##1##

Chapter I

T h e NRa t i oinsa l ies m inoEfu r o p eN a t i o n a l i s m i n E u r o p e

The Rise of Nationalism in Europe

Fig. 1 — The Dream of Worldwide Democratic and Social Republics – The Pact Between Nations, a print prepared by
Frédéric Sorrieu, 1848.

In 1848, Frédéric Sorrieu, a French artist, prepared a series of four
prints visualising his dream of a world made up of ‘democratic
and social Republics’, as he called them. The first print (Fig. 1) of the
series, shows the peoples of Europe and America – men and women
of all ages and social classes – marching in a long train, and offering
homage to the statue of Liberty as they pass by it. As you would
recall, artists of the time of the French Revolution personified Liberty
as a female figure – here you can recognise the torch of Enlightenment
she bears in one hand and the Charter of the Rights of Man in the
other. On the earth in the foreground of the image lie the shattered
remains of the symbols of absolutist institutions. In Sorrieu’s
utopian vision, the peoples of the world are grouped as distinct
nations, identified through their flags and national costume. Leading
the procession, way past the statue of Liberty, are the United States
and Switzerland, which by this time were already nation-states. France,

New words
Absolutist – Literally, a government or
system of rule that has no restraints on
the power exercised. In history, the term
refers to a for m of monarchical
government that was centralised,
militarised and repressive
Utopian – A vision of a society that is so
ideal that it is unlikely to actually exist

Activity
In what way do you think this print (Fig. 1)
depicts a utopian vision?

3
Reprint 2025-26

identifiable by the revolutionary tricolour, has just reached the statue. Source A
She is followed by the peoples of Germany, bearing the black, red
Ernst Renan, ‘What is a Nation?’
and gold flag. Interestingly, at the time when Sorrieu created this
In a lecture delivered at the University of
image, the German peoples did not yet exist as a united nation – the
Sorbonne in 1882, the French philosopher Ernst
flag they carry is an expression of liberal hopes in 1848 to unify the Renan (1823-92) outlined his understanding of
numerous German-speaking principalities into a nation-state under what makes a nation. The lecture was
subsequently published as a famous essay entitled
a democratic constitution. Following the German peoples are the
‘Qu’est-ce qu’une nation?’ (‘What is a Nation?’).
peoples of Austria, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, Lombardy, In this essay Renan criticises the notion suggested
Poland, England, Ireland, Hungary and Russia. From the heavens by others that a nation is formed by a common
language, race, religion, or territory:
above, Christ, saints and angels gaze upon the scene. They have
‘A nation is the culmination of a long past of
been used by the artist to symbolise fraternity among the nations of endeavours, sacrifice and devotion. A heroic past,
the world.
great men, glory, that is the social capital upon
This chapter will deal with many of the issues visualised by Sorrieu
in Fig. 1. During the nineteenth century, nationalism emerged as a
force which brought about sweeping changes in the political and
mental world of Europe. The end result of these changes was the
emergence of the nation-state in place of the multi-national dynastic
empires of Europe. The concept and practices of a modern state, in
which a centralised power exercised sovereign control over a clearly
defined territory, had been developing over a long period of time
in Europe. But a nation-state was one in which the majority of its
citizens, and not only its rulers, came to develop a sense of common
identity and shared history or descent. This commonness did not
exist from time immemorial; it was forged through struggles, through
the actions of leaders and the common people. This chapter will
look at the diverse processes through which nation-states and
nationalism came into being in nineteenth-century Europe.

which one bases a national idea. To have
common glories in the past, to have a common
will in the present, to have performed great deeds
together, to wish to perform still more, these
are the essential conditions of being a people. A
nation is therefore a large-scale solidarity … Its
existence is a daily plebiscite … A province is its
inhabitants; if anyone has the right to be
consulted, it is the inhabitant. A nation never
has any real interest in annexing or holding on to
a country against its will. The existence of nations
is a good thing, a necessity even. Their existence
is a guarantee of liberty, which would be lost if
the world had only one law and only one master.’

Source
New words

India and the Contemporary World

Plebiscite – A direct vote by which all the
people of a region are asked to accept or reject
a proposal

Discuss
Summarise the attributes of a nation, as Renan
understands them. Why, in his view, are nations
important?

4
Reprint 2025-26

1 The French Revolution and the Idea of the Nation

The first clear expression of nationalism came with
the French Revolution in 1789. France, as you
would remember, was a full-fledged territorial state
in 1789 under the rule of an absolute monarch.
The political and constitutional changes that came
in the wake of the French Revolution led to the
transfer of sovereignty from the monarchy to a
body of French citizens. The revolution proclaimed
that it was the people who would henceforth
constitute the nation and shape its destiny.
From the very beginning, the French revolutionaries
introduced various measures and practices that
could create a sense of collective identity amongst
the French people. The ideas of la patrie (the
fatherland) and le citoyen (the citizen) emphasised
the notion of a united community enjoying equal rights under a
constitution. A new French flag, the tricolour, was chosen to replace
the former royal standard. The Estates General was elected by the
body of active citizens and renamed the National Assembly. New
hymns were composed, oaths taken and martyrs commemorated,
all in the name of the nation. A centralised administrative system
was put in place and it formulated uniform laws for all citizens
within its territory. Internal customs duties and dues were abolished
and a uniform system of weights and measures was adopted.
Regional dialects were discouraged and French, as it was spoken
and written in Paris, became the common language of the nation.

Fig. 2 — The cover of a German almanac
designed by the journalist Andreas Rebmann in
1798.
The image of the French Bastille being stormed
by the revolutionary crowd has been placed
next to a similar fortress meant to represent the
bastion of despotic rule in the German province
of Kassel. Accompanying the illustration is the
slogan: ‘The people must seize their own
freedom!’ Rebmann lived in the city of Mainz
and was a member of a German Jacobin group.

N a t i o n a l i s m in

Europe

The revolutionaries further declared that it was the mission and the
destiny of the French nation to liberate the peoples of Europe
from despotism, in other words to help other peoples of Europe
to become nations.
When the news of the events in France reached the different cities
of Europe, students and other members of educated middle classes
began setting up Jacobin clubs. Their activities and campaigns
prepared the way for the French armies which moved into Holland,
Belgium, Switzerland and much of Italy in the 1790s. With the
outbreak of the revolutionary wars, the French armies began to
carry the idea of nationalism abroad.
5
Reprint 2025-26

ICELAND
(DENMARK)

ATLANTIC SEA
NORWAY
(SWEDEN)

SWEDEN
SCOTLAND

IRELAND

GREAT
BRITAIN
WALES

DENMARK

RUSSIAN EMPIRE

HABOVER
(G.B.)
PRUSSIA
NETHERLANDS

ENGLAND

POLAND
GALICIA

BAVARIA

AUSTRIAN EMPIRE

FRANCE
SWITZERLAND

AUSTRIA

ROMANIA

SPAIN

BULGARIA

CORSICA
SARDINIA

GEORGIA

SERBIA

OTTOMAN EMPIRE

KINGDOM
OF THE
TWO
SICILIES

ARMENIA
SIA
PER

POR
TUG
AL

HUNGARY
SMALL
STATES

MESOPOTAMIA

GREECE
TUNIS
MOROCCO

ALGERIA

CRETE

CYPRUS

SYRIA

MEDITERRANEAN SEA
PALESTINE

India and the Contemporary World

EGYPT

Within the wide swathe of territory that came under his control,
Napoleon set about introducing many of the reforms that he had
already introduced in France. Through a return to monarchy
Napoleon had, no doubt, destroyed democracy in France, but in
the administrative field he had incorporated revolutionary principles
in order to make the whole system more rational and efficient. The
Civil Code of 1804 – usually known as the Napoleonic Code –
did away with all privileges based on birth, established equality
before the law and secured the right to property. This Code was
exported to the regions under French control. In the Dutch Republic,
in Switzerland, in Italy and Germany, Napoleon simplified
administrative divisions, abolished the feudal system and freed
peasants from serfdom and manorial dues. In the towns too, guild
restrictions were removed. Transport and communication systems
were improved. Peasants, artisans, workers and new businessmen
6
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 3 — Europe after the
Congress of Vienna, 1815.

Fig. 4 — The Planting of Tree of Liberty in Zweibrücken, Germany.
The subject of this colour print by the German painter Karl Kaspar Fritz is the occupation of the town of Zweibrücken
by the French armies. French soldiers, recognisable by their blue, white and red uniforms, have been portrayed as
oppressors as they seize a peasant’s cart (left), harass some young women (centre foreground) and force a peasant
down to his knees. The plaque being affixed to the Tree of Liberty carries a German inscription which in translation
reads: ‘Take freedom and equality from us, the model of humanity.’ This is a sarcastic reference to the claim of the
French as being liberators who opposed monarchy in the territories they entered.

N a t i o n a l i s m in

However, in the areas conquered, the reactions of the local
populations to French rule were mixed. Initially, in many places such
as Holland and Switzerland, as well as in certain cities like Brussels,
Mainz, Milan and Warsaw, the French armies were welcomed as
harbingers of liberty. But the initial enthusiasm soon turned to hostility,
as it became clear that the new administrative arrangements did not
go hand in hand with political freedom. Increased taxation,
censorship, forced conscription into the French armies required to
conquer the rest of Europe, all seemed to outweigh the advantages
of the administrative changes.

Europe

enjoyed a new-found freedom. Businessmen and small-scale
producers of goods, in particular, began to realise that uniform
laws, standardised weights and measures, and a common national
currency would facilitate the movement and exchange of goods
and capital from one region to another.

Fig. 5 — The courier of Rhineland loses all that
he has on his way home from Leipzig.
Napoleon here is represented as a postman on
his way back to France after he lost the battle of
Leipzig in 1813. Each letter dropping out of his
bag bears the names of the territories he lost.

7
Reprint 2025-26

2 The Making of Nationalism in Europe
If you look at the map of mid-eighteenth-century Europe you will
find that there were no ‘nation-states’ as we know them today.
What we know today as Germany, Italy and Switzerland were
divided into kingdoms, duchies and cantons whose rulers had their
autonomous territories. Eastern and Central Europe were under
autocratic monarchies within the territories of which lived diverse
peoples. They did not see themselves as sharing a collective identity
or a common culture. Often, they even spoke different languages
and belonged to different ethnic groups. The Habsburg Empire
that ruled over Austria-Hungary, for example, was a patchwork of
many different regions and peoples. It included the Alpine regions
– the Tyrol, Austria and the Sudetenland – as well as Bohemia,
where the aristocracy was predominantly German-speaking. It also
included the Italian-speaking provinces of Lombardy and Venetia.
In Hungary, half of the population spoke Magyar while the other
half spoke a variety of dialects. In Galicia, the aristocracy spoke
Polish. Besides these three dominant groups, there also lived within
the boundaries of the empire, a mass of subject peasant peoples –
Bohemians and Slovaks to the north, Slovenes in Carniola, Croats
to the south, and Roumans to the east in Transylvania. Such
differences did not easily promote a sense of political unity. The
only tie binding these diverse groups together was a common
allegiance to the emperor.

India and the Contemporary World

How did nationalism and the idea of the nation-state emerge?

2.1 The Aristocracy and the New Middle Class
Socially and politically, a landed aristocracy was the dominant class
on the continent. The members of this class were united by a
common way of life that cut across regional divisions. They owned
estates in the countryside and also town-houses. They spoke French
for purposes of diplomacy and in high society. Their families were
often connected by ties of marriage. This powerful aristocracy was,
however, numerically a small group. The majority of the population
was made up of the peasantry. To the west, the bulk of the land
was farmed by tenants and small owners, while in Eastern and
Central Europe the pattern of landholding was characterised by
vast estates which were cultivated by serfs.
8
Reprint 2025-26

Some important dates
1797
Napoleon invades Italy; Napoleonic wars
begin.
1814-1815
Fall of Napoleon; the Vienna Peace
Settlement.
1821
Greek struggle for independence begins.
1848
Revolutions in Europe; artisans, industrial
workers and peasants revolt against
economic hardships; middle classes
demand constitutions and representative
governments; Italians, Germans, Magyars,
Poles, Czechs, etc. demand nation-states.
1859-1870
Unification of Italy.
1866-1871
Unification of Germany.
1905
Slav nationalism gathers force in the
Habsburg and Ottoman Empires.

In Western and parts of Central Europe the growth of industrial
production and trade meant the growth of towns and the emergence
of commercial classes whose existence was based on production
for the market. Industrialisation began in England in the second
half of the eighteenth century, but in France and parts of the German
states it occurred only during the nineteenth century. In its wake,
new social groups came into being: a working-class population, and
middle classes made up of industrialists, businessmen, professionals.
In Central and Eastern Europe these groups were smaller in number
till late nineteenth century. It was among the educated, liberal middle
classes that ideas of national unity following the abolition of
aristocratic privileges gained popularity.

2.2 What did Liberal Nationalism Stand for?
Ideas of national unity in early-nineteenth-century Europe were closely
allied to the ideology of liberalism. The term ‘liberalism’ derives
from the Latin root liber, meaning free. For the new middle classes
liberalism stood for freedom for the individual and equality of all
before the law. Politically, it emphasised the concept of government
by consent. Since the French Revolution, liberalism had stood for
the end of autocracy and clerical privileges, a constitution and
representative government through parliament. Nineteenth-century
liberals also stressed the inviolability of private property.
New words

Europe

Suffrage – The right to vote

N a t i o n a l i s m in

Yet, equality before the law did not necessarily stand for universal
suffrage. You will recall that in revolutionary France, which marked
the first political experiment in liberal democracy, the right to vote
and to get elected was granted exclusively to property-owning men.
Men without property and all women were excluded from political
rights. Only for a brief period under the Jacobins did all adult males
enjoy suffrage. However, the Napoleonic Code went back to limited
suffrage and reduced women to the status of a minor, subject to
the authority of fathers and husbands. Throughout the nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries women and non-propertied men
organised opposition movements demanding equal political rights.
In the economic sphere, liberalism stood for the freedom of markets
and the abolition of state-imposed restrictions on the movement
of goods and capital. During the nineteenth century this was a strong
demand of the emerging middle classes. Let us take the example of
the German-speaking regions in the first half of the nineteenth
century. Napoleon’s administrative measures had created out of

9
Reprint 2025-26

countless small principalities a confederation of 39 states. Each of Source B
these possessed its own currency, and weights and measures. A
Economists began to think in terms of the national
merchant travelling in 1833 from Hamburg to Nuremberg to sell
economy. They talked of how the nation could
his goods would have had to pass through 11 customs barriers and
develop and what economic measures could help
forge this nation together.
pay a customs duty of about 5 per cent at each one of them. Duties
Friedrich List, Professor of Economics at the
were often levied according to the weight or measurement of the
University of Tübingen in Germany, wrote in 1834:
goods. As each region had its own system of weights and measures,
‘The aim of the zollverein is to bind the Germans
this involved time-consuming calculation. The measure of cloth,
economically into a nation. It will strengthen the
for example, was the elle which in each region stood for a different
nation materially as much by protecting its
interests externally as by stimulating its internal
length. An elle of textile material bought in Frankfurt would get you
productivity. It ought to awaken and raise
54.7 cm of cloth, in Mainz 55.1 cm, in Nuremberg 65.6 cm, in
national sentiment through a fusion of individual
Freiburg 53.5 cm.
and provincial interests. The German people have

India and the Contemporary World

Such conditions were viewed as obstacles to economic exchange
and growth by the new commercial classes, who argued for the
creation of a unified economic territory allowing the unhindered
movement of goods, people and capital. In 1834, a customs union
or zollverein was formed at the initiative of Prussia and joined by
most of the German states. The union abolished tariff barriers and
reduced the number of currencies from over thirty to two. The
creation of a network of railways further stimulated mobility,
harnessing economic interests to national unification. A wave of
economic nationalism strengthened the wider nationalist sentiments
growing at the time.

realised that a free economic system is the only
means to engender national feeling.’

Source
Discuss
Describe the political ends that List hopes to
achieve through economic measures.

2.3 A New Conservatism after 1815

New words

Following the defeat of Napoleon in 1815, European governments
were driven by a spirit of conservatism. Conservatives believed
that established, traditional institutions of state and society – like the
monarchy, the Church, social hierarchies, property and the family –
should be preserved. Most conservatives, however, did not propose
a return to the society of pre-revolutionary days. Rather, they realised,
from the changes initiated by Napoleon, that modernisation could
in fact strengthen traditional institutions like the monarchy. It could
make state power more effective and strong. A modern army, an
efficient bureaucracy, a dynamic economy, the abolition of feudalism
and serfdom could strengthen the autocratic monarchies of Europe.

Conservatism – A political philosophy that
stressed the importance of tradition, established
institutions and customs, and preferred gradual
development to quick change

In 1815, representatives of the European powers – Britain, Russia,
Prussia and Austria – who had collectively defeated Napoleon, met
at Vienna to draw up a settlement for Europe. The Congress was
hosted by the Austrian Chancellor Duke Metternich. The delegates
10
Reprint 2025-26

drew up the Treaty of Vienna of 1815 with the object of undoing
most of the changes that had come about in Europe during the
Napoleonic wars. The Bourbon dynasty, which had been deposed
during the French Revolution, was restored to power, and France
lost the territories it had annexed under Napoleon. A series of states
were set up on the boundaries of France to prevent French expansion
in future. Thus the kingdom of the Netherlands, which included
Belgium, was set up in the north and Genoa was added to Piedmont
in the south. Prussia was given important new territories on its western
frontiers, while Austria was given control of northern Italy. But the
German confederation of 39 states that had been set up by Napoleon
was left untouched. In the east, Russia was given part of Poland
while Prussia was given a portion of Saxony. The main intention
was to restore the monarchies that had been overthrown by
Napoleon, and create a new conservative order in Europe.

Plot on a map of Europe the changes drawn
up by the Vienna Congress.

Discuss
What is the caricaturist trying to depict?

N a t i o n a l i s m in

Europe

Conservative regimes set up in 1815 were autocratic. They did not
tolerate criticism and dissent, and sought to curb activities that
questioned the legitimacy of autocratic governments. Most of them
imposed censorship laws to control what was said in newspapers,
books, plays and songs and reflected the ideas of liberty and freedom

Activity

Fig. 6 — The Club of Thinkers, anonymous caricature dating to c. 1820.
The plaque on the left bears the inscription: ‘The most important question of today’s meeting: How
long will thinking be allowed to us?’
The board on the right lists the rules of the Club which include the following:
‘1. Silence is the first commandment of this learned society.
2. To avoid the eventuality whereby a member of this club may succumb to the temptation of
speech, muzzles will be distributed to members upon entering.’

11
Reprint 2025-26

associated with the French Revolution. The memory of the French
Revolution nonetheless continued to inspire liberals. One of the major
issues taken up by the liberal-nationalists, who criticised the new
conservative order, was freedom of the press.

2.4 The Revolutionaries

India and the Contemporary World

During the years following 1815, the fear of repression drove
many liberal-nationalists underground. Secret societies sprang
up in many European states to train revolutionaries and spread
their ideas. To be revolutionary at this time meant a commitment
to oppose monarchical forms that had been established after
the Vienna Congress, and to fight for liberty and freedom. Most
of these revolutionaries also saw the creation of nation-states as
a necessary part of this struggle for freedom.
One such individual was the Italian revolutionary Giuseppe
Mazzini. Born in Genoa in 1805, he became a member of the
secret society of the Carbonari. As a young man of 24, he was
sent into exile in 1831 for attempting a revolution in Liguria.
He subsequently founded two more underground societies,
first, Young Italy in Marseilles, and then, Young Europe in
Berne, whose members were like-minded young men from
Poland, France, Italy and the German states. Mazzini believed
that God had intended nations to be the natural units of
mankind. So Italy could not continue to be a patchwork of
small states and kingdoms. It had to be forged into a single
unified republic within a wider alliance of nations. This
unification alone could be the basis of Italian liberty. Following
his model, secret societies were set up in Germany, France,
Switzerland and Poland. Mazzini’s relentless opposition to
monarchy and his vision of democratic republics frightened the
conservatives. Metternich described him as ‘the most dangerous
enemy of our social order’.

12
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 7 — Giuseppe Mazzini and the founding of
Young Europe in Berne 1833.
Print by Giacomo Mantegazza.

3 The Age of Revolutions: 1830-1848
As conservative regimes tried to consolidate their power, liberalism
and nationalism came to be increasingly associated with revolution
in many regions of Europe such as the Italian and German states,
the provinces of the Ottoman Empire, Ireland and Poland. These
revolutions were led by the liberal-nationalists belonging to the
educated middle-class elite, among whom were professors, schoolteachers, clerks and members of the commercial middle classes.
The first upheaval took place in France in July 1830. The Bourbon
kings who had been restored to power during the conservative
reaction after 1815, were now overthrown by liberal revolutionaries
who installed a constitutional monarchy with Louis Philippe at its
head. ‘When France sneezes,’ Metternich once remarked, ‘the rest of
Europe catches cold.’ The July Revolution sparked an uprising in
Brussels which led to Belgium breaking away from the United
Kingdom of the Netherlands.

Europe

An event that mobilised nationalist feelings among the educated elite
across Europe was the Greek war of independence. Greece had
been part of the Ottoman Empire since the fifteenth century. The
growth of revolutionary nationalism in Europe sparked off a struggle
for independence amongst the Greeks which began in 1821.
Nationalists in Greece got support from other Greeks living in exile
and also from many West Europeans who had sympathies for ancient
Greek culture. Poets and artists lauded Greece as the cradle of
European civilisation and mobilised public opinion to support its
struggle against a Muslim empire. The English poet Lord Byron
organised funds and later went to fight in the war, where he died of
fever in 1824. Finally, the Treaty of Constantinople of 1832
recognised Greece as an independent nation.

N a t i o n a l i s m in

3.1 The Romantic Imagination and National Feeling
The development of nationalism did not come about only through
wars and territorial expansion. Culture played an important role in
creating the idea of the nation: art and poetry, stories and music
helped express and shape nationalist feelings.
Let us look at Romanticism, a cultural movement which sought to
develop a particular form of nationalist sentiment. Romantic artists
and poets generally criticised the glorification of reason and science
13
Reprint 2025-26

India and the Contemporary World

Fig. 8 — The Massacre at Chios, Eugene Delacroix, 1824.
The French painter Delacroix was one of the most important French Romantic
painters. This huge painting (4.19m x 3.54m) depicts an incident in which
20,000 Greeks were said to have been killed by Turks on the island of Chios. By
dramatising the incident, focusing on the suffering of women and children, and
using vivid colours, Delacroix sought to appeal to the emotions of the spectators,
and create sympathy for the Greeks.

and focused instead on emotions, intuition and mystical feelings.
Their effort was to create a sense of a shared collective heritage, a
common cultural past, as the basis of a nation.
Other Romantics such as the German philosopher Johann Gottfried
Herder (1744-1803) claimed that true German culture was to be
discovered among the common people – das volk. It was through
folk songs, folk poetry and folk dances that the true spirit of the
nation (volksgeist) was popularised. So collecting and recording these
forms of folk culture was essential to the project of nation-building.
14
Reprint 2025-26

The emphasis on vernacular language and the collection of local
folklore was not just to recover an ancient national spirit, but also to
carry the modern nationalist message to large audiences who were
mostly illiterate. This was especially so in the case of Poland, which
had been partitioned at the end of the eighteenth century by the
Great Powers – Russia, Prussia and Austria. Even though Poland no
longer existed as an independent territory, national feelings were kept
alive through music and language. Karol Kurpinski, for example,
celebrated the national struggle through his operas and music, turning
folk dances like the polonaise and mazurka into nationalist symbols.
Language too played an important role in developing nationalist
sentiments. After Russian occupation, the Polish language was forced
out of schools and the Russian language was imposed everywhere.
In 1831, an armed rebellion against Russian rule took place which
was ultimately crushed. Following this, many members of the clergy
in Poland began to use language as a weapon of national resistance.
Polish was used for Church gatherings and all religious instruction.
As a result, a large number of priests and bishops were put in jail or
sent to Siberia by the Russian authorities as punishment for their
refusal to preach in Russian. The use of Polish came to be seen as a
symbol of the struggle against Russian dominance.

Box 1
The Grimm Brothers: Folktales and
Nation-building

Grimms’ Fairy Tales is a familiar name. The brothers
Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm were born in the
German city of Hanau in 1785 and 1786
respectively. While both of them studied law,
they soon developed an interest in collecting old
folktales. They spent six years travelling from
village to village, talking to people and writing
down fairy tales, which were handed down
through the generations. These were popular
both among children and adults. In 1812, they
published their first collection of tales.
Subsequently, both the brothers became active
in liberal politics, especially the movement
for freedom of the press. In the meantime they
also published a 33-volume dictionary of the
German language.
The Grimm brothers also saw French domination
as a threat to German culture, and believed that
the folktales they had collected were expressions
of a pure and authentic German spirit. They
considered their projects of collecting folktales
and developing the German language as part of
the wider effort to oppose French domination
and create a German national identity.

3.2 Hunger, Hardship and Popular Revolt

Discuss
Discuss the importance of language and
popular traditions in the creation of national

Europe

identity.

N a t i o n a l i s m in

The 1830s were years of great economic hardship in Europe. The
first half of the nineteenth century saw an enormous increase in
population all over Europe. In most countries there were more
seekers of jobs than employment. Population from rural areas
migrated to the cities to live in overcrowded slums. Small producers
in towns were often faced with stiff competition from imports of
cheap machine-made goods from England, where industrialisation
was more advanced than on the continent. This was especially so in
textile production, which was carried out mainly in homes or small
workshops and was only partly mechanised. In those regions of
Europe where the aristocracy still enjoyed power, peasants struggled
under the burden of feudal dues and obligations. The rise of food
prices or a year of bad harvest led to widespread pauperism in
town and country.
The year 1848 was one such year. Food shortages and widespread
unemployment brought the population of Paris out on the roads.
Barricades were erected and Louis Philippe was forced to flee. A

15
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 9 — Peasants’ uprising, 1848.

National Assembly proclaimed a Republic, granted suffrage to all
adult males above 21, and guaranteed the right to work. National
workshops to provide employment were set up.
Earlier, in 1845, weavers in Silesia had led a revolt against contractors
who supplied them raw material and gave them orders for finished
textiles but drastically reduced their payments. The journalist Wilhelm
Wolff described the events in a Silesian village as follows:

India and the Contemporary World

In these villages (with 18,000 inhabitants) cotton weaving is the
most widespread occupation … The misery of the workers is
extreme. The desperate need for jobs has been taken advantage
of by the contractors to reduce the prices of the goods they
order …
On 4 June at 2 p.m. a large crowd of weavers emerged from
their homes and marched in pairs up to the mansion of their
contractor demanding higher wages. They were treated with
scorn and threats alternately. Following this, a group of them
forced their way into the house, smashed its elegant windowpanes, furniture, porcelain … another group broke into the
storehouse and plundered it of supplies of cloth which they
tore to shreds … The contractor fled with his family to a
neighbouring village which, however, refused to shelter such a
person. He returned 24 hours later having requisitioned the army.
In the exchange that followed, eleven weavers were shot.
16
Reprint 2025-26

Discuss
Describe the cause of the Silesian weavers’
uprising. Comment on the viewpoint of the
journalist.

Activity
Imagine you are a weaver who saw the events
as they unfolded. Write a report on what you saw.

3.3 1848: The Revolution of the Liberals

The issue of extending political rights to women was a controversial
one within the liberal movement, in which large numbers of women
had participated actively over the years. Women had formed their
own political associations, founded newspapers and taken part in
political meetings and demonstrations. Despite this they were denied
New words
Feminist – Awareness of women’s rights and interests based on
the belief of the social, economic and political equality of the genders

How were liberty and equality for women
to be defined?
The liberal politician Carl Welcker, an elected
member of the Frankfurt Parliament, expressed
the following views:
‘Nature has created men and women to carry
out different functions … Man, the stronger, the
bolder and freer of the two, has been designated
as protector of the family, its provider, meant for
public tasks in the domain of law, production,
defence. Woman, the weaker, dependent and
timid, requires the protection of man. Her sphere
is the home, the care of the children, the
nurturing of the family … Do we require any
further proof that given such differences, equality
between the sexes would only endanger
harmony and destroy the dignity of the family?’
Louise Otto-Peters (1819-95) was a political
activist who founded a women’s journal and
subsequently a feminist political association. The
first issue of her newspaper (21 April 1849) carried
the following editorial:
‘Let us ask how many men, possessed by
thoughts of living and dying for the sake of Liberty,
would be prepared to fight for the freedom of
the entire people, of all human beings? When
asked this question, they would all too easily
respond with a “Yes!”, though their untiring
efforts are intended for the benefit of only one
half of humanity – men. But Liberty is indivisible!
Free men therefore must not tolerate to be
surrounded by the unfree …’
An anonymous reader of the same newspaper
sent the following letter to the editor on 25 June
1850:
‘It is indeed ridiculous and unreasonable to deny
women political rights even though they enjoy
the right to property which they make use
of. They perform functions and assume
responsibilities without however getting the
benefits that accrue to men for the same … Why
this injustice? Is it not a disgrace that even the
stupidest cattle-herder possesses the right
to vote, simply because he is a man, whereas
highly talented women owning considerable
property are excluded from this right, even
though they contribute so much to the
maintenance of the state?’

Source

17
Reprint 2025-26

Europe

In the German regions a large number of political associations whose
members were middle-class professionals, businessmen and
prosperous artisans came together in the city of Frankfurt and decided
to vote for an all-German National Assembly. On 18 May 1848,
831 elected representatives marched in a festive procession to take
their places in the Frankfurt parliament convened in the Church of
St Paul. They drafted a constitution for a German nation to be
headed by a monarchy subject to a parliament. When the deputies
offered the crown on these terms to Friedrich Wilhelm IV, King of
Prussia, he rejected it and joined other monarchs to oppose the
elected assembly. While the opposition of the aristocracy and military
became stronger, the social basis of parliament eroded. The
parliament was dominated by the middle classes who resisted the
demands of workers and artisans and consequently lost their support.
In the end troops were called in and the assembly was forced
to disband.

Source C

N a t i o n a l i s m in

Parallel to the revolts of the poor, unemployed and starving peasants
and workers in many European countries in the year 1848, a revolution
led by the educated middle classes was under way. Events of February
1848 in France had brought about the abdication of the monarch
and a republic based on universal male suffrage had been proclaimed.
In other parts of Europe where independent nation-states did not
yet exist – such as Germany, Italy, Poland, the Austro-Hungarian
Empire – men and women of the liberal middle classes combined
their demands for constitutionalism with national unification. They
took advantage of the growing popular unrest to push their
demands for the creation of a nation-state on parliamentary
principles – a constitution, freedom of the press and freedom
of association.

India and the Contemporary World

Fig. 10 — The Frankfurt parliament in the Church of St Paul.
Contemporary colour print. Notice the women in the upper left gallery.

suffrage rights during the election of the Assembly. When the
Frankfurt parliament convened in the Church of St Paul, women
were admitted only as observers to stand in the visitors’ gallery.
Though conservative forces were able to suppress liberal movements
in 1848, they could not restore the old order. Monarchs were
beginning to realise that the cycles of revolution and repression could
only be ended by granting concessions to the liberal-nationalist
revolutionaries. Hence, in the years after 1848, the autocratic
monarchies of Central and Eastern Europe began to introduce the
changes that had already taken place in Western Europe before 1815.
Thus serfdom and bonded labour were abolished both in the
Habsburg dominions and in Russia. The Habsburg rulers granted
more autonomy to the Hungarians in 1867.

18
Reprint 2025-26

Discuss
Compare the positions on the question of
women’s rights voiced by the three writers cited
above. What do they reveal about liberal
ideology?

New words
Ideology – System of ideas reflecting a
particular social and political vision

4 The Making of Germany and Italy
4.1 Germany – Can the Army be the Architect of a Nation?
After 1848, nationalism in Europe moved away from its association
with democracy and revolution. Nationalist sentiments were often
mobilised by conservatives for promoting state power and achieving
political domination over Europe.
This can be observed in the process by which Germany and Italy came
to be unified as nation-states. As you have seen, nationalist feelings were
widespread among middle-class Germans, who in 1848 tried to unite
the different regions of the German confederation into a nation-state
governed by an elected parliament. This liberal initiative to nation-building
was, however, repressed by the combined forces of the monarchy and
the military, supported by the large landowners (called Junkers) of Prussia.
From then on, Prussia took on the leadership of the movement for
national unification. Its chief minister, Otto von
Bismarck, was the architect of this process carried
out with the help of the Prussian army and
bureaucracy. Three wars over seven years – with
Austria, Denmark and France – ended in Prussian
victory and completed the process of unification.
In January 1871, the Prussian king, William I,
was proclaimed German Emperor in a ceremony
held at Versailles.

Fig. 11 — The proclamation of the German empire in the Hall of
Mirrors at Versailles, Anton von Werner. At the centre stands the
Kaiser and the chief commander of the Prussian army, General von
Roon. Near them is Bismarck. This monumental work (2.7m x
2.7m) was completed and presented by the artist to Bismarck on
the latter’s 70th birthday in 1885.

19
Reprint 2025-26

N a t i o n a l i s m in

The nation-building process in Germany had
demonstrated the dominance of Prussian state
power. The new state placed a strong emphasis
on modernising the currency, banking, legal
and judicial systems in Germany. Prussian
measures and practices often became a model for
the rest of Germany.

Europe

On the bitterly cold morning of 18 January 1871,
an assembly comprising the princes of the
German states, representatives of the army,
important Prussian ministers including the chief
minister Otto von Bismarck gathered in the
unheated Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles
to proclaim the new German Empire headed
by Kaiser William I of Prussia.

BALTIC SEA

NORTH SEA
SCHLESWIGHOLSTEIN

EAST PRUSSIA
MECKLENBURGSCHWERIN

POMERANIA

HANOVER
BRANDENBURG
BRUNSWICK

PR

U

SS

WEST PRUSSIA

IA
POSEN

WESTPHALIA

BA
DE
N

RHINELAND

EN
SS
E
H

RUSSIAN
EMPIRE

A
SS
NA

THURINGIAN
STATES

RG
BE
M
E
TT
UR
W

SILESIA

AUSTRIAN
EMPIRE

BAVARIA

Prussia before 1866
Conquered by Prussia in Austro-Prussia
War, 1866
Austrian territories excluded from German
Confederation 1867
Joined with Prussia to form German
Confederation, 1867
South German states joining with Prussia to
form German Empire, 1871
Won by Prussia in Franco-Prussia War, 1871

Fig. 12 — Unification of Germany (1866-71).

India and the Contemporary World

4.2 Italy Unified
Like Germany, Italy too had a long history of political fragmentation.
Italians were scattered over several dynastic states as well as the
multi-national Habsburg Empire. During the middle of the
nineteenth century, Italy was divided into seven states, of which
only one, Sardinia-Piedmont, was ruled by an Italian princely house.
The north was under Austrian Habsburgs, the centre was ruled by
the Pope and the southern regions were under the domination
of the Bourbon kings of Spain. Even the Italian language had
not acquired one common form and still had many regional and
local variations.
During the 1830s, Giuseppe Mazzini had sought to put together a
coherent programme for a unitary Italian Republic. He had also
formed a secret society called Young Italy for the dissemination of
his goals. The failure of revolutionary uprisings both in 1831 and
1848 meant that the mantle now fell on Sardinia-Piedmont under
its ruler King Victor Emmanuel II to unify the Italian states through
war. In the eyes of the ruling elites of this region, a unified
Italy offered them the possibility of economic development and
political dominance.
20
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 13 — Caricature of Otto von Bismarck in
the German reichstag (parliament), from Figaro,
Vienna, 5 March 1870.

Activity
Describe the caricature. How does it represent
the relationship between Bismarck and the
elected deputies of Parliament? What
interpretation of democratic processes is the
artist trying to convey?

Chief Minister Cavour who led the movement to unify the regions
of Italy was neither a revolutionary nor a democrat. Like many
other wealthy and educated members of the Italian elite, he spoke
French much better than he did Italian. Through a tactful diplomatic
alliance with France engineered by Cavour, Sardinia-Piedmont
succeeded in defeating the Austrian forces in 1859. Apart from regular
troops, a large number of armed volunteers under the leadership of
Giuseppe Garibaldi joined the fray. In 1860, they marched into South
Italy and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies and succeeded in winning
the support of the local peasants in order to drive out the Spanish
rulers. In 1861 Victor Emmanuel II was proclaimed king of united
Italy. However, much of the Italian population, among whom rates
of illiteracy were very high, remained blissfully unaware of liberalnationalist ideology. The peasant masses who had supported Garibaldi
in southern Italy had never heard of Italia, and believed that ‘La Talia’
was Victor Emmanuel’s wife!

Activity
Look at Fig. 14(a). Do you think that the people
living in any of these regions thought of
themselves as Italians?
Examine Fig. 14(b). Which was the first region
to become a part of unified Italy? Which was the
last region to join? In which year did the largest
number of states join?

SWITZERLAND

LOMBARDY
SAVOY
SARDINIA

SWITZERLAND
VENETIA
1866

PARMA

AUSTRIA

MODENA

1858
SAN MARINO

MONACO

1858-60
TUSCANY
PAPAL
STATE

1870

1860
KINGDOM
OF BOTH
SICILIES

Europe

1858

N a t i o n a l i s m in

TUNIS

Fig. 14(b) — Italy after unification.
The map shows the year in which different
regions (seen in Fig 14(a) become part of a
unified Italy.

TUNIS

Fig. 14(a) — Italian states before unification, 1858.

4.3 The Strange Case of Britain
The model of the nation or the nation-state, some scholars have
argued, is Great Britain. In Britain the formation of the nation-state
21
Reprint 2025-26

India and the Contemporary World

was not the result of a sudden upheaval or revolution. It was the Box 2
result of a long-drawn-out process. There was no British nation
Giuseppe Garibaldi (1807-82) is perhaps the
prior to the eighteenth century. The primary identities of the people
most celebrated of Italian freedom fighters. He
who inhabited the British Isles were ethnic ones – such as English,
came from a family engaged in coastal trade and
Welsh, Scot or Irish. All of these ethnic groups had their own cultural
was a sailor in the merchant navy. In 1833 he
met Mazzini, joined the Young Italy movement
and political traditions. But as the English nation steadily grew in
and participated in a republican uprising in
wealth, importance and power, it was able to extend its influence
Piedmont in 1834. The uprising was suppressed
over the other nations of the islands. The English parliament, which
and Garibaldi had to flee to South America, where
he lived in exile till 1848. In 1854, he supported
had seized power from the monarchy in 1688 at the end of a
Victor Emmanuel II in his efforts to unify the
protracted conflict, was the instrument through which a nation-state,
Italian states. In 1860, Garibaldi led the famous
with England at its centre, came to be forged. The Act of Union
Expedition of the Thousand to South Italy. Fresh
volunteers kept joining through the course of
(1707) between England and Scotland that resulted in the formation
the campaign, till their numbers grew to about
of the ‘United Kingdom of Great Britain’ meant, in effect, that
30,000. They were popularly known as Red
England was able to impose its influence on Scotland. The British
Shirts.
In 1867, Garibaldi led an army of volunteers to
parliament was henceforth dominated by its English members. The
Rome to fight the last obstacle to the unification
growth of a British identity meant that Scotland’s distinctive culture
of Italy, the Papal States where a French garrison
and political institutions were systematically suppressed. The Catholic
was stationed. The Red Shirts proved to be no
match for the combined French and Papal troops.
clans that inhabited the Scottish Highlands suffered terrible repression
It was only in 1870 when, during the war with
whenever they attempted to assert their independence. The Scottish
Prussia, France withdrew its troops from Rome
Highlanders were forbidden to speak their Gaelic language or
that the Papal States were finally joined
to Italy.
wear their national dress, and large numbers were forcibly driven
out of their homeland.
Ireland suffered a similar fate. It was a country deeply divided
between Catholics and Protestants. The English helped the Protestants
of Ireland to establish their dominance over a largely Catholic country.
Catholic revolts against British dominance were suppressed. After a
failed revolt led by Wolfe Tone and his United Irishmen (1798),
Ireland was forcibly incorporated into the United Kingdom in 1801.
A new ‘British nation’ was forged through the propagation of a
dominant English culture. The symbols of the new Britain – the
British flag (Union Jack), the national anthem (God Save Our Noble
King), the English language – were actively promoted and the older
nations survived only as subordinate partners in this union.

Activity
The artist has portrayed Garibaldi as holding on to the base of
the boot, so that the King of Sardinia-Piedmont can enter it from
the top. Look at the map of Italy once more. What statement is
this caricature making?

22
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 15 – Garibaldi helping King Victor
Emmanuel II of Sardinia-Piedmont to pull on the
boot named ‘Italy’. English caricature of 1859.

New words
Ethnic – Relates to a common racial, tribal, or
cultural origin or background that a community
identifies with or claims

5 Visualising the Nation
While it is easy enough to represent a ruler through a portrait or a
statue, how does one go about giving a face to a nation? Artists in
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries found a way out by
personifying a nation. In other words they represented a country as
if it were a person. Nations were then portrayed as female figures.
The female form that was chosen to personify the nation did not
stand for any particular woman in real life; rather it sought to give
the abstract idea of the nation a concrete form. That is, the female
figure became an allegory of the nation.
You will recall that during the French Revolution artists used the
female allegory to portray ideas such as Liberty, Justice and the
Republic. These ideals were represented through specific objects or
symbols. As you would remember, the attributes of Liberty are the
red cap, or the broken chain, while Justice is generally a blindfolded
woman carrying a pair of weighing scales.

Fig. 16 — Postage stamps of 1850 with the
figure of Marianne representing the Republic of
France.

Similar female allegories were invented by artists in the nineteenth
century to represent the nation. In France she was christened
Marianne, a popular Christian name, which underlined the idea of a
people’s nation. Her characteristics were drawn from those of Liberty
and the Republic – the red cap, the tricolour, the cockade. Statues
of Marianne were erected in public squares to remind the public of
the national symbol of unity and to persuade them to identify with
it. Marianne images were marked on coins and stamps.

Europe

Similarly, Germania became the allegory of the German nation. In
visual representations, Germania wears a crown of oak leaves, as
the German oak stands for heroism.

N a t i o n a l i s m in

New words
Allegory – When an abstract idea (for instance, greed, envy,
freedom, liberty) is expressed through a person or a thing. An
allegorical story has two meanings, one literal and one symbolic

Fig. 17 — Germania, Philip Veit, 1848.
The artist prepared this painting of Germania on a
cotton banner, as it was meant to hang from the
ceiling of the Church of St Paul where the Frankfurt
parliament was convened in March 1848.

23
Reprint 2025-26

Box 3
Meanings of the symbols
Attribute

Significance

Broken chains

Being freed

Breastplate with eagle

Symbol of the German empire – strength

Crown of oak leaves

Heroism

Sword

Readiness to fight

Olive branch around the sword

Willingness to make peace

Black, red and gold tricolour

Flag of the liberal-nationalists in 1848, banned by the Dukes of the
German states

Rays of the rising sun

Beginning of a new era

Activity
With the help of the chart in Box 3, identify the attributes of Veit’s
Germania and interpret the symbolic meaning of the painting.
In an earlier allegorical rendering of 1836, Veit had portrayed the
Kaiser’s crown at the place where he has now located the

India and the Contemporary World

broken chain. Explain the significance of this change.

Fig. 18 — The fallen Germania, Julius Hübner, 1850.

Activity
Describe what you see in Fig. 17. What historical events could Hübner be
referring to in this allegorical vision of the nation?

24
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 19 — Germania guarding the Rhine.
In 1860, the artist Lorenz Clasen was commissioned to paint this image. The inscription
on Germania’s sword reads: ‘The German sword protects the German Rhine.’

Europe

Activity
Look once more at Fig. 10. Imagine you were a citizen of Frankfurt in March 1848 and were present during the

N a t i o n a l i s m in

proceedings of the parliament. How would you (a) as a man seated in the hall of deputies, and (b) as a woman
observing from the galleries, relate to the banner of Germania hanging from the ceiling?

25
Reprint 2025-26

6 Nationalism and Imperialism
By the last quarter of the nineteenth century nationalism no longer
retained its idealistic liberal-democratic sentiment of the first half
of the century, but became a narrow creed with limited ends. During
this period nationalist groups became increasingly intolerant of each
other and ever ready to go to war. The major European powers, in
turn, manipulated the nationalist aspirations of the subject peoples
in Europe to further their own imperialist aims.

India and the Contemporary World

The most serious source of nationalist tension in Europe after 1871
was the area called the Balkans. The Balkans was a region of
geographical and ethnic variation comprising modern-day Romania,
Bulgaria, Albania, Greece, Macedonia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina,
Slovenia, Serbia and Montenegro whose inhabitants were broadly
known as the Slavs. A large part of the Balkans was under the control
of the Ottoman Empire. The spread of the ideas of romantic
nationalism in the Balkans together with the disintegration of the
Ottoman Empire made this region very explosive. All through the
nineteenth century the Ottoman Empire had sought to strengthen
itself through modernisation and internal reforms but with very
little success. One by one, its European subject nationalities broke
away from its control and declared independence. The Balkan
peoples based their claims for independence or political rights on
nationality and used history to prove that they had once been
independent but had subsequently been subjugated by foreign
powers. Hence the rebellious nationalities in the Balkans thought of
their struggles as attempts to win back their long-lost independence.
As the different Slavic nationalities struggled to define their identity
and independence, the Balkan area became an area of intense conflict.
The Balkan states were fiercely jealous of each other and each hoped
to gain more territory at the expense of the others. Matters were
further complicated because the Balkans also became the scene of
big power rivalry. During this period, there was intense rivalry among
the European powers over trade and colonies as well as naval and
military might. These rivalries were very evident in the way the Balkan
problem unfolded. Each power – Russia, Germany, England,
Austro-Hungary – was keen on countering the hold of other powers
over the Balkans, and extending its own control over the area. This
led to a series of wars in the region and finally the First World War.

26
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 20 — A map celebrating the British Empire.
At the top, angels are shown carrying the banner of freedom. In the foreground, Britannia — the
symbol of the British nation — is triumphantly sitting over the globe. The colonies are represented
through images of tigers, elephants, forests and primitive people. The domination of the world is
shown as the basis of Britain’s national pride.

N a t i o n a l i s m in

Europe

Nationalism, aligned with imperialism, led Europe to disaster in 1914.
But meanwhile, many countries in the world which had been
colonised by the European powers in the nineteenth century began
to oppose imperial domination. The anti-imperial movements that
developed everywhere were nationalist, in the sense that they all
struggled to form independent nation-states, and were inspired by
a sense of collective national unity, forged in confrontation with
imperialism. European ideas of nationalism were nowhere
replicated, for people everywhere developed their own specific variety
of nationalism. But the idea that societies should be organised into
‘nation-states’ came to be accepted as natural and universal.

27
Reprint 2025-26

1. Write a note on:
a) Guiseppe Mazzini
b) Count Camillo de Cavour
c) The Greek war of independence
d) Frankfurt parliament
e) The role of women in nationalist struggles
2. What steps did the French revolutionaries take to create a sense of collective
identity among the French people?
3. Who were Marianne and Germania? What was the importance of the way in
which they were portrayed?
4. Briefly trace the process of German unification.

Write in brief

Write in brief

5. What changes did Napoleon introduce to make the administrative system more
efficient in the territories ruled by him?

Discuss
1. Explain what is meant by the 1848 revolution of the liberals. What were the political, social
and economic ideas supported by the liberals?

3. Through a focus on any two countries, explain how nations developed over the nineteenth
century.
4. How was the history of nationalism in Britain unlike the rest of Europe?
5. Why did nationalist tensions emerge in the Balkans?

Project
Project
Find out more about nationalist symbols in countries outside Europe. For one or two countries,
collect examples of pictures, posters or music that are symbols of nationalism. How are these
different from European examples?

28
Reprint 2025-26

Discuss

India and the Contemporary World

2. Choose three examples to show the contribution of culture to the growth of nationalism
in Europe.
##2##
Chapter II

Nationalism in India
As you have seen, modern nationalism in Europe came to be
associated with the formation of nation-states. It also meant a change
in people’s understanding of who they were, and what defined their
identity and sense of belonging. New symbols and icons, new songs
and ideas forged new links and redefined the boundaries of
communities. In most countries the making of this new national
identity was a long process. How did this consciousness emerge
in India?
In India and as in many other colonies, the growth of modern
nationalism is intimately connected to the anti-colonial movement.
People began discovering their unity in the process of their struggle
with colonialism. The sense of being oppressed under colonialism
provided a shared bond that tied many different groups together.
But each class and group felt the effects of colonialism differently,
their experiences were varied, and their notions of freedom were
not always the same. The Congress under Mahatma Gandhi tried
to forge these groups together within one movement. But the unity
did not emerge without conflict.

Nationalism
in India
Nationalism in India

In an earlier textbook you have read about the growth of nationalism
in India up to the first decade of the twentieth century. In this chapter
we will pick up the story from the 1920s and study the NonCooperation and Civil Disobedience Movements. We will explore
how the Congress sought to develop the national movement, how
different social groups participated in the movement, and how
nationalism captured the imagination of people.

Fig. 1 – 6 April 1919.
Mass processions on
the streets became a
common feature during
the national movement.

29
Reprint 2025-26

1 The First World War, Khilafat and Non-Cooperation
In the years after 1919, we see the national movement spreading to
new areas, incorporating new social groups, and developing new
modes of struggle. How do we understand these developments?
What implications did they have?
First of all, the war created a new economic and political situation.
It led to a huge increase in defence expenditure which was financed
by war loans and increasing taxes: customs duties were raised and
income tax introduced. Through the war years prices increased –
doubling between 1913 and 1918 – leading to extreme hardship
for the common people. Villages were called upon to supply soldiers,
and the forced recruitment in rural areas caused widespread anger.
Then in 1918-19 and 1920-21, crops failed in many parts of India,
resulting in acute shortages of food. This was accompanied by an
influenza epidemic. According to the census of 1921, 12 to 13 million
people perished as a result of famines and the epidemic.

New words
Forced recruitment – A process by which the
colonial state forced people to join the army

People hoped that their hardships would end after the war was
over. But that did not happen.
At this stage a new leader appeared and suggested a new mode
of struggle.

1.1 The Idea of Satyagraha

India and the Contemporary World

Mahatma Gandhi returned to India in January 1915. As you know,
he had come from South Africa where he had successfully fought

Fig. 2 – Indian workers in South
Africa march through Volksrust, 6
November 1913.
Mahatma Gandhi was leading the
workers from Newcastle to
Transvaal. When the marchers were
stopped and Gandhiji arrested,
thousands of more workers joined
the satyagraha against racist laws
that denied rights to non-whites.

30
Reprint 2025-26

After arriving in India, Mahatma Gandhi successfully organised
satyagraha movements in various places. In 1917 he travelled to
Champaran in Bihar to inspire the peasants to struggle against the
oppressive plantation system. Then in 1917, he organised a satyagraha
to support the peasants of the Kheda district of Gujarat. Affected
by crop failure and a plague epidemic, the peasants of Kheda could
not pay the revenue, and were demanding that revenue collection be
relaxed. In 1918, Mahatma Gandhi went to Ahmedabad to organise
a satyagraha movement amongst cotton mill workers.

1.2 The Rowlatt Act
Emboldened with this success, Gandhiji in 1919 decided to launch a
nationwide satyagraha against the proposed Rowlatt Act (1919). This
Act had been hurriedly passed through the Imperial Legislative
Council despite the united opposition of the Indian members. It
gave the government enormous powers to repress political activities,
and allowed detention of political prisoners without trial for two
years. Mahatma Gandhi wanted non-violent civil disobedience against
such unjust laws, which would start with a hartal on 6 April.

Source A
Mahatma Gandhi on Satyagraha
‘It is said of “passive resistance” that it is the
weapon of the weak, but the power which is
the subject of this article can be used only
by the strong. This power is not passive
resistance; indeed it calls for intense activity. The
movement in South Africa was not passive
but active …

‘ Satyagraha is not physical force. A satyagrahi
does not inflict pain on the adversary; he does
not seek his destruction … In the use of
satyagraha, there is no ill-will whatever.
‘ Satyagraha is pure soul-force. Truth is the very
substance of the soul. That is why this force is
called satyagraha. The soul is informed with
knowledge. In it burns the flame of love. … Nonviolence is the supreme dharma …
‘It is certain that India cannot rival Britain or
Europe in force of arms. The British worship the
war-god and they can all of them become, as
they are becoming, bearers of arms. The
hundreds of millions in India can never carry arms.
They have made the religion of non-violence their
own ...’

Source

Activity
Read the text carefully. What did Mahatma
Gandhi mean when he said satyagraha is
active resistance?

Nationalism in India

the racist regime with a novel method of mass agitation, which he
called satyagraha. The idea of satyagraha emphasised the power of
truth and the need to search for truth. It suggested that if the cause
was true, if the struggle was against injustice, then physical force was
not necessary to fight the oppressor. Without seeking vengeance or
being aggressive, a satyagrahi could win the battle through nonviolence. This could be done by appealing to the conscience of the
oppressor. People – including the oppressors – had to be persuaded
to see the truth, instead of being forced to accept truth through the
use of violence. By this struggle, truth was bound to ultimately
triumph. Mahatma Gandhi believed that this dharma of non-violence
could unite all Indians.

Rallies were organised in various cities, workers went on strike in
railway workshops, and shops closed down. Alarmed by the popular
upsurge, and scared that lines of communication such as the railways
and telegraph would be disrupted, the British administration decided
to clamp down on nationalists. Local leaders were picked up from
Amritsar, and Mahatma Gandhi was barred from entering Delhi.
On 10 April, the police in Amritsar fired upon a peaceful procession,
provoking widespread attacks on banks, post offices and railway
stations. Martial law was imposed and General Dyer took command.
31
Reprint 2025-26

On 13 April the infamous Jallianwalla Bagh incident took place. On
that day a large crowd gathered in the enclosed ground of Jallianwalla
Bagh. Some came to protest against the government’s new repressive
measures. Others had come to attend the annual Baisakhi fair. Being
from outside the city, many villagers were unaware of the martial
law that had been imposed. Dyer entered the area, blocked the exit
points, and opened fire on the crowd, killing hundreds. His object,
as he declared later, was to ‘produce a moral effect’, to create in the
minds of satyagrahis a feeling of terror and awe.

India and the Contemporary World

As the news of Jallianwalla Bagh spread, crowds took to the streets
in many north Indian towns. There were strikes, clashes with the
police and attacks on government buildings. The government
responded with brutal repression, seeking to humiliate and terrorise
people: satyagrahis were forced to rub their noses on the ground,
crawl on the streets, and do salaam (salute) to all sahibs; people were
flogged and villages (around Gujranwala in Punjab, now in Pakistan)
were bombed. Seeing violence spread, Mahatma Gandhi called off
the movement.
While the Rowlatt satyagraha had been a widespread movement, it
was still limited mostly to cities and towns. Mahatma Gandhi now felt
the need to launch a more broad-based movement in India. But he
was certain that no such movement could be organised without
bringing the Hindus and Muslims closer together. One way of doing
this, he felt, was to take up the Khilafat issue. The First World War had
ended with the defeat of Ottoman Turkey. And there were rumours
that a harsh peace treaty was going to be imposed on the Ottoman
emperor – the spiritual head of the Islamic world (the Khalifa). To
defend the Khalifa’s temporal powers, a Khilafat Committee was
formed in Bombay in March 1919. A young generation of Muslim
leaders like the brothers Muhammad Ali and Shaukat Ali, began
discussing with Mahatma Gandhi about the possibility of a united
mass action on the issue. Gandhiji saw this as an opportunity to bring
Muslims under the umbrella of a unified national movement. At the
Calcutta session of the Congress in September 1920, he convinced
other leaders of the need to start a non-cooperation movement in
support of Khilafat as well as for swaraj.

1.3 Why Non-cooperation?
In his famous book Hind Swaraj (1909) Mahatma Gandhi declared
that British rule was established in India with the cooperation of
32
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 3 – General Dyer’s ‘crawling orders’ being
administered by British soldiers, Amritsar,
Punjab, 1919.

Indians, and had survived only because of this cooperation. If Indians
refused to cooperate, British rule in India would collapse within a
year, and swaraj would come.
How could non-cooperation become a movement? Gandhiji
proposed that the movement should unfold in stages. It should begin
with the surrender of titles that the government awarded, and a
boycott of civil services, army, police, courts and legislative councils,
schools, and foreign goods. Then, in case the government used
repression, a full civil disobedience campaign would be launched.
Through the summer of 1920 Mahatma Gandhi and Shaukat Ali
toured extensively, mobilising popular support for the movement.

New words
Boycott – The refusal to deal and associate with
people, or participate in activities, or buy and
use things; usually a form of protest

Many within the Congress were, however, concerned about the
proposals. They were reluctant to boycott the council elections
scheduled for November 1920, and they feared that the movement
might lead to popular violence. In the months between September
and December there was an intense tussle within the Congress. For a
while there seemed no meeting point between the supporters and
the opponents of the movement. Finally, at the Congress session at
Nagpur in December 1920, a compromise was worked out and
the Non-Cooperation programme was adopted.

Nationalism in India

How did the movement unfold? Who participated in it? How did
different social groups conceive of the idea of Non-Cooperation?

Fig. 4 – The boycott of foreign
cloth, July 1922.
Foreign cloth was seen as the
symbol of Western economic
and cultural domination.

33
Reprint 2025-26

2 Differing Strands within the Movement

The Non-Cooperation-Khilafat Movement began in January 1921.
Various social groups participated in this movement, each with its
own specific aspiration. All of them responded to the call of Swaraj,
but the term meant different things to different people.

2.1 The Movement in the Towns
The movement started with middle-class participation in the cities.
Thousands of students left government-controlled schools and
colleges, headmasters and teachers resigned, and lawyers gave up
their legal practices. The council elections were boycotted in most
provinces except Madras, where the Justice Party, the party of the
non-Brahmans, felt that entering the council was one way of gaining
some power – something that usually only Brahmans had access to.

India and the Contemporary World

The effects of non-cooperation on the economic front were more
dramatic. Foreign goods were boycotted, liquor shops picketed,
and foreign cloth burnt in huge bonfires. The import of foreign
cloth halved between 1921 and 1922, its value dropping from
Rs 102 crore to Rs 57 crore. In many places merchants and traders
refused to trade in foreign goods or finance foreign trade. As the
boycott movement spread, and people began discarding imported
clothes and wearing only Indian ones, production of Indian textile
mills and handlooms went up.
But this movement in the cities gradually slowed down for a variety
of reasons. Khadi cloth was often more expensive than massproduced mill cloth and poor people could not afford to buy it.
How then could they boycott mill cloth for too long? Similarly the
boycott of British institutions posed a problem. For the movement
to be successful, alternative Indian institutions had to be set up
so that they could be used in place of the British ones. These were
slow to come up. So students and teachers began trickling
back to government schools and lawyers joined back work in
government courts.

2.2 Rebellion in the Countryside
From the cities, the Non-Cooperation Movement spread to the
countryside. It drew into its fold the struggles of peasants and tribals
34
Reprint 2025-26

New words
Picket – A form of demonstration or protest
by which people block the entrance to a shop,
factory or office

Activity
The year is 1921. You are a student in a
government-controlled school. Design a
poster urging school students to answer
Gandhiji’s call to join the Non-Cooperation
Movement.

which were developing in different parts of India in the years
after the war.
In Awadh, peasants were led by Baba Ramchandra – a sanyasi who
had earlier been to Fiji as an indentured labourer. The movement
here was against talukdars and landlords who demanded from
peasants exorbitantly high rents and a variety of other cesses. Peasants
had to do begar and work at landlords’ farms without any payment.
As tenants they had no security of tenure, being regularly evicted so
that they could acquire no right over the leased land. The peasant
movement demanded reduction of revenue, abolition of begar, and
social boycott of oppressive landlords. In many places nai – dhobi
bandhs were organised by panchayats to deprive landlords of the
services of even barbers and washermen. In June 1920, Jawaharlal
Nehru began going around the villages in Awadh, talking to the
villagers, and trying to understand their grievances. By October, the
Oudh Kisan Sabha was set up headed by Jawaharlal Nehru, Baba
Ramchandra and a few others. Within a month, over 300 branches
had been set up in the villages around the region. So when the NonCooperation Movement began the following year, the effort of the
Congress was to integrate the Awadh peasant struggle into the wider
struggle. The peasant movement, however, developed in forms that
the Congress leadership was unhappy with. As the movement spread
in 1921, the houses of talukdars and merchants were attacked,
bazaars were looted, and grain hoards were taken over. In many
places local leaders told peasants that Gandhiji had declared that
no taxes were to be paid and land was to be redistributed among
the poor. The name of the Mahatma was being invoked to sanction
all action and aspirations.

New words
Begar – Labour that villagers were forced to
contribute without any payment

Activity
If you were a peasant in Uttar Pradesh in 1920,
how would you have responded to Gandhiji’s
call for Swaraj? Give reasons for your response.

In 1928, Vallabhbhai Patel led the peasant
movement in Bardoli, a taluka in Gujarat, against
enhancement of land revenue. Known as the
Bardoli Satyagraha, this movement was a success
under the able leadership of Vallabhbhai Patel.
The struggle was widely publicised and
generated immense sympathy in many parts
of India.

Nationalism in India

Source B
On 6 January 1921, the police in United Provinces fired at peasants near Rae Bareli. Jawaharlal Nehru wanted to go to
the place of firing, but was stopped by the police. Agitated and angry, Nehru addressed the peasants who gathered
around him. This is how he later described the meeting:
‘They behaved as brave men, calm and unruffled in the face of danger. I do not know how they felt but I know what
my feelings were. For a moment my blood was up, non-violence was almost forgotten – but for a moment only. The
thought of the great leader, who by God’s goodness has been sent to lead us to victory, came to me, and I saw the
kisans seated and standing near me, less excited, more peaceful than I was – and the moment of weakness passed, I
spoke to them in all humility on non-violence – I needed the lesson more than they – and they heeded me and
peacefully dispersed.’
Quoted in Sarvapalli Gopal, Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography, Vol. I.

Source
35

Reprint 2025-26

Tribal peasants interpreted the message of Mahatma Gandhi and
the idea of swaraj in yet another way. In the Gudem Hills of Andhra
Pradesh, for instance, a militant guerrilla movement spread in
the early 1920s – not a form of struggle that the Congress could
approve. Here, as in other forest regions, the colonial government
had closed large forest areas, preventing people from entering
the forests to graze their cattle, or to collect fuelwood and fruits.
This enraged the hill people. Not only were their livelihoods
affected but they felt that their traditional rights were being denied.
When the government began forcing them to contribute begar
for road building, the hill people revolted. The person who came
to lead them was an interesting figure. Alluri Sitaram Raju claimed
that he had a variety of special powers: he could make correct
astrological predictions and heal people, and he could survive
even bullet shots. Captivated by Raju, the rebels proclaimed that
he was an incarnation of God. Raju talked of the greatness of
Mahatma Gandhi, said he was inspired by the Non-Cooperation
Movement, and persuaded people to wear khadi and give up drinking.
But at the same time he asserted that India could be liberated only
by the use of force, not non-violence. The Gudem rebels attacked
police stations, attempted to kill British officials and carried on
guerrilla warfare for achieving swaraj. Raju was captured and
executed in 1924, and over time became a folk hero.

India and the Contemporary World

2.3 Swaraj in the Plantations
Workers too had their own understanding of Mahatma Gandhi
and the notion of swaraj. For plantation workers in Assam, freedom
meant the right to move freely in and out of the confined space in
which they were enclosed, and it meant retaining a link with the
village from which they had come. Under the Inland Emigration
Act of 1859, plantation workers were not permitted to leave the
tea gardens without permission, and in fact they were rarely given
such permission. When they heard of the Non-Cooperation
Movement, thousands of workers defied the authorities, left the
plantations and headed home. They believed that Gandhi Raj was
coming and everyone would be given land in their own villages.
They, however, never reached their destination. Stranded on the way
by a railway and steamer strike, they were caught by the police and
brutally beaten up.
36
Reprint 2025-26

Activity
Find out about other participants in the
National Movement who were captured and
put to death by the British. Can you think of a
similar example from the national movement
in Indo-China (Chapter 2)?

The visions of these movements were not defined by the Congress
programme. They interpreted the term swaraj in their own ways,
imagining it to be a time when all suffering and all troubles would
be over. Yet, when the tribals chanted Gandhiji’s name and raised
slogans demanding ‘Swatantra Bharat’, they were also emotionally
relating to an all-India agitation. When they acted in the name of
Mahatma Gandhi, or linked their movement to that of the Congress,
they were identifying with a movement which went beyond the limits
of their immediate locality.

Nationalism in India

Fig. 5 – Chauri Chaura, 1922.
At Chauri Chaura in Gorakhpur, a peaceful demonstration in a bazaar turned into a
violent clash with the police. Hearing of the incident, Mahatma Gandhi called a halt
to the Non-Cooperation Movement.

37
Reprint 2025-26

3 Towards Civil Disobedience
In February 1922, Mahatma Gandhi decided to withdraw the
Non-Cooperation Movement. He felt the movement was turning
violent in many places and satyagrahis needed to be properly trained
before they would be ready for mass struggles. Within the Congress,
some leaders were by now tired of mass struggles and wanted to
participate in elections to the provincial councils that had been set
up by the Government of India Act of 1919. They felt that it was
important to oppose British policies within the councils, argue for
reform and also demonstrate that these councils were not truly
democratic. C. R. Das and Motilal Nehru formed the Swaraj Party
within the Congress to argue for a return to council politics. But
younger leaders like Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose
pressed for more radical mass agitation and for full independence.

Lala Lajpat Rai was assaulted by the British police
during a peaceful demonstration against the
Simon Commission. He succumbed to injuries
that were inflicted on him during the
demonstration.

India and the Contemporary World

In such a situation of internal debate and dissension two factors
again shaped Indian politics towards the late 1920s. The first was
the effect of the worldwide economic depression. Agricultural prices
began to fall from 1926 and collapsed after 1930. As the demand
for agricultural goods fell and exports declined, peasants found it
difficult to sell their harvests and pay their revenue. By 1930, the
countryside was in turmoil.
Against this background the new Tory government in Britain
constituted a Statutory Commission under Sir John Simon. Set up
in response to the nationalist movement, the
commission was to look into the functioning of
the constitutional system in India and suggest
changes. The problem was that the commission
did not have a single Indian member. They were
all British.
When the Simon Commission arrived in India in
1928, it was greeted with the slogan ‘Go back
Simon’. All parties, including the Congress and the
Muslim League, participated in the demonstrations.
In an effort to win them over, the viceroy, Lord
Irwin, announced in October 1929, a vague offer
of ‘dominion status’ for India in an unspecified
future, and a Round Table Conference to discuss a
future constitution. This did not satisfy the Congress
leaders. The radicals within the Congress, led by

Fig. 6 – Meeting of Congress leaders at Allahabad, 1931.
Apart from Mahatma Gandhi, you can see Sardar Vallabhbhai
Patel (extreme left), Jawaharlal Nehru (extreme right) and Subhas
Chandra Bose (fifth from right).

38
Reprint 2025-26

Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose, became more assertive.
The liberals and moderates, who were proposing a constitutional
system within the framework of British dominion, gradually lost
their influence. In December 1929, under the presidency of Jawaharlal
Nehru, the Lahore Congress formalised the demand of ‘Purna
Swaraj’ or full independence for India. It was declared that 26 January
1930, would be celebrated as the Independence Day when people
were to take a pledge to struggle for complete independence. But
the celebrations attracted very little attention. So Mahatma Gandhi
had to find a way to relate this abstract idea of freedom to more
concrete issues of everyday life.

3.1 The Salt March and the Civil Disobedience Movement
Mahatma Gandhi found in salt a powerful symbol that could unite
the nation. On 31 January 1930, he sent a letter to Viceroy Irwin
stating eleven demands. Some of these were of general interest;
others were specific demands of different classes, from industrialists
to peasants. The idea was to make the demands wide-ranging, so
that all classes within Indian society could identify with them and
everyone could be brought together in a united campaign. The most
stirring of all was the demand to abolish the salt tax. Salt was
something consumed by the rich and the poor alike, and it was one
of the most essential items of food. The tax on salt and the
government monopoly over its production, Mahatma Gandhi
declared, revealed the most oppressive face of British rule.

Source C
The Independence Day Pledge, 26 January
1930
‘We believe that it is the inalienable right of the
Indian people, as of any other people, to have
freedom and to enjoy the fruits of their toil and
have the necessities of life, so that they may
have full opportunities of growth. We believe
also that if any government deprives a people of
these rights and oppresses them, the people
have a further right to alter it or to abolish it.
The British Government in India has not only
deprived the Indian people of their freedom but
has based itself on the exploitation of the masses,
and has ruined India economically, politically,
culturally, and spiritually. We believe, therefore,
that India must sever the British connection and
attain Purna Swaraj or Complete Independence.’

Source

Nationalism in India

Mahatma Gandhi’s letter was, in a way, an ultimatum. If the
demands were not fulfilled by 11 March, the letter stated, the
Congress would launch a civil disobedience campaign. Irwin was
unwilling to negotiate. So Mahatma Gandhi started his famous
salt march accompanied by 78 of his trusted volunteers. The march
was over 240 miles, from Gandhiji’s ashram in Sabarmati to the
Gujarati coastal town of Dandi. The volunteers walked for 24 days,
about 10 miles a day. Thousands came to hear Mahatma Gandhi
wherever he stopped, and he told them what he meant by swaraj
and urged them to peacefully defy the British. On 6 April he reached
Dandi, and ceremonially violated the law, manufacturing salt by
boiling sea water.
This marked the beginning of the Civil Disobedience Movement.
How was this movement different from the Non-Cooperation
Movement? People were now asked not only to refuse cooperation
39
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 7 – The Dandi march.
During the salt march Mahatma
Gandhi was accompanied by
78 volunteers. On the way
they were joined by thousands.

India and the Contemporary World

with the British, as they had done in 1921-22, but also to break
colonial laws. Thousands in different parts of the country broke
the salt law, manufactured salt and demonstrated in front of
government salt factories. As the movement spread, foreign cloth
was boycotted, and liquor shops were picketed. Peasants refused to
pay revenue and chaukidari taxes, village officials resigned, and in
many places forest people violated forest laws – going into Reserved
Forests to collect wood and graze cattle.
Worried by the developments, the colonial government began
arresting the Congress leaders one by one. This led to violent clashes
in many palaces. When Abdul Ghaffar Khan, a devout disciple of
Mahatma Gandhi, was arrested in April 1930, angry crowds
demonstrated in the streets of Peshawar, facing armoured cars and
police firing. Many were killed. A month later, when Mahatma
Gandhi himself was arrested, industrial workers in Sholapur attacked
police posts, municipal buildings, lawcourts and railway stations –
all structures that symbolised British rule. A frightened government
responded with a policy of brutal repression. Peaceful satyagrahis
were attacked, women and children were beaten, and about 100,000
people were arrested.
In such a situation, Mahatma Gandhi once again decided to call off
the movement and entered into a pact with Irwin on 5 March 1931.
By this Gandhi-Irwin Pact, Gandhiji consented to participate in a
Round Table Conference (the Congress had boycotted the first
40
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 8 – Police cracked down on satyagrahis,
1930.

Round Table Conference) in London and the government agreed to Box 1
release the political prisoners. In December 1931, Gandhiji went to
‘To the altar of this revolution we have
London for the conference, but the negotiations broke down and
brought our youth as incense’
he returned disappointed. Back in India, he discovered that the
Many nationalists thought that the struggle
government had begun a new cycle of repression. Ghaffar Khan
against the British could not be won through
non-violence. In 1928, the Hindustan Socialist
and Jawaharlal Nehru were both in jail, the Congress had been
Republican Army (HSRA) was founded at a
declared illegal, and a series of measures had been imposed to prevent
meeting in Ferozeshah Kotla ground in Delhi.
meetings, demonstrations and boycotts. With great apprehension,
Amongst its leaders were Bhagat Singh, Jatin
Das and Ajoy Ghosh. In a series of dramatic
Mahatma Gandhi relaunched the Civil Disobedience Movement.
actions in different parts of India, the HSRA
For over a year, the movement continued, but by 1934 it lost
targeted some of the symbols of British power.
its momentum.
In April 1929, Bhagat Singh and Batukeswar

Let us now look at the different social groups that participated in the
Civil Disobedience Movement. Why did they join the movement?
What were their ideals? What did swaraj mean to them?
In the countryside, rich peasant communities – like the Patidars of
Gujarat and the Jats of Uttar Pradesh – were active in the movement.
Being producers of commercial crops, they were very hard hit by
the trade depression and falling prices. As their cash income
disappeared, they found it impossible to pay the government’s revenue
demand. And the refusal of the government to reduce the revenue
demand led to widespread resentment. These rich peasants became
enthusiastic supporters of the Civil Disobedience Movement,
organising their communities, and at times forcing reluctant members,
to participate in the boycott programmes. For them the fight for
swaraj was a struggle against high revenues. But they were deeply
disappointed when the movement was called off in 1931 without
the revenue rates being revised. So when the movement was restarted
in 1932, many of them refused to participate.

‘Revolution is the inalienable right of mankind.
Freedom is the imprescriptible birthright of all.
The labourer is the real sustainer of society …
To the altar of this revolution we have brought
our youth as incense, for no sacrifice is too
great for so magnificent a cause. We are
content. We await the advent of revolution.
Inquilab Zindabad!’

Nationalism in India

3.2 How Participants saw the Movement

Dutta threw a bomb in the Legislative Assembly.
In the same year there was an attempt to blow
up the train that Lord Irwin was travelling in.
Bhagat Singh was 23 when he was tried and
executed by the colonial government. During
his trial, Bhagat Singh stated that he did not
wish to glorify ‘the cult of the bomb and pistol’
but wanted a revolution in society:

The poorer peasantry were not just interested in the lowering of the
revenue demand. Many of them were small tenants cultivating land
they had rented from landlords. As the Depression continued and
cash incomes dwindled, the small tenants found it difficult to pay
their rent. They wanted the unpaid rent to the landlord to be remitted.
They joined a variety of radical movements, often led by Socialists
and Communists. Apprehensive of raising issues that might upset
the rich peasants and landlords, the Congress was unwilling to support
‘no rent’ campaigns in most places. So the relationship between the
poor peasants and the Congress remained uncertain.
41
Reprint 2025-26

India and the Contemporary World

What about the business classes? How did they relate to the Civil
Disobedience Movement? During the First World War, Indian
merchants and industrialists had made huge profits and become
powerful (see Chapter 5). Keen on expanding their business, they
now reacted against colonial policies that restricted business activities.
They wanted protection against imports of foreign goods, and a
rupee-sterling foreign exchange ratio that would discourage imports.
To organise business interests, they formed the Indian Industrial
and Commercial Congress in 1920 and the Federation of the Indian
Chamber of Commerce and Industries (FICCI) in 1927. Led by
prominent industrialists like Purshottamdas Thakurdas and
G. D. Birla, the industrialists attacked colonial control over the Indian
economy, and supported the Civil Disobedience Movement when
it was first launched. They gave financial assistance and refused to
buy or sell imported goods. Most businessmen came to see swaraj
as a time when colonial restrictions on business would no longer
exist and trade and industry would flourish without constraints. But
after the failure of the Round Table Conference, business groups
were no longer uniformly enthusiastic. They were apprehensive of
the spread of militant activities, and worried about prolonged
disruption of business, as well as of the growing influence of
socialism amongst the younger members of the Congress.
The industrial working classes did not participate in the Civil
Disobedience Movement in large numbers, except in the Nagpur
region. As the industrialists came closer to the Congress, workers
stayed aloof. But in spite of that, some workers did participate in
the Civil Disobedience Movement, selectively adopting some of
the ideas of the Gandhian programme, like boycott of foreign
goods, as part of their own movements against low wages and
poor working conditions. There were strikes by railway workers in
1930 and dockworkers in 1932. In 1930 thousands of workers in
Chotanagpur tin mines wore Gandhi caps and participated in protest
rallies and boycott campaigns. But the Congress was reluctant to
include workers’ demands as part of its programme of struggle.
It felt that this would alienate industrialists and divide the antiimperial forces.
Another important feature of the Civil Disobedience Movement
was the large-scale participation of women. During Gandhiji’s salt
march, thousands of women came out of their homes to listen to
him. They participated in protest marches, manufactured salt, and
42
Reprint 2025-26

Some important dates
1918-19
Distressed UP peasants organised by Baba
Ramchandra.
April 1919
Gandhian hartal against Rowlatt Act; Jallianwala
Bagh massacre.
January 1921
Non-Cooperation and Khilafat movement
launched.
February 1922
Chauri Chaura; Gandhiji withdraws NonCooperation movement.
May 1924
Alluri Sitarama Raju arrested ending a two-year
armed tribal struggle.
December 1929
Lahore Congress; Congress adopts the demand
for ‘Purna Swaraj’.
1930
Ambedkar establishes Depressed Classes
Association.
March 1930
Gandhiji begins Civil Disobedience Movement by
breaking salt law at Dandi.
March 1931
Gandhiji ends Civil Disobedience Movement.
December 1931
Second Round Table Conference.
1932
Civil Disobedience re-launched.

Fig. 9 – Women join
nationalist processions.
During the national
movement, many women,
for the first time in their
lives, moved out of their
homes on to a public arena.
Amongst the marchers you
can see many old women,
and mothers with children in
their arms.

Discuss
Why did various classes and groups of Indians
participate in the Civil Disobedience
Movement?

Nationalism in India

picketed foreign cloth and liquor shops. Many went to jail. In urban
areas these women were from high-caste families; in rural areas
they came from rich peasant households. Moved by Gandhiji’s call,
they began to see service to the nation as a sacred duty of women.
Yet, this increased public role did not necessarily mean any radical
change in the way the position of women was visualised. Gandhiji
was convinced that it was the duty of women to look after home
and hearth, be good mothers and good wives. And for a long time
the Congress was reluctant to allow women to hold any position
of authority within the organisation. It was keen only on their
symbolic presence.

3.3 The Limits of Civil Disobedience
Not all social groups were moved by the abstract concept of swaraj.
One such group was the nation’s ‘untouchables’, who from around
the 1930s had begun to call themselves dalit or oppressed. For
long the Congress had ignored the dalits, for fear of offending the
sanatanis, the conservative high-caste Hindus. But Mahatma Gandhi
declared that swaraj would not come for a hundred years if
untouchability was not eliminated. He called the ‘untouchables’ harijan,

43
Reprint 2025-26

or the children of God, organised satyagraha to secure them
entry into temples, and access to public wells, tanks, roads and
schools. He himself cleaned toilets to dignify the work of the
bhangi (the sweepers), and persuaded upper castes to change
their heart and give up ‘the sin of untouchability’. But many
dalit leaders were keen on a different political solution to the
problems of the community. They began organising themselves,
demanding reserved seats in educational institutions, and a
separate electorate that would choose dalit members for
legislative councils. Political empowerment, they believed, would
resolve the problems of their social disabilities. Dalit
participation in the Civil Disobedience Movement was therefore
limited, particularly in the Maharashtra and Nagpur region
where their organisation was quite strong.

India and the Contemporary World

Dr B.R. Ambedkar, who organised the dalits into the
Depressed Classes Association in 1930, clashed with Mahatma
Gandhi at the second Round Table Conference by demanding
separate electorates for dalits. When the British government
conceded Ambedkar’s demand, Gandhiji began a fast unto
death. He believed that separate electorates for dalits would
slow down the process of their integration into society.
Ambedkar ultimately accepted Gandhiji’s position and the
result was the Poona Pact of September 1932. It gave the
Depressed Classes (later to be known as the Schedule Castes)
reserved seats in provincial and central legislative councils,
but they were to be voted in by the general electorate. The
dalit movement, however, continued to be apprehensive of
the Congress-led national movement.
Some of the Muslim political organisations in India were also
lukewarm in their response to the Civil Disobedience
Movement. After the decline of the Non-Cooperation-Khilafat
Movement, a large section of Muslims felt alienated from the
Congress. From the mid-1920s the Congress came to be more
visibly associated with openly Hindu religious nationalist groups
like the Hindu Mahasabha. As relations between Hindus and
Muslims worsened, each community organised religious
processions with militant fervour, provoking Hindu-Muslim
communal clashes and riots in various cities. Every riot deepened
the distance between the two communities.
The Congress and the Muslim League made efforts to renegotiate
an alliance, and in 1927 it appeared that such a unity could be forged.
The important differences were over the question of representation
in the future assemblies that were to be elected. Muhammad Ali
44
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 10 – Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru
and Maulana Azad at Sevagram Ashram,
Wardha, 1935.

Jinnah, one of the leaders of the Muslim League, was willing to give
up the demand for separate electorates, if Muslims were assured
reserved seats in the Central Assembly and representation in
proportion to population in the Muslim-dominated provinces (Bengal
and Punjab). Negotiations over the question of representation
continued but all hope of resolving the issue at the All Parties
Conference in 1928 disappeared when M.R. Jayakar of the Hindu
Mahasabha strongly opposed efforts at compromise.
When the Civil Disobedience Movement started there was thus
an atmosphere of suspicion and distrust between communities.
Alienated from the Congress, large sections of Muslims could not
respond to the call for a united struggle. Many Muslim leaders and
intellectuals expressed their concern about the status of Muslims
as a minority within India. They feared that the culture and identity
of minorities would be submerged under the domination of a
Hindu majority.
Source D
In 1930, Sir Muhammad Iqbal, as president of the Muslim League, reiterated the importance of separate electorates for
the Muslims as an important safeguard for their minority political interests. His statement is supposed to have provided the
intellectual justification for the Pakistan demand that came up in subsequent years. This is what he said:

‘Communalism in its higher aspect, then, is indispensable to the formation of a harmonious whole in a country like India.
The units of Indian society are not territorial as in European countries … The principle of European democracy cannot be
applied to India without recognising the fact of communal groups. The Muslim demand for the creation of a Muslim India
within India is, therefore, perfectly justified…
‘The Hindu thinks that separate electorates are contrary to the spirit of true nationalism, because he understands the
word “nation” to mean a kind of universal amalgamation in which no communal entity ought to retain its private individuality.
Such a state of things, however, does not exist. India is a land of racial and religious variety. Add to this the general
economic inferiority of the Muslims, their enormous debt, especially in the Punjab, and their insufficient majorities in some
of the provinces, as at present constituted and you will begin to see clearly the meaning of our anxiety to retain separate
electorates.’

Source

Discuss
Read the Source D carefully. Do you agree with Iqbal’s idea of communalism? Can you define communalism in a
different way?

45
Reprint 2025-26

Nationalism in India

‘I have no hesitation in declaring that if the principle that the Indian Muslim is entitled to full and free development on the
lines of his own culture and tradition in his own Indian home-lands is recognised as the basis of a permanent communal
settlement, he will be ready to stake his all for the freedom of India. The principle that each group is entitled to free
development on its own lines is not inspired by any feeling of narrow communalism … A community which is inspired by
feelings of ill-will towards other communities is low and ignoble. I entertain the highest respect for the customs, laws,
religions and social institutions of other communities. Nay, it is my duty according to the teachings of the Quran, even to
defend their places of worship, if need be. Yet I love the communal group which is the source of life and behaviour and
which has formed me what I am by giving me its religion, its literature, its thought, its culture and thereby its whole past
as a living operative factor in my present consciousness …

4 The Sense of Collective Belonging

India and the Contemporary World

Fig. 11 – Bal Gangadhar Tilak,
an early-twentieth-century print.
Notice how Tilak is surrounded by symbols of
unity. The sacred institutions of different faiths
(temple, church, masjid) frame the central figure.

Nationalism spreads when people begin to believe that they are all
part of the same nation, when they discover some unity that binds
them together. But how did the nation become a reality in the minds
of people? How did people belonging to different communities,
regions or language groups develop a sense of collective belonging?
This sense of collective belonging came partly through the experience
of united struggles. But there were also a variety of cultural processes
through which nationalism captured people’s imagination. History
and fiction, folklore and songs, popular prints and symbols, all played
a part in the making of nationalism.
46
Reprint 2025-26

The identity of the nation, as you know (see Chapter 1), is most
often symbolised in a figure or image. This helps create an image
with which people can identify the nation. It was in the twentieth
century, with the growth of nationalism, that the identity of India
came to be visually associated with the image of Bharat Mata. The
image was first created by Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay. In the
1870s he wrote ‘Vande Mataram’ as a hymn to the motherland.
Later it was included in his novel Anandamath and widely sung during
the Swadeshi movement in Bengal. Moved by the Swadeshi
movement, Abanindranath Tagore painted his famous image of
Bharat Mata (see Fig. 12). In this painting Bharat Mata is portrayed
as an ascetic figure; she is calm, composed, divine and spiritual.
In subsequent years, the image of Bharat Mata acquired many
different forms, as it circulated in popular prints, and was painted
by different artists (see Fig. 14). Devotion to this mother figure came
to be seen as evidence of one’s nationalism.

Fig. 12 – Bharat Mata, Abanindranath Tagore,
1905.
Notice that the mother figure here is shown as
dispensing learning, food and clothing. The mala
in one hand emphasises her ascetic quality.
Abanindranath Tagore, like Ravi Varma before
him, tried to develop a style of painting that
could be seen as truly Indian.

Nationalism in India

Ideas of nationalism also developed through a movement to revive
Indian folklore. In late-nineteenth-century India, nationalists began
recording folk tales sung by bards and they toured villages to gather
folk songs and legends. These tales, they believed, gave a true picture
of traditional culture that had been corrupted and damaged by
outside forces. It was essential to preserve this folk tradition in
order to discover one’s national identity and restore a sense of pride
in one’s past. In Bengal, Rabindranath Tagore himself began collecting
ballads, nursery rhymes and myths, and led the movement for folk

Fig. 13 – Jawaharlal Nehru, a popular print.
Nehru is here shown holding the image of Bharat Mata and the map of India
close to his heart. In a lot of popular prints, nationalist leaders are shown
offering their heads to Bharat Mata. The idea of sacrifice for the mother was
powerful within popular imagination.

47
Reprint 2025-26

revival. In Madras, Natesa Sastri published a massive four-volume
collection of Tamil folk tales, The Folklore of Southern India. He believed
that folklore was national literature; it was ‘the most trustworthy
manifestation of people’s real thoughts and characteristics’.
As the national movement developed, nationalist leaders became
more and more aware of such icons and symbols in unifying people
and inspiring in them a feeling of nationalism. During the Swadeshi
movement in Bengal, a tricolour flag (red, green and yellow) was
designed. It had eight lotuses representing eight provinces of British
India, and a crescent moon, representing Hindus and Muslims. By
1921, Gandhiji had designed the Swaraj flag. It was again a tricolour
(red, green and white) and had a spinning wheel in the centre,
representing the Gandhian ideal of self-help. Carrying the flag,
holding it aloft, during marches became a symbol of defiance.

India and the Contemporary World

Another means of creating a feeling of nationalism was through
reinterpretation of history. By the end of the nineteenth century
many Indians began feeling that to instill a sense of pride in the
nation, Indian history had to be thought about differently. The British
saw Indians as backward and primitive, incapable of governing
themselves. In response, Indians began looking into the past to
discover India’s great achievements. They wrote about the glorious
developments in ancient times when art and architecture, science
and mathematics, religion and culture, law and philosophy, crafts
and trade had flourished. This glorious time, in their view, was
followed by a history of decline, when India was colonised. These
nationalist histories urged the readers to take pride in India’s great
achievements in the past and struggle to change the miserable
conditions of life under British rule.

Fig. 14a – Bharat Mata.
This figure of Bharat Mata is a contrast to the
one painted by Abanindranath Tagore. Here she
is shown with a trishul, standing beside a lion
and an elephant – both symbols of power and
authority.

Activity
Look at Figs. 12 and 14. Do you think these
images will appeal to all castes and communities?
Explain your views briefly.

These efforts to unify people were not without problems. When the
past being glorified was Hindu, when the images celebrated were
drawn from Hindu iconography, then people of other communities
felt left out.
Source E
‘In earlier times, foreign travellers in India marvelled at the courage, truthfulness and modesty of the people of the Arya
vamsa; now they remark mainly on the absence of those qualities. In those days Hindus would set out on conquest and
hoist their flags in Tartar, China and other countries; now a few soldiers from a tiny island far away are lording it over the
land of India.’
Tarinicharan Chattopadhyay, Bharatbarsher Itihas (The History of Bharatbarsh), vol. 1, 1858.

48
Reprint 2025-26

Source

Conclusion
A growing anger against the colonial government was thus
bringing together various groups and classes of Indians into a
common struggle for freedom in the first half of the twentieth
century. The Congress under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi
tried to channel people’s grievances into organised movements
for independence. Through such movements the nationalists
tried to forge a national unity. But as we have seen, diverse groups
and classes participated in these movements with varied aspirations
and expectations. As their
grievances were wide-ranging,
freedom from colonial rule also
meant different things to
different people. The Congress
continuously attempted to
resolve differences, and ensure
that the demands of one group
did not alienate another. This is
precisely why the unity within
the movement often broke down.
The high points of Congress
activity and nationalist unity
were followed by phases of
disunity and inner conflict
between groups.
In other words, what was emerging was a nation with many
voices wanting freedom from colonial rule.

Fig. 14b
Women’s procession in Bombay during the Quit
India Movement

The failure of the Cripps Mission and the effects of World War II created widespread discontentment in India. This
led Gandhiji to launch a movement calling for complete withdrawal of the British from India. The Congress Working
Committee, in its meeting in Wardha on 14 July 1942, passed the historic ‘Quit India’ resolution demanding the
immediate transfer of power to Indians and quit India. On 8 August 1942 in Bombay, the All India Congress Committee
endorsed the resolution which called for a non-violent mass struggle on the widest possible scale throughout the
country. It was on this occasion that Gandhiji delivered the famous ‘Do or Die’ speech. The call for ‘Quit India’ almost
brought the state machinery to a standstill in large parts of the country as people voluntarily threw themselves into
the thick of the movement. People observed hartals, and demonstrations and processions were accompanied by
national songs and slogans. The movement was truly a mass movement which brought into its ambit thousands of
ordinary people, namely students, workers and peasants. It also saw the active participation of leaders, namely,
Jayprakash Narayan, Aruna Asaf Ali and Ram Manohar Lohia and many women such as Matangini Hazra in Bengal,
Kanaklata Barua in Assam and Rama Devi in Odisha. The British responded with much force, yet it took more than a
year to suppress the movement.

49
Reprint 2025-26

Nationalism in India

Quit India Movement

1. Explain:
a) Why growth of nationalism in the colonies is linked to an anti-colonial movement.
b) How the First World War helped in the growth of the National Movement in India.
c) Why Indians were outraged by the Rowlatt Act.
d) Why Gandhiji decided to withdraw the Non-Cooperation Movement.
2. What is meant by the idea of satyagraha?
3. Write a newspaper report on:
a) The Jallianwala Bagh massacre
b) The Simon Commission
4. Compare the images of Bharat Mata in this chapter with the image of Germania
in Chapter 1.

Write in brief

Write in brief

Discuss

2. Discuss the Salt March to make clear why it was an effective symbol of resistance
against colonialism.
3. Imagine you are a woman participating in the Civil Disobedience Movement. Explain
what the experience meant to your life.

Discuss

1. List all the different social groups which joined the Non-Cooperation Movement of 1921.
Then choose any three and write about their hopes and struggles to show why they
joined the movement.

India and the Contemporary World

4. Why did political leaders differ sharply over the question of separate electorates?

Project
Find out about the anti-colonial movement in Indo-China. Compare and contrast India’s national
movement with the ways in which Indo-China became independent.

Project

50
Reprint 2025-26

SECTION II

LIVELIHOODS, ECONOMIES AND SOCIETIES

Reprint 2025-26

Reprint 2025-26
##3##
Chapter III

The Making of a Global World
1 The Pre-modern World
When we talk of ‘globalisation’ we often refer to an economic
system that has emerged since the last 50 years or so. But as you will
see in this chapter, the making of the global world has a long
history – of trade, of migration, of people in search of work, the
movement of capital, and much else. As we think about the dramatic
and visible signs of global interconnectedness in our lives today,
we need to understand the phases through which this world in
which we live has emerged.

The TheMaking
a
Making of a Global of
World

Global

World

All through history, human societies have become steadily more
interlinked. From ancient times, travellers, traders, priests and
pilgrims travelled vast distances for knowledge, opportunity and
spiritual fulfilment, or to escape persecution. They carried goods,
money, values, skills, ideas, inventions, and even germs and diseases.
As early as 3000 BCE an active coastal trade linked the Indus valley
civilisations with present-day West Asia. For more than a millennia,
cowries (the Hindi cowdi or seashells, used as a form of currency)
from the Maldives found their way to China and East Africa. The
long-distance spread of disease-carrying germs may be traced as
far back as the seventh century. By the thirteenth century it had
become an unmistakable link.

Fig. 1 – Image of a ship on a memorial stone,
Goa Museum, tenth century CE.
From the ninth century, images of ships
appear regularly in memorial stones found in
the western coast, indicating the significance
of oceanic trade.

53
Reprint 2025-26

1.1 Silk Routes Link the World
The silk routes are a good example of vibrant pre-modern trade
and cultural links between distant parts of the world. The name ‘silk
routes’ points to the importance of West-bound Chinese silk cargoes
along this route. Historians have identified several silk routes, over
land and by sea, knitting together vast regions of Asia, and linking
Asia with Europe and northern Africa. They are known to have
existed since before the Christian Era and thrived almost till the
fifteenth century. But Chinese pottery also travelled the same route,
as did textiles and spices from India and Southeast Asia. In return,
precious metals – gold and silver – flowed from Europe to Asia.
Trade and cultural exchange always went hand in hand. Early
Christian missionaries almost certainly travelled this route to Asia, as
did early Muslim preachers a few centuries later. Much before all
this, Buddhism emerged from eastern India and spread in several
directions through intersecting points on the silk routes.

Fig. 2 – Silk route trade as depicted in a
Chinese cave painting, eighth century, Cave
217, Mogao Grottoes, Gansu, China.

India and the Contemporary World

1.2 Food Travels: Spaghetti and Potato
Food offers many examples of long-distance cultural exchange.
Traders and travellers introduced new crops to the lands they
travelled. Even ‘ready’ foodstuff in distant parts of the world might
share common origins. Take spaghetti and noodles. It is believed
that noodles travelled west from China to
become spaghetti. Or, perhaps Arab traders
took pasta to fifth-century Sicily, an island now
in Italy. Similar foods were also known in India
and Japan, so the truth about their origins may
never be known. Yet such guesswork suggests
the possibilities of long-distance cultural contact
even in the pre-modern world.
Many of our common foods such as potatoes,
soya, groundnuts, maize, tomatoes, chillies,
sweet potatoes, and so on were not known to
our ancestors until about five centuries ago.
These foods were only introduced in Europe
and Asia after Christopher Columbus
accidentally discovered the vast continent that
would later become known as the Americas.

Fig. 3 – Merchants from Venice and the Orient exchanging goods,
from Marco Polo, Book of Marvels, fifteenth century.

54
Reprint 2025-26

(Here we will use ‘America’ to describe North America, South
America and the Caribbean.) In fact, many of our common foods
came from America’s original inhabitants – the American Indians.
Sometimes the new crops could make the difference between life
and death. Europe’s poor began to eat better and live longer with
the introduction of the humble potato. Ireland’s poorest peasants
became so dependent on potatoes that when disease destroyed the
potato crop in the mid-1840s, hundreds of thousands died
of starvation.

1.3 Conquest, Disease and Trade
The pre-modern world shrank greatly in the sixteenth century after
European sailors found a sea route to Asia and also successfully
crossed the western ocean to America. For centuries before, the
Indian Ocean had known a bustling trade, with goods, people,
knowledge, customs, etc. criss-crossing its waters. The Indian
subcontinent was central to these flows and a crucial point in their
networks. The entry of the Europeans helped expand or redirect
some of these flows towards Europe.

Precious metals, particularly silver, from mines located in presentday Peru and Mexico also enhanced Europe’s wealth and financed
its trade with Asia. Legends spread in seventeenth-century Europe
about South America’s fabled wealth. Many expeditions set off in
search of El Dorado, the fabled city of gold.
The Portuguese and Spanish conquest and colonisation of America
was decisively under way by the mid-sixteenth century. European
conquest was not just a result of superior firepower. In fact, the
most powerful weapon of the Spanish conquerors was not a
conventional military weapon at all. It was the germs such as those
of smallpox that they carried on their person. Because of their long
isolation, America’s original inhabitants had no immunity against
these diseases that came from Europe. Smallpox in particular proved
a deadly killer. Once introduced, it spread deep into the continent,
ahead even of any Europeans reaching there. It killed and decimated
whole communities, paving the way for conquest.

Fig. 4 – The Irish Potato Famine, Illustrated
London News, 1849.
Hungry children digging for potatoes in a field that
has already been harvested, hoping to discover
some leftovers. During the Great Irish Potato
Famine (1845 to 1849), around 1,000,000
people died of starvation in Ireland, and double the
number emigrated in search of work.

Box 1
‘Biological’ warfare?
John Winthorp, the first governor of the
Massachusetts Bay colony in New England,
wrote in May 1634 that smallpox signalled God’s
blessing for the colonists: ‘… the natives … were
neere (near) all dead of small Poxe (pox), so as
the Lord hathe (had) cleared our title to what
we possess’.
Alfred Crosby, Ecological Imperialism.

55
Reprint 2025-26

The Making of a Global World

Before its ‘discovery’, America had been cut off from regular contact
with the rest of the world for millions of years. But from the sixteenth
century, its vast lands and abundant crops and minerals began to
transform trade and lives everywhere.

Guns could be bought or captured and turned against the invaders.
But not diseases such as smallpox to which the conquerors were
mostly immune.

New words
Dissenter – One who refuses to accept
established beliefs and practices

Until the nineteenth century, poverty and hunger were common in
Europe. Cities were crowded and deadly diseases were widespread.
Religious conflicts were common, and religious dissenters were
persecuted. Thousands therefore fled Europe for America. Here,
by the eighteenth century, plantations worked by slaves captured
in Africa were growing cotton and sugar for European markets.

India and the Contemporary World

Until well into the eighteenth century, China and India were among
the world’s richest countries. They were also pre-eminent in Asian
trade. However, from the fifteenth century, China is said to have
restricted overseas contacts and retreated into isolation. China’s
reduced role and the rising importance of the Americas gradually
moved the centre of world trade westwards. Europe now emerged
as the centre of world trade.

Discuss
Explain what we mean when we say that the
world ‘shrank’ in the 1500s.

Fig. 5 – Slaves for sale, New Orleans, Illustrated London News, 1851.
A prospective buyer carefully inspecting slaves lined up before the auction. You can see two
children along with four women and seven men in top hats and suit waiting to be sold. To attract
buyers, slaves were often dressed in their best clothes.

56
Reprint 2025-26

2 The Nineteenth Century (1815-1914)
The world changed profoundly in the nineteenth century. Economic,
political, social, cultural and technological factors interacted in
complex ways to transform societies and reshape external relations.
Economists identify three types of movement or ‘flows’ within
international economic exchanges. The first is the flow of trade which
in the nineteenth century referred largely to trade in goods (e.g.,
cloth or wheat). The second is the flow of labour – the migration
of people in search of employment. The third is the movement of
capital for short-term or long-term investments over long distances.
All three flows were closely interwoven and affected peoples’ lives
more deeply now than ever before. The interconnections could
sometimes be broken – for example, labour migration was often
more restricted than goods or capital flows. Yet it helps us understand
the nineteenth-century world economy better if we look at the
three flows together.

2.1 A World Economy Takes Shape
A good place to start is the changing pattern of food production
and consumption in industrial Europe. Traditionally, countries liked
to be self-sufficient in food. But in nineteenth-century Britain,
self-sufficiency in food meant lower living standards and social
conflict. Why was this so?

The Making of a Global World

Population growth from the late eighteenth century had increased
the demand for food grains in Britain. As urban centres expanded
and industry grew, the demand for agricultural products went
up, pushing up food grain prices. Under pressure from landed
groups, the government also restricted the import of corn. The
laws allowing the government to do this were commonly known as
the ‘Corn Laws’. Unhappy with high food prices, industrialists and
urban dwellers forced the abolition of the Corn Laws.
After the Corn Laws were scrapped, food could be imported into
Britain more cheaply than it could be produced within the country.
British agriculture was unable to compete with imports. Vast areas
of land were now left uncultivated, and thousands of men and
women were thrown out of work. They flocked to the cities or
migrated overseas.
57
Reprint 2025-26

As food prices fell, consumption in Britain rose. From the midnineteenth century, faster industrial growth in Britain also led to higher
incomes, and therefore more food imports. Around the world – in
Eastern Europe, Russia, America and Australia – lands were cleared
and food production expanded to meet the British demand.
It was not enough merely to clear lands for agriculture. Railways
were needed to link the agricultural regions to the ports. New
harbours had to be built and old ones expanded to ship the new
cargoes. People had to settle on the lands to bring them under
cultivation. This meant building homes and settlements. All these
activities in turn required capital and labour. Capital flowed from
financial centres such as London. The demand for labour in places
where labour was in short supply – as in America and Australia –
led to more migration.

Fig. 6 – Emigrant ship leaving for the US, by
M.W. Ridley, 1869.

India and the Contemporary World

Nearly 50 million people emigrated from Europe to America and
Australia in the nineteenth century. All over the world some 150
million are estimated to have left their homes, crossed oceans and
vast distances over land in search of a better future.

Fig. 7 – Irish emigrants waiting to board the ship, by Michael Fitzgerald, 1874.

58
Reprint 2025-26

Thus by 1890, a global agricultural economy had taken shape,
accompanied by complex changes in labour movement patterns,
capital flows, ecologies and technology. Food no longer came from
a nearby village or town, but from thousands of miles away. It was
not grown by a peasant tilling his own land, but by an agricultural
worker, perhaps recently arrived, who was now working on a large
farm that only a generation ago had most likely been a forest. It was
transported by railway, built for that very purpose, and by ships
which were increasingly manned in these decades by low-paid
workers from southern Europe, Asia, Africa and the Caribbean.

Activity
Prepare a flow chart to show how Britain’s
decision to import food led to increased
migration to America and Australia.

Activity
Imagine that you are an agricultural worker who has arrived in
America from Ireland. Write a paragraph on why you chose to
come and how you are earning your living.

Some of this dramatic change, though on a smaller scale, occurred
closer home in west Punjab. Here the British Indian government
built a network of irrigation canals to transform semi-desert wastes
into fertile agricultural lands that could grow wheat and cotton for
export. The Canal Colonies, as the areas irrigated by the new canals
were called, were settled by peasants from other parts of Punjab.

The Making of a Global World

Of course, food is merely an example. A similar story can be told
for cotton, the cultivation of which expanded worldwide to feed
British textile mills. Or rubber. Indeed, so rapidly did regional
specialisation in the production of commodities develop, that
between 1820 and 1914 world trade is estimated to have multiplied
25 to 40 times. Nearly 60 per cent of this trade comprised ‘primary
products’ – that is, agricultural products such as wheat and cotton,
and minerals such as coal.

2.2 Role of Technology
What was the role of technology in all this? The railways, steamships,
the telegraph, for example, were important inventions without
which we cannot imagine the transformed nineteenth-century world.
But technological advances were often the result of larger social,
political and economic factors. For example, colonisation stimulated
new investments and improvements in transport: faster railways,
lighter wagons and larger ships helped move food more cheaply
and quickly from faraway farms to final markets.
59
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 8 — The Smithfield Club
Cattle Show, Illustrated London
News, 1851.
Cattle were traded at fairs, brought
by farmers for sale. One of the
oldest livestock markets in London
was at Smithfield. In the midnineteenth century a huge poultry
and meat market was established
near the railway line connecting
Smithfield to all the meat-supplying
centres of the country.

India and the Contemporary World

The trade in meat offers a good example of this connected process.
Till the 1870s, animals were shipped live from America to Europe
and then slaughtered when they arrived there. But live animals took
up a lot of ship space. Many also died in voyage, fell ill, lost weight,
or became unfit to eat. Meat was hence an expensive luxury beyond
the reach of the European poor. High prices in turn kept demand
and production down until the development of a new technology,
namely, refrigerated ships, which enabled the transport of perishable
foods over long distances.
Now animals were slaughtered for food at the starting point – in
America, Australia or New Zealand – and then transported to
Europe as frozen meat. This reduced shipping costs and lowered
meat prices in Europe. The poor in Europe could now consume
a more varied diet. To the earlier monotony of bread and potatoes
many, though not all, could now add meat (and butter and eggs)
to their diet. Better living conditions promoted social peace within
the country and support for imperialism abroad.

2.3 Late nineteenth-century Colonialism
Trade flourished and markets expanded in the late nineteenth
century. But this was not only a period of expanding trade and
increased prosperity. It is important to realise that there was a
darker side to this process. In many parts of the world, the
expansion of trade and a closer relationship with the world
economy also meant a loss of freedoms and livelihoods. Latenineteenth-century European conquests produced many painful
economic, social and ecological changes through which the
colonised societies were brought into the world economy.
60
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 9 – Meat being loaded on to the ship,
Alexandra, Illustrated London News, 1878.
Export of meat was possible only after ships
were refrigerated.

Britain and France made vast additions to
their overseas territories in the late nineteenth
century. Belgium and Germany became new
colonial powers. The US also became a
colonial power in the late 1890s by taking
over some colonies earlier held by Spain.
Let us look at one example of the destructive
impact of colonialism on the economy and
livelihoods of colonised people.

SPANISH
MOROCCO
TUNISIA

MEDITERRANEAN SEA

MOROCCO
SPANISH
SAHARA

LIBYA
(TRIPOLI)

ALGERIA

EGYPT

EA
DS
RE

Look at a map of Africa (Fig. 10). You
will see some countries’ borders run
straight, as if they were drawn using a
ruler. Well, in fact this was almost how
rival European powers in Africa drew up
the borders demarcating their respective
territories. In 1885 the big European
powers met in Berlin to complete the
carving up of Africa between them.

RIO
DE ORO
FRENCH WEST AFRICA
FRENCH SUDAN
PORT
GUINEA

FRENCH
EQUATORIAL
AFRICA ANGLOEGYPTIAN
SUDAN

NIGERIA

SIERRA
LEONE

CAMEROONS

IVORY
COAST

GOLD TOGO
COAST

MIDDLE
CONGO

CONGO
FREE STATE
(BELGIAN
CONGO)

ATLANTIC
OCEAN
ANGOLA

BELGIAN
BRITISH
FRENCH
GERMAN
ITALIAN
PORTUGUESE
SPANISH
BRITISH DOMINION
INDEPENDENT STATE

ERITREA FRENCH
SOMALILAND

GERMAN
SOUTH WEST
AFRICA

BRITISH
SOMALILAND
ETHIOPIA
ITALIAN
SOMALILAND
BRITISH
EAST AFRICA
GERMAN
EAST AFRICA

NORTHERN
RHODESIA
SOUTHERN
RHODESIA

PORTUGUESE
EAST AFRICA

MADAGASCAR

UNION OF
SOUTH AFRICA

Fig. 10 – Map of colonial Africa at the end of the nineteenth century.

Box 2
Sir Henry Morton Stanley in Central
Africa

The Making of a Global World

Stanley was a journalist and explorer sent
by the New York Herald to find Livingston,
a missionary and explorer who had been in
Africa for several years. Like other European
and American explorers of the time, Stanley
went with arms, mobilised local hunters,
warriors and labourers to help him, fought
with local tribes, investigated African
terrains, and mapped different regions.
These explorations helped the conquest
of Africa. Geographical explorations were
not driven by an innocent search for
scientific information. They were directly
linked to imperial projects.
Fig. 11 – Sir Henry Morton Stanley and his retinue in Central Africa,
Illustrated London News, 1871.

61
Reprint 2025-26

2.4 Rinderpest, or the Cattle Plague
In Africa, in the 1890s, a fast-spreading disease of cattle plague
or Rinderpest had a terrifying impact on people’s
livelihoods and the local economy. This is a good example
of the widespread European imperial impact on colonised
societies. It shows how in this era of conquest even a disease
affecting cattle reshaped the lives and fortunes of thousands
of people and their relations with the rest of the world.
Historically, Africa had abundant land and a relatively small
population. For centuries, land and livestock sustained African
livelihoods and people rarely worked for a wage. In latenineteenth-century Africa there were few consumer goods that
wages could buy. If you had been an African possessing land
and livestock – and there was plenty of both – you too would
have seen little reason to work for a wage.

Fig. 12 – Transport to the Transvaal gold mines,
The Graphic, 1887.
Crossing the Wilge river was the quickest method of
transport to the gold fields of Transvaal. After the
discovery of gold in Witwatersrand, Europeans
rushed to the region despite their fear of disease and
death, and the difficulties of the journey. By the
1890s, South Africa contributed over 20 per cent of
the world gold production.

In the late nineteenth century, Europeans were attracted to
Africa due to its vast resources of land and minerals. Europeans
came to Africa hoping to establish plantations and mines to
produce crops and minerals for export to Europe. But there
was an unexpected problem – a shortage of labour willing to
work for wages.

India and the Contemporary World

Employers used many methods to recruit and retain labour. Heavy
taxes were imposed which could be paid only by working for wages
on plantations and mines. Inheritance laws were changed so that

Fig. 13 — Diggers at work
in the Transvaal gold fields
in South Africa, The
Graphic, 1875.

62
Reprint 2025-26

peasants were displaced from land: only one member of a family
was allowed to inherit land, as a result of which the others were
pushed into the labour market. Mineworkers were also confined in
compounds and not allowed to move about freely.
Then came Rinderpest, a devastating cattle disease.
Rinderpest arrived in Africa in the late 1880s. It was carried by
infected cattle imported from British Asia to feed the Italian soldiers
invading Eritrea in East Africa. Entering Africa in the east, rinderpest
moved west ‘like forest fire’, reaching Africa’s Atlantic coast in 1892.
It reached the Cape (Africa’s southernmost tip) five years later. Along
the way rinderpest killed 90 per cent of the cattle.
The loss of cattle destroyed African livelihoods. Planters, mine owners
and colonial governments now successfully monopolised what scarce
cattle resources remained, to strengthen their power and to force
Africans into the labour market. Control over the scarce resource
of cattle enabled European colonisers to conquer and subdue Africa.
Similar stories can be told about the impact of Western conquest on
other parts of the nineteenth-century world.

2.4 Indentured Labour Migration from India

In the nineteenth century, hundreds of thousands of Indian and
Chinese labourers went to work on plantations, in mines, and in
road and railway construction projects around the world. In India,
indentured labourers were hired under contracts which promised
return travel to India after they had worked five years on their
employer’s plantation.

New words
Indentured labour – A bonded labourer under
contract to work for an employer for a specific
amount of time, to pay off his passage to a
new country or home
The Making of a Global World

The example of indentured labour migration from India also
illustrates the two-sided nature of the nineteenth-century world.
It was a world of faster economic growth as well as great misery,
higher incomes for some and poverty for others, technological
advances in some areas and new forms of coercion in others.

Most Indian indentured workers came from the present-day regions
of eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, central India and the dry districts
of Tamil Nadu. In the mid-nineteenth century these regions
experienced many changes – cottage industries declined, land rents
rose, lands were cleared for mines and plantations. All this affected
the lives of the poor: they failed to pay their rents, became deeply
indebted and were forced to migrate in search of work.
63
Reprint 2025-26

The main destinations of Indian indentured
migrants were the Caribbean islands (mainly
Trinidad, Guyana and Surinam), Mauritius and Fiji.
Closer home, Tamil migrants went to Ceylon and
Malaya. Indentured workers were also recruited
for tea plantations in Assam.
Recruitment was done by agents engaged by
employers and paid a small commission. Many
migrants agreed to take up work hoping to escape
poverty or oppression in their home villages.
Agents also tempted the prospective migrants
by providing false information about final
destinations, modes of travel, the nature of the Fig. 14 — Indian indentured labourers in a cocoa plantation in
work, and living and working conditions. Often Trinidad, early nineteenth century.
migrants were not even told that they were to embark on a long
sea voyage. Sometimes agents even forcibly abducted less
willing migrants.

India and the Contemporary World

Nineteenth-century indenture has been described as a ‘new system
of slavery’. On arrival at the plantations, labourers found conditions
to be different from what they had imagined. Living and working
conditions were harsh, and there were few legal rights.
But workers discovered their own ways of surviving. Many of them
escaped into the wilds, though if caught they faced severe punishment.
Others developed new forms of individual and collective selfexpression, blending different cultural forms, old and new. In
Trinidad the annual Muharram procession was transformed into a
riotous carnival called ‘Hosay’ (for Imam Hussain) in which workers
of all races and religions joined. Similarly, the protest religion of
Rastafarianism (made famous by the Jamaican reggae star Bob
Marley) is also said to reflect social and cultural links with Indian
migrants to the Caribbean. ‘Chutney music’, popular in Trinidad
and Guyana, is another creative contemporary expression of the
post-indenture experience. These forms of cultural fusion are part
of the making of the global world, where things from different
places get mixed, lose their original characteristics and become
something entirely new.
Most indentured workers stayed on after their contracts ended, or
returned to their new homes after a short spell in India. Consequently,
there are large communities of people of Indian descent in these
countries. Have you heard of the Nobel Prize-winning writer
64
Reprint 2025-26

Discuss
Discuss the importance of language and
popular traditions in the creation of national
identity.

Fig. 15 — Indentured laboureres photographed
for identification.
For the employers, the numbers and not the
names mattered.

V.S. Naipaul? Some of you may have followed the exploits of
West Indies cricketers Shivnarine Chanderpaul and Ramnaresh
Sarwan. If you have wondered why their names sound vaguely
Indian, the answer is that they are descended from indentured
labour migrants from India.
From the 1900s India’s nationalist leaders began opposing the system
of indentured labour migration as abusive and cruel. It was abolished
in 1921. Yet for a number of decades afterwards, descendants of
Indian indentured workers, often thought of as ‘coolies’, remained
an uneasy minority in the Caribbean islands. Some of Naipaul’s
early novels capture their sense of loss and alienation.

2.5 Indian Entrepreneurs Abroad

Fig. 16 — A contract form of an indentured
labourer.

Source A

Enter the Indian banker. Do you know of the Shikaripuri
Shroffs and Nattukottai Chettiars? They were amongst the
many groups of bankers and traders who financed export
agriculture in Central and Southeast Asia, using either their own
funds or those borrowed from European banks. They had a
sophisticated system to transfer money over large distances, and
even developed indigenous forms of corporate organisation.
Indian traders and moneylenders also followed European
colonisers into Africa. Hyderabadi Sindhi traders, however,
ventured beyond European colonies. From the 1860s they
established flourishing emporia at busy ports worldwide, selling
local and imported curios to tourists whose numbers were
beginning to swell, thanks to the development of safe and
comfortable passenger vessels.

The testimony of an indentured labourer
Extract from the testimony of Ram Narain
Tewary, an indentured labourer who spent ten
years on Demerara in the early twentieth century.
‘… in spite of my best efforts, I could not properly
do the works that were allotted to me ... In a
few days I got my hands bruised all over and I
could not go to work for a week for which I was
prosecuted and sent to jail for 14 days. ... new
emigrants find the tasks allotted to them
extremely heavy and cannot complete them in
a day. ... Deductions are also made from wages
if the work is considered to have been done
unsatisfactorily. Many people cannot therefore
earn their full wages and are punished in various
ways. In fact, the labourers have to spend their
period of indenture in great trouble …’
Source: Department of Commerce and Industry,
Emigration Branch. 1916

Source

The Making of a Global World

Growing food and other crops for the world market required
capital. Large plantations could borrow it from banks and
markets. But what about the humble peasant?

2.6 Indian Trade, Colonialism and the Global System
Historically, fine cottons produced in India were exported to
Europe. With industrialisation, British cotton manufacture
began to expand, and industrialists pressurised the government
to restrict cotton imports and protect local industries. Tariffs
were imposed on cloth imports into Britain. Consequently, the
inflow of fine Indian cotton began to decline.
From the early nineteenth century, British manufacturers also began
to seek overseas markets for their cloth. Excluded from the British
65
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 17 – East India Company House, London.
This was the nerve centre of the worldwide operations of the East India Company.

market by tariff barriers, Indian textiles now faced stiff competition
in other international markets. If we look at the figures of exports
from India, we see a steady decline of the share of cotton textiles:
from some 30 per cent around 1800 to 15 per cent by 1815. By the
1870s this proportion had dropped to below 3 per cent.

India and the Contemporary World

What, then, did India export? The figures again tell a dramatic
story. While exports of manufactures declined rapidly, export of
raw materials increased equally fast. Between 1812 and 1871, the
share of raw cotton exports rose from 5 per cent to 35 per cent.
Indigo used for dyeing cloth was another important export for

Fig. 18 – A distant view of Surat
and its river.
All through the seventeenth and early
eighteenth centuries, Surat remained
the main centre of overseas trade in
the western Indian Ocean.

66
Reprint 2025-26

many decades. And, as you have read last year, opium shipments to
China grew rapidly from the 1820s to become for a while India’s
single largest export. Britain grew opium in India and exported it to
China and, with the money earned through this sale, it financed its
tea and other imports from China.
Over the nineteenth century, British manufactures flooded the Indian
market. Food grain and raw material exports from India to Britain
and the rest of the world increased. But the value of British exports
to India was much higher than the value of British imports from
India. Thus Britain had a ‘trade surplus’ with India. Britain used this
surplus to balance its trade deficits with other countries – that is,
with countries from which Britain was importing more than it was
selling to. This is how a multilateral settlement system works – it
allows one country’s deficit with another country to be settled
by its surplus with a third country. By helping Britain balance its
deficits, India played a crucial role in the late-nineteenth-century
world economy.

Bukhara

Aleppo

The
Great

Yarkand

Alexandria
Basra

Wa
ll

Britain’s trade surplus in India also helped pay the so-called ‘home
charges’ that included private remittances home by British officials
and traders, interest payments on India’s external debt, and pensions
of British officials in India.

Lahore
n
ia
rs
Pe
f
ul
G

ea
dS
Re

Jedda

Hoogly

Bandar Abbas
Muscat

Canton

Surat
Hanoi

Macha

Masulipatam

Bangkok

The Making of a Global World

Madras
Goa
Indian Ocean

Acheh

Malacca

Mombasa
Bantam

Batavia

Mozambique

Sea route
Land route
Volume of trade passing through the port

Fig. 19 – The trade routes that linked India to the world at the end of the seventeenth century.

67
Reprint 2025-26

3 The Inter-war Economy
The First World War (1914-18) was mainly fought in Europe. But
its impact was felt around the world. Notably for our concerns
in this chapter, it plunged the first half of the twentieth century
into a crisis that took over three decades to overcome. During
this period the world experienced widespread economic and
political instability, and another catastrophic war.

3.1 Wartime Transformations
The First World War, as you know, was fought between two power
blocs. On the one side were the Allies – Britain, France and Russia
(later joined by the US); and on the opposite side were the Central
Powers – Germany, Austria-Hungary and Ottoman Turkey. When
the war began in August 1914, many governments thought it would
be over by Christmas. It lasted more than four years.

India and the Contemporary World

The First World War was a war like no other before. The fighting
involved the world’s leading industrial nations which now
harnessed the vast powers of modern industry to inflict the greatest
possible destruction on their enemies.
This war was thus the first modern industrial war. It saw the use
of machine guns, tanks, aircraft, chemical weapons, etc. on a
massive scale. These were all increasingly products of modern largescale industry. To fight the war, millions of soldiers
had to be recruited from around the world and
moved to the frontlines on large ships and trains.
The scale of death and destruction – 9 million dead
and 20 million injured – was unthinkable before the
industrial age, without the use of industrial arms.
Most of the killed and maimed were men of
working age. These deaths and injuries reduced the
able-bodied workforce in Europe. With fewer
numbers within the family, household incomes
declined after the war.
During the war, industries were restructured to
produce war-related goods. Entire societies were
also reorganised for war – as men went to battle,
women stepped in to undertake jobs that earlier only
men were expected to do.

Fig. 20 – Workers in a munition factory during the First World
War.
Production of armaments increased rapidly to meet war demands.

68
Reprint 2025-26

The war led to the snapping of economic links between some of
the world’s largest economic powers which were now fighting
each other to pay for them. So Britain borrowed large sums
of money from US banks as well as the US public. Thus the war
transformed the US from being an international debtor to an
international creditor. In other words, at the war’s end, the US and
its citizens owned more overseas assets than foreign governments
and citizens owned in the US.

3.2 Post-war Recovery
Post-war economic recovery proved difficult. Britain, which was
the world’s leading economy in the pre-war period, in particular
faced a prolonged crisis. While Britain was preoccupied with war,
industries had developed in India and Japan. After the war Britain
found it difficult to recapture its earlier position of dominance in
the Indian market, and to compete with Japan internationally.
Moreover, to finance war expenditures Britain had borrowed liberally
from the US. This meant that at the end of the war Britain was
burdened with huge external debts.
The war had led to an economic boom, that is, to a large increase in
demand, production and employment. When the war boom ended,
production contracted and unemployment increased. At the
same time the government reduced bloated war expenditures to
bring them into line with peacetime revenues. These developments
led to huge job losses – in 1921 one in every five British workers
was out of work. Indeed, anxiety and uncertainty about work
became an enduring part of the post-war scenario.
The Making of a Global World

Many agricultural economies were also in crisis. Consider the case
of wheat producers. Before the war, eastern Europe was a major
supplier of wheat in the world market. When this supply was
disrupted during the war, wheat production in Canada, America
and Australia expanded dramatically. But once the war was over,
production in eastern Europe revived and created a glut in wheat
output. Grain prices fell, rural incomes declined, and farmers fell
deeper into debt.

3.3 Rise of Mass Production and Consumption
In the US, recovery was quicker. We have already seen how the war
helped boost the US economy. After a short period of economic
69
Reprint 2025-26

trouble in the years after the war, the US economy resumed
its strong growth in the early 1920s.
One important feature of the US economy of the 1920s
was mass production. The move towards mass production
had begun in the late nineteenth century, but in the 1920s it
became a characteristic feature of industrial production in
the US. A well-known pioneer of mass production was the
car manufacturer Henry Ford. He adapted the assembly line
of a Chicago slaughterhouse (in which slaughtered animals
were picked apart by butchers as they came down a conveyor
belt) to his new car plant in Detroit. He realised that the
‘assembly line’ method would allow a faster and cheaper way
of producing vehicles. The assembly line forced workers to
Fig. 21 – T-Model automobiles lined up outside the
repeat a single task mechanically and continuously – such as
factory.
fitting a particular part to the car – at a pace dictated by the
conveyor belt. This was a way of increasing the output per worker
by speeding up the pace of work. Standing in front of a conveyor
belt no worker could afford to delay the motions, take a break, or
even have a friendly word with a workmate. As a result, Henry
Ford’s cars came off the assembly line at three-minute intervals, a
speed much faster than that achieved by previous methods. The TModel Ford was the world’s first mass-produced car.

India and the Contemporary World

At first workers at the Ford factory were unable to cope with the
stress of working on assembly lines in which they could not control
the pace of work. So they quit in large numbers. In desperation
Ford doubled the daily wage to $5 in January 1914. At the same
time he banned trade unions from operating in his plants.
Henry Ford recovered the high wage by repeatedly speeding up
the production line and forcing workers to work ever harder. So
much so, he would soon describe his decision to double the daily
wage as the ‘best cost-cutting decision’ he had ever made.
Fordist industrial practices soon spread in the US. They were also
widely copied in Europe in the 1920s. Mass production lowered
costs and prices of engineered goods. Thanks to higher wages,
more workers could now afford to purchase durable consumer
goods such as cars. Car production in the US rose from 2 million in
1919 to more than 5 million in 1929. Similarly, there was a spurt
in the purchase of refrigerators, washing machines, radios,
gramophone players, all through a system of ‘hire purchase’ (i.e., on
70
Reprint 2025-26

credit repaid in weekly or monthly instalments). The demand
for refrigerators, washing machines, etc. was also fuelled by a boom
in house construction and home ownership, financed once again
by loans.
The housing and consumer boom of the 1920s created the basis of
prosperity in the US. Large investments in housing and household
goods seemed to create a cycle of higher employment
and incomes, rising consumption demand, more investment, and
yet more employment and incomes.

Box 3

In 1923, the US resumed exporting capital to the rest of the world
and became the largest overseas lender. US imports and capital
exports also boosted European recovery and world trade and
income growth over the next six years.
All this, however, proved too good to last. By 1929 the world
would be plunged into a depression such as it had never
experienced before.

3.4 The Great Depression

The depression was caused by a combination of several factors. We
have already seen how fragile the post-war world economy was.
First: agricultural overproduction remained a problem. This was
made worse by falling agricultural prices. As prices slumped and
agricultural incomes declined, farmers tried to expand production
and bring a larger volume of produce to the market to maintain
their overall income. This worsened the glut in the market, pushing
down prices even further. Farm produce rotted for a lack of buyers.
Second: in the mid-1920s, many countries financed their investments
through loans from the US. While it was often extremely easy to
raise loans in the US when the going was good, US overseas lenders
panicked at the first sign of trouble. In the first half of 1928, US

Fig. 22 – Migrant agricultural worker’s family,
homeless and hungry, during the Great
Depression, 1936. Courtesy: Library of Congress,
Prints and Photographs Division.

M a n y y e a r s l a t e r, D o r o t h e a L a n g e , t h e
photographer who shot this picture, recollected
the moment of her encounter with the
hungry mother:
‘I saw and approached the hungry and desperate
mother, as if drawn by a magnet … I did not ask
her name or her history. She told me her age,
that she was thirty-two. She said that they
(i.e., she and her seven children) had been living
on frozen vegetables from the surrounding fields,
and birds that the children killed … There she
sat … with her children huddled around her,
and seemed to know that my pictures might
help her, and so she helped me …’
From: Popular Photography, February 1960.

71
Reprint 2025-26

The Making of a Global World

The Great Depression began around 1929 and lasted till the mid1930s. During this period most parts of the world experienced
catastrophic declines in production, employment, incomes and
trade. The exact timing and impact of the depression varied
across countries. But in general, agricultural regions and communities
were the worst affected. This was because the fall
in agricultural prices was greater and more prolonged than that
in the prices of industrial goods.

overseas loans amounted to over $ 1 billion. A year later it was one
quarter of that amount. Countries that depended crucially on US
loans now faced an acute crisis.
The withdrawal of US loans affected much of the rest of the world,
though in different ways. In Europe it led to the failure of some
major banks and the collapse of currencies such as the British pound
sterling. In Latin America and elsewhere it intensified the slump
in agricultural and raw material prices. The US attempt to protect
its economy in the depression by doubling import duties also dealt
another severe blow to world trade.

India and the Contemporary World

The US was also the industrial country most severely affected by
the depression. With the fall in prices and the prospect of a
depression, US banks had also slashed domestic lending and
called back loans. Farms could not sell their harvests, households
were ruined, and businesses collapsed. Faced with falling
incomes, many households in the US could not repay what they had
borrowed, and were forced to give up their homes, cars and other
consumer durables. The consumerist prosperity of the 1920s now
disappeared in a puff of dust. As unemployment soared, people
trudged long distances looking for any work they could find.
Ultimately, the US banking system itself collapsed. Unable to
recover investments, collect loans and repay depositors, thousands
of banks went bankrupt and were forced to close. The numbers
are phenomenal: by 1933 over 4,000 banks had closed and
between 1929 and 1932 about 110, 000 companies had collapsed.
By 1935, a modest economic recovery was under way in most
industrial countries. But the Great Depression’s wider effects on
society, politics and international relations, and on peoples’ minds,
proved more enduring.

3.5 India and the Great Depression
If we look at the impact of the depression on India we realise
how integrated the global economy had become by the early
twentieth century. The tremors of a crisis in one part of the world
were quickly relayed to other parts, affecting lives, economies and
societies worldwide.
In the nineteenth century, as you have seen, colonial India had become
an exporter of agricultural goods and importer of manufactures.
The depression immediately affected Indian trade. India’s exports
72
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 23 – People lining up for unemployment
benefits, US, photograph by Dorothea Lange,
1938. Courtesy: Library of Congress, Prints and
Photographs Division.
When an unemployment census showed
10 million people out of work, the local
government in many US states began making
small allowances to the unemployed. These long
queues came to symbolise the poverty and
unemployment of the depression years.

and imports nearly halved between 1928 and 1934. As international
prices crashed, prices in India also plunged. Between 1928 and 1934,
wheat prices in India fell by 50 per cent.
Peasants and farmers suffered more than urban dwellers. Though
agricultural prices fell sharply, the colonial government refused to
reduce revenue demands. Peasants producing for the world market
were the worst hit.
Consider the jute producers of Bengal. They grew raw jute that was
processed in factories for export in the form of gunny bags. But
as gunny exports collapsed, the price of raw jute crashed more than
60 per cent. Peasants who borrowed in the hope of better times or
to increase output in the hope of higher incomes faced ever lower
prices, and fell deeper and deeper into debt. Thus the Bengal jute
growers’ lament:
grow more jute, brothers, with the hope of greater cash.
Costs and debts of jute will make your hopes get dashed.
When you have spent all your money and got the crop off the ground,
… traders, sitting at home, will pay only Rs 5 a maund.

Discuss
Who profits from jute cultivation according to the
jute growers’ lament? Explain.

The Making of a Global World

Across India, peasants’ indebtedness increased. They used up their
savings, mortgaged lands, and sold whatever jewellery and precious
metals they had to meet their expenses. In these depression years,
India became an exporter of precious metals, notably gold.
The famous economist John Maynard Keynes thought that Indian
gold exports promoted global economic recovery. They certainly
helped speed up Britain’s recovery, but did little for the Indian peasant.
Rural India was thus seething with unrest when Mahatma Gandhi
launched the civil disobedience movement at the height of the
depression in 1931.
The depression proved less grim for urban India. Because of falling
prices, those with fixed incomes – say town-dwelling landowners
who received rents and middle-class salaried employees – now found
themselves better off. Everything cost less. Industrial investment also
grew as the government extended tariff protection to industries,
under the pressure of nationalist opinion.

73
Reprint 2025-26

4 Rebuilding a World Economy: The Post-war Era
The Second World War broke out a mere two decades after the
end of the First World War. It was fought between the Axis powers
(mainly Nazi Germany, Japan and Italy) and the Allies (Britain,
France, the Soviet Union and the US). It was a war waged for six
years on many fronts, in many places, over land, on sea, in the air.
Once again death and destruction was enormous. At least 60 million
people, or about 3 per cent of the world’s 1939 population, are
believed to have been killed, directly or indirectly, as a result of the
war. Millions more were injured.
Unlike in earlier wars, most of these deaths took place outside the
battlefields. Many more civilians than soldiers died from war-related
causes. Vast parts of Europe and Asia were devastated, and several
cities were destroyed by aerial bombardment or relentless
artillery attacks. The war caused an immense amount of economic
devastation and social disruption. Reconstruction promised to
be long and difficult.

Fig. 24 – German forces attack Russia, July 1941.
Hitler’s attempt to invade Russia was a turning
point in the war.

India and the Contemporary World

Two crucial influences shaped post-war
reconstruction. The first was the US’s
emergence as the dominant economic, political
and military power in the Western world. The
second was the dominance of the Soviet
Union. It had made huge sacrifices to defeat
Nazi Germany, and transformed itself from
a backward agricultural country into a world
power during the very years when the capitalist
world was trapped in the Great Depression.
Fig. 25 – Stalingrad in Soviet Russia devastated by the war.

4.1 Post-war Settlement and the
Bretton Woods Institutions
Economists and politicians drew two key lessons from inter-war
economic experiences. First, an industrial society based on mass
production cannot be sustained without mass consumption. But to
ensure mass consumption, there was a need for high and stable
incomes. Incomes could not be stable if employment was unstable.
Thus stable incomes also required steady, full employment.
But markets alone could not guarantee full employment.
Therefore governments would have to step in to minimise
74
Reprint 2025-26

fluctuations of price, output and employment. Economic stability
could be ensured only through the intervention of the government.
The second lesson related to a country’s economic links with
the outside world. The goal of full employment could only be
achieved if governments had power to control flows of goods,
capital and labour.
Thus in brief, the main aim of the post-war international economic
system was to preserve economic stability and full employment in
the industrial world. Its framework was agreed upon at the United
Nations Monetary and Financial Conference held in July 1944 at
Bretton Woods in New Hampshire, USA.

Fig. 26 – Mount Washington Hotel situated in
Bretton Woods, US.
This is the place where the famous conference
was held.

The Bretton Woods conference established the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) to deal with external surpluses and deficits of its member
nations. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(popularly known as the World Bank) was set up to finance postwar reconstruction. The IMF and the World Bank are referred to
as the Bretton Woods institutions or sometimes the Bretton Woods
twins. The post-war international economic system is also often
described as the Bretton Woods system.
The IMF and the World Bank commenced financial operations
in 1947. Decision-making in these institutions is controlled by
the Western industrial powers. The US has an effective right of
veto over key IMF and World Bank decisions.

Discuss
Briefly summarise the two lessons learnt by
economists and politicians from the inter-war

The Making of a Global World

The international monetary system is the system linking national
currencies and monetary system. The Bretton Woods system was
based on fixed exchange rates. In this system, national currencies,
for example the Indian rupee, were pegged to the dollar at a fixed
exchange rate. The dollar itself was anchored to gold at a fixed
price of $35 per ounce of gold.

economic experience?

4.2 The Early Post-war Years
The Bretton Woods system inaugurated an era of unprecedented
growth of trade and incomes for the Western industrial nations and
Japan. World trade grew annually at over 8 per cent between 1950
and 1970 and incomes at nearly 5 per cent. The growth was also
mostly stable, without large fluctuations. For much of this period
the unemployment rate, for example, averaged less than 5 per cent
in most industrial countries.
75
Reprint 2025-26

These decades also saw the worldwide spread of technology and
enterprise. Developing countries were in a hurry to catch up with
the advanced industrial countries. Therefore, they invested vast
amounts of capital, importing industrial plant and equipment
featuring modern technology.

4.3 Decolonisation and Independence
When the Second World War ended, large parts of the world were
still under European colonial rule. Over the next two decades most
colonies in Asia and Africa emerged as free, independent nations.
They were, however, overburdened by poverty and a lack of
resources, and their economies and societies were handicapped by
long periods of colonial rule.
The IMF and the World Bank were designed to meet the financial
needs of the industrial countries. They were not equipped to cope
with the challenge of poverty and lack of development in the former
colonies. But as Europe and Japan rapidly rebuilt their economies,
they grew less dependent on the IMF and the World Bank. Thus
from the late 1950s the Bretton Woods institutions began to shift
their attention more towards developing countries.

India and the Contemporary World

As colonies, many of the less developed regions of the world had
been part of Western empires. Now, ironically, as newly independent
countries facing urgent pressures to lift their populations out of
poverty, they came under the guidance of international agencies
dominated by the former colonial powers. Even after many years
of decolonisation, the former colonial powers still controlled vital
resources such as minerals and land in many of their former colonies.
Large corporations of other powerful countries, for example the
US, also often managed to secure rights to exploit developing
countries’ natural resources very cheaply.
At the same time, most developing countries did not benefit from
the fast growth the Western economies experienced in the 1950s
and 1960s. Therefore they organised themselves as a group – the
Group of 77 (or G-77) – to demand a new international economic
order (NIEO). By the NIEO they meant a system that would give
them real control over their natural resources, more development
assistance, fairer prices for raw materials, and better access for their
manufactured goods in developed countries’ markets.
76
Reprint 2025-26

Box 4
What are MNCs?
Multinational corporations (MNCs) are large
companies that operate in several countries at
the same time. The first MNCs were established
in the 1920s. Many more came up in the 1950s
and 1960s as US businesses expanded worldwide
and Western Europe and Japan also recovered
to become powerful industrial economies. The
worldwide spread of MNCs was a notable feature
of the 1950s and 1960s. This was partly because
high import tariffs imposed by different
governments forced MNCs to locate their
manufacturing operations and become ‘domestic
producers’ in as many countries as possible.

New words
Tariff – Tax imposed on a country’s imports
from the rest of the world. Tariffs are
levied at the point of entry, i.e., at the border
or the airport.

4.4 End of Bretton Woods and the Beginning of
‘Globalisation’
Despite years of stable and rapid growth, not all was well in
this post-war world. From the 1960s the rising costs of its
overseas involvements weakened the US’s finances and competitive
strength. The US dollar now no longer commanded confidence
as the world’s principal currency. It could not maintain its value
in relation to gold. This eventually led to the collapse of the
system of fixed exchange rates and the introduction of a system
of floating exchange rates.
From the mid-1970s the international financial system also changed
in important ways. Earlier, developing countries could turn to
international institutions for loans and development assistance. But
now they were forced to borrow from Western commercial banks
and private lending institutions. This led to periodic debt crises in
the developing world, and lower incomes and increased poverty,
especially in Africa and Latin America.
The industrial world was also hit by unemployment that began
rising from the mid-1970s and remained high until the early 1990s.
From the late 1970s MNCs also began to shift production operations
to low-wage Asian countries.

Wages were relatively low in countries like China. Thus they became
attractive destinations for investment by foreign MNCs competing
to capture world markets. Have you noticed that most of the TVs,
mobile phones, and toys we see in the shops seem to be made in
China? This is because of the low-cost structure of the Chinese
economy, most importantly its low wages.
The relocation of industry to low-wage countries stimulated world
trade and capital flows. In the last two decades the world’s economic
geography has been transformed as countries such as India, China
and Brazil have undergone rapid economic transformation.

New words
Exchange rates – They link national currencies
for purposes of international trade. There are
broadly two kinds of exchange rates: fixed
exchange rate and floating exchange rate
Fixed exchange rates – When exchange rates
are fixed and governments intervene to prevent
movements in them
Flexible or floating exchange rates – These rates
fluctuate depending on demand and supply of
currencies in foreign exchange markets, in
principle without interference by governments

77
Reprint 2025-26

The Making of a Global World

China had been cut off from the post-war world economy since
its revolution in 1949. But new economic policies in China and
the collapse of the Soviet Union and Soviet-style communism in
Eastern Europe brought many countries back into the fold of the
world economy.

Write in brief
1. Give two examples of different types of global exchanges which took place before the
seventeenth century, choosing one example from Asia and one from the Americas.

3. Write a note to explain the effects of the following:
a) The British government’s decision to abolish the Corn Laws.
b) The coming of rinderpest to Africa.
c) The death of men of working-age in Europe because of the World War.
d) The Great Depression on the Indian economy.
e) The decision of MNCs to relocate production to Asian countries.
4. Give two examples from history to show the impact of technology on food availability.

Write in brief

2. Explain how the global transfer of disease in the pre-modern world helped in the
colonisation of the Americas.

5. What is meant by the Bretton Woods Agreement?

Discuss

7. Explain the three types of movements or flows within international economic
exchange. Find one example of each type of flow which involved India and Indians,
and write a short account of it.

India and the Contemporary World

8. Explain the causes of the Great Depression.
9. Explain what is referred to as the G-77 countries. In what ways can G-77 be seen as
a reaction to the activities of the Bretton Woods twins?

Project
Find out more about gold and diamond mining in South Africa in the nineteenth century.
Who controlled the gold and diamond companies? Who were the miners and what were
their lives like?

Project

78
Reprint 2025-26

Discuss

6. Imagine that you are an indentured Indian labourer in the Caribbean. Drawing from the
details in this chapter, write a letter to your family describing your life and feelings.

##4##
Chapter IV

T h e TheA Age
g eof Industrialisation
o f I n d us t r i a l isa t i o n

The Age of Industrialisation

Fig. 1 – Dawn of the Century, published by E.T. Paull Music Co.,
New York, England, 1900.

In 1900, a popular music publisher E.T. Paull produced a music
book that had a picture on the cover page announcing the ‘Dawn
of the Century’ (Fig. 1). As you can see from the illustration, at the
centre of the picture is a goddess-like figure, the angel of progress,
bearing the flag of the new century. She is gently perched on a wheel
with wings, symbolising time. Her flight is taking her into the future.
Floating about, behind her, are the signs of progress: railway, camera,
machines, printing press and factory.

The Age of Industrialisation

This glorification of machines and technology is even more marked
in a picture which appeared on the pages of a trade magazine over
a hundred years ago (Fig. 2). It shows two magicians. The one at the
top is Aladdin from the Orient who built a beautiful palace with his

New words
Orient – The countries to the east of
the Mediterranean, usually referring to
Asia. The term arises out of a western
viewpoint that sees this region as premodern, traditional and mysterious

79
Reprint 2025-26

magic lamp. The one at the bottom is the modern mechanic, who
with his modern tools weaves a new magic: builds bridges, ships,
towers and high-rise buildings. Aladdin is shown as representing the
East and the past, the mechanic stands for the West and modernity.
These images offer us a triumphant account of the modern world.
Within this account the modern world is associated with rapid
technological change and innovations, machines and factories, railways
and steamships. The history of industrialisation thus becomes simply
a story of development, and the modern age appears as a wonderful
time of technological progress.
These images and associations have now become part of popular
imagination. Do you not see rapid industrialisation as a time of
progress and modernity? Do you not think that the spread of railways
and factories, and construction of high-rise buildings and bridges is
a sign of society’s development?
How have these images developed? And how do we relate to these
ideas? Is industrialisation always based on rapid technological
development? Can we today continue to glorify continuous
mechanisation of all work? What has industrialisation meant to
people’s lives? To answer such questions we need to turn to the
history of industrialisation.
In this chapter we will look at this history by focusing first on Britain,
the first industrial nation, and then India, where the pattern of
industrial change was conditioned by colonial rule.

India and the Contemporary World

Activity
Give two examples where modern development that is associated
with progress has led to problems. You may like to think of areas
related to environmental issues, nuclear weapons or disease.

80
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 2 – Two Magicians, published in Inland
Printers, 26 January 1901.

1 Before the Industrial Revolution

All too often we associate industrialisation with the growth of
factory industry. When we talk of industrial production we refer
to factory production. When we talk of industrial workers we
mean factory workers. Histories of industrialisation very often begin
with the setting up of the first factories.
There is a problem with such ideas. Even before factories began to
dot the landscape in England and Europe, there was large-scale
industrial production for an international market. This was not based
on factories. Many historians now refer to this phase of
industrialisation as proto-industrialisation.

New words
Proto – Indicating the first or early form
of something

In the countryside poor peasants and artisans began
working for merchants. As you have seen in the
textbook last year, this was a time when open fields
were disappearing and commons were being
enclosed. Cottagers and poor peasants who had earlier
depended on common lands for their survival,
gathering their firewood, berries, vegetables, hay and
straw, had to now look for alternative sources of
income. Many had tiny plots of land which could not
provide work for all members of the household. So
when merchants came around and offered advances
to produce goods for them, peasant households
eagerly agreed. By working for the merchants, they

The Age of Industrialisation

In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, merchants from the towns
in Europe began moving to the countryside, supplying money to
peasants and artisans, persuading them to produce for an international
market. With the expansion of world trade and the acquisition of
colonies in different parts of the world, the demand for goods
began growing. But merchants could not expand production within
towns. This was because here urban crafts and trade guilds were
powerful. These were associations of producers that trained
craftspeople, maintained control over production, regulated
competition and prices, and restricted the entry of new people into
the trade. Rulers granted different guilds the monopoly
right to produce and trade in specific products. It was
therefore difficult for new merchants to set up
business in towns. So they turned to the countryside.

Fig. 3 – Spinning in the eighteenth century.
You can see each member of the family involved in the
production of yarn. Notice that one wheel is moving only one
spindle.

81
Reprint 2025-26

could remain in the countryside and continue to cultivate their small
plots. Income from proto-industrial production supplemented their
shrinking income from cultivation. It also allowed them a fuller use
of their family labour resources.
Within this system a close relationship developed between the town
and the countryside. Merchants were based in towns but the work
was done mostly in the countryside. A merchant clothier in England
purchased wool from a wool stapler, and carried it to the spinners;
the yarn (thread) that was spun was taken in subsequent stages
of production to weavers, fullers, and then to dyers. The finishing
was done in London before the export merchant sold the cloth in
the international market. London in fact came to be known as a
finishing centre.

New words
Stapler – A person who ‘staples’ or sorts wool
according to its fibre
Fuller – A person who ‘fulls’ – that is, gathers
– cloth by pleating
Carding – The process in which fibres, such as
cotton or wool, are prepared prior to spinning

This proto-industrial system was thus part of a network of
commercial exchanges. It was controlled by merchants and the goods
were produced by a vast number of producers working within
their family farms, not in factories. At each stage of production 20
to 25 workers were employed by each merchant. This meant that
each clothier was controlling hundreds of workers.

1.1 The Coming Up of the Factory

India and the Contemporary World

The earliest factories in England came up by the 1730s. But it
was only in the late eighteenth century that the number of
factories multiplied.
The first symbol of the new era was cotton. Its production boomed
in the late nineteenth century. In 1760 Britain was importing 2.5
million pounds of raw cotton to feed its cotton industry. By 1787
this import soared to 22 million pounds. This increase was linked to
a number of changes within the process of production. Let us look
briefly at some of these.
A series of inventions in the eighteenth century increased the efficacy
of each step of the production process (carding, twisting and
spinning, and rolling). They enhanced the output per worker, enabling
each worker to produce more, and they made possible the
production of stronger threads and yarn. Then Richard Arkwright
created the cotton mill. Till this time, as you have seen, cloth
production was spread all over the countryside and carried out within
village households. But now, the costly new machines could be
purchased, set up and maintained in the mill. Within the mill all the
82
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 4 – A Lancashire cotton mill, painted by
C.E. Turner, The Illustrated London News,
1925.
The artist said: ‘Seen through the humid
atmosphere that makes Lancashire the best
cotton-spinning locality in the world, a huge
cotton-mill aglow with electricity in the
twilight, is a most impressive sight.’

processes were brought together under one roof and management.
This allowed a more careful supervision over the production process,
a watch over quality, and the regulation of labour, all of which had
been difficult to do when production was in the countryside.
In the early nineteenth century, factories increasingly became an
intimate part of the English landscape. So visible were the imposing
new mills, so magical seemed to be the power of new technology,
that contemporaries were dazzled. They concentrated their attention
on the mills, almost forgetting the bylanes and the workshops where
production still continued.

Activity
The way in which historians focus on
industrialisation rather than on small
workshops is a good example of how what we
believe today about the past is influenced by
what historians choose to notice and what they
ignore. Note down one event or aspect of your
own life which adults such as your parents or
teachers may think is unimportant, but which
you believe to be important.

1.2 The Pace of Industrial Change

The Age of Industrialisation

Fig. 5 – Industrial Manchester by M. Jackson, The Illustrated London News, 1857.
Chimneys billowing smoke came to characterise the industrial landscape.

Activity

How rapid was the process of industrialisation? Does industrialisation
mean only the growth of factory industries?
First: The most dynamic industries in Britain were clearly cotton and
metals. Growing at a rapid pace, cotton was the leading sector in the
first phase of industrialisation up to the 1840s. After that the iron
and steel industry led the way. With the expansion of railways, in
England from the 1840s and in the colonies from the 1860s, the
demand for iron and steel increased rapidly. By 1873 Britain was
exporting iron and steel worth about £ 77 million, double the value
of its cotton export.

Look at Figs. 4 and 5. Can you see any
difference in the way the two images show
industrialisation? Explain your view briefly.

83
Reprint 2025-26

Second: the new industries could not easily displace traditional
industries. Even at the end of the nineteenth century, less than 20 per
cent of the total workforce was employed in technologically
advanced industrial sectors. Textiles was a dynamic sector, but a
large portion of the output was produced not within factories, but
outside, within domestic units.
Third: the pace of change in the ‘traditional’ industries was not set
by steam-powered cotton or metal industries, but they did not remain
entirely stagnant either. Seemingly ordinary and small innovations
were the basis of growth in many non-mechanised sectors such as
food processing, building, pottery, glass work, tanning, furniture
making, and production of implements.

Fig. 6 – A fitting shop at a railway works in
England, The Illustrated London News, 1849.
In the fitting shop new locomotive engines were
completed and old ones repaired.

India and the Contemporary World

Fourth: technological changes occurred slowly. They did not spread
dramatically across the industrial landscape. New technology was
expensive and merchants and industrialists were cautious about using
it. The machines often broke down and repair was costly. They
were not as effective as their inventors and manufacturers claimed.
Consider the case of the steam engine. James Watt improved the
steam engine produced by Newcomen and patented the new engine
in 1781. His industrialist friend Mathew Boulton manufactured the
new model. But for years he could find no buyers. At the beginning
of the nineteenth century, there were no more than 321 steam engines
all over England. Of these, 80 were
in cotton industries, nine in wool
industries, and the rest in mining,
canal works and iron works. Steam
engines were not used in any of the
other industries till much later in
the century. So even the most
powerful new technology that
enhanced the productivity of
labour manifold was slow to be
accepted by industrialists.
Historians now have come to
increasingly recognise that the typical
worker in the mid-nineteenth century
was not a machine operator but the
traditional craftsperson and labourer.

Fig. 7 – A spinning factory in 1830.
You can see how giant wheels moved by steam power could set in motion
hundreds of spindles to manufacture thread.

84
Reprint 2025-26

2 Hand Labour and Steam Power

In many industries the demand for labour was seasonal. Gas works
and breweries were especially busy through the cold months. So
they needed more workers to meet their peak demand. Bookbinders and printers, catering to Christmas demand, too needed
extra hands before December. At the waterfront, winter was the
time that ships were repaired and spruced up. In all such industries
where production fluctuated with the season, industrialists usually
preferred hand labour, employing workers for the season.

Source A
Will Thorne is one of those who went in search
of seasonal work, loading bricks and doing odd
jobs. He describes how job-seekers walked to
London in search of work:
‘I had always wanted to go to London, and my
desire … was stimulated by letters from an old
workmate … who was now working at the Old
Kent Road Gas Works … I finally decided to go …
in November, 1881. With two friends I started
out to walk the journey, filled with the hope
that we would be able to obtain employment,
when we get there, with the kind assistance of
my friend … we had little money when we
started, not enough to pay for our food and
lodgings each night until we arrived in London.
Some days we walked as much as twenty miles,
and other days less. Our money was gone at
the end of the third day … For two nights we
slept out – once under a haystack, and once in
an old farm shed … On arrival in London we tried
to find … my friend … but … were unsuccessful.
Our money was gone, so there was nothing for
us to do but to walk around until late at night,
and then try to find some place to sleep. We
found an old building and slept in it that night.
The next day, Sunday, late in the afternoon, we
got to the Old Kent Gas Works, and applied for
work. To my great surprise, the man we had
been looking for was working at the time. He
spoke to the foreman and I was given a job.’
Quoted in Raphael Samuel, ‘Comers and Goers’,
in H.J. Dyos and Michael Wolff, eds, The Victorian
City: Images and Realities, 1973.

Source
Fig. 8 – People on the move in search of work, The Illustrated
London News, 1879.
Some people were always on the move selling small goods and
looking for temporary work.

A range of products could be produced only with hand
labour. Machines were oriented to producing uniforms,
standardised goods for a mass market. But the demand in the market
was often for goods with intricate designs and specific shapes. In
mid-nineteenth-century Britain, for instance, 500 varieties of

Activity
Imagine that you are a merchant writing back
to a salesman who has been trying to
persuade you to buy a new machine. Explain
in your letter what you have heard and why you
do not wish to invest in the new technology.

85
Reprint 2025-26

The Age of Industrialisation

In Victorian Britain there was no shortage of human labour. Poor
peasants and vagrants moved to the cities in large numbers in search
of jobs, waiting for work. As you will know, when there is plenty of
labour, wages are low. So industrialists had no problem of labour
shortage or high wage costs. They did not want to introduce machines
that got rid of human labour and required large capital investment.

hammers were produced and 45 kinds of axes. These required
human skill, not mechanical technology.
In Victorian Britain, the upper classes – the aristocrats and the
bourgeoisie – preferred things produced by hand. Handmade
products came to symbolise refinement and class. They were better
finished, individually produced, and carefully designed. Machinemade goods were for export to the colonies.
In countries with labour shortage, industrialists were keen on using
mechanical power so that the need for human labour can be
minimised. This was the case in nineteenth-century America. Britain,
however, had no problem hiring human hands.

2.1 Life of the Workers

India and the Contemporary World

The abundance of labour in the market affected the lives of workers.
As news of possible jobs travelled to the countryside, hundreds
tramped to the cities. The actual possibility of getting a job depended
on existing networks of friendship and kin relations. If you had
a relative or a friend in a factory, you were more likely to get a
job quickly. But not everyone had social connections. Many jobseekers had to wait weeks, spending nights under bridges or in night

Fig. 9 – Workers in an iron works, north-east
England, painting by William Bell Scott, 1861.
Many artists from the late nineteenth century
began idealising workers: they were shown
suffering hardship and pain for the cause of
the nation.

Fig. 10 – Houseless and Hungry, painting by Samuel Luke Fildes, 1874.
This painting shows the homeless in London applying for tickets to stay overnight in a workhouse. These shelters
were maintained under the supervision of the Poor Law Commissioners for the ‘destitute, wayfarers, wanderers and
foundling’. Staying in these workhouses was a humiliating experience: everyone was subjected to a medical
examination to see whether they were carrying disease, their bodies were cleansed, and their clothes purified. They
had to also do hard labour.

86
Reprint 2025-26

shelters. Some stayed in Night Refuges that were set up by private
individuals; others went to the Casual Wards maintained by the Poor
Law authorities.
Seasonality of work in many industries meant prolonged periods
without work. After the busy season was over, the poor were on
the streets again. Some returned to the countryside after the winter,
when the demand for labour in the rural areas opened up in places.
But most looked for odd jobs, which till the mid-nineteenth century
were difficult to find.
Wages increased somewhat in the early nineteenth century. But they
tell us little about the welfare of the workers. The average figures
hide the variations between trades and the fluctuations from year to
year. For instance, when prices rose sharply during the prolonged
Napoleonic War, the real value of what the workers earned fell
significantly, since the same wages could now buy fewer things.
Moreover, the income of workers depended not on the wage rate
alone. What was also critical was the period of employment: the
number of days of work determined the average daily income of
the workers. At the best of times till the mid-nineteenth century,
about 10 per cent of the urban population were extremely poor. In
periods of economic slump, like the 1830s, the proportion of
unemployed went up to anything between 35 and 75 per cent in
different regions.
The fear of unemployment made workers hostile to the introduction
of new technology. When the Spinning Jenny was introduced in

spindles

spindles
Fig. 11 – A Spinning Jenny, a drawing by
T.E. Nicholson, 1835.
Notice the number of spindles that could be
operated with one wheel.

New words
Spinning Jenny – Devised by James Hargreaves
in 1764, this machine speeded up the spinning
process and reduced labour demand. By
turning one single wheel a worker could set in
motion a number of spindles and spin several
threads at the same time.

Source B
A magistrate reported in 1790 about an incident when he was
called in to protect a manufacturer’s property from being attacked
by workers:
‘From the depredations of a lawless Banditti of colliers and their
wives, for the wives had lost their work to spinning engines … they
advanced at first with much insolence, avowing their intention of
cutting to pieces the machine lately introduced in the woollen
manufacture; which they suppose, if generally adopted, will lessen
the demand for manual labour. The women became clamorous.
The men were more open to conviction and after some
expostulation were induced to desist from their purpose and return
peaceably home.’

Look at Figs. 3, 7 and 11, then reread source B.
Explain why many workers were opposed to the
use of the Spinning Jenny.

J.L. Hammond and B. Hammond, The Skilled Labourer 1760-1832,
quoted in Maxine Berg, The Age of Manufactures.

Source
87
Reprint 2025-26

The Age of Industrialisation

Discuss

Fig. 12 – A shallow underground railway being constructed in central London, Illustrated Times, 1868.
From the 1850s railway stations began coming up all over London. This meant a demand for large numbers of
workers to dig tunnels, erect timber scaffolding, do the brick and iron works. Job-seekers moved from one
construction site to another.

India and the Contemporary World

the woollen industry, women who survived on hand spinning began
attacking the new machines. This conflict over the introduction of
the jenny continued for a long time.
After the 1840s, building activity intensified in the cities, opening up
greater opportunities of employment. Roads were widened, new
railway stations came up, railway lines were extended, tunnels dug,
drainage and sewers laid, rivers embanked. The number of workers
employed in the transport industry doubled in the 1840s, and doubled
again in the subsequent 30 years.

88
Reprint 2025-26

3 Industrialisation in the Colonies

Let us now move to India to see how a colony industrialises. Once
again we will look not only at factory industries but also at the
non-mechanised sector. We will limit our discussion primarily to
textile industries.

3.1 The Age of Indian Textiles
Before the age of machine industries, silk and cotton goods from
India dominated the international market in textiles. Coarser cottons
were produced in many countries, but the finer varieties often came
from India. Armenian and Persian merchants took the goods from
Punjab to Afghanistan, eastern Persia and Central Asia. Bales of fine
textiles were carried on camel back via the north-west frontier, through
mountain passes and across deserts. A vibrant sea trade operated
through the main pre-colonial ports. Surat on the Gujarat coast
connected India to the Gulf and Red Sea Ports; Masulipatam on
the Coromandel coast and Hoogly in Bengal had trade links with
Southeast Asian ports.

Activity
On a map of Asia, find and draw the sea and
land links of the textile trade from India to
Central Asia, West Asia and Southeast Asia.

The Age of Industrialisation

A variety of Indian merchants and bankers were involved in this
network of export trade – financing production, carrying goods
and supplying exporters. Supply merchants linked the port towns to
the inland regions. They gave advances to weavers, procured the
woven cloth from weaving villages, and carried the supply to the
ports. At the port, the big shippers and export merchants had brokers
who negotiated the price and bought goods from the supply
merchants operating inland.
By the 1750s this network, controlled by Indian merchants, was
breaking down.
The European companies gradually gained power – first securing a
variety of concessions from local courts, then the monopoly rights
to trade. This resulted in a decline of the old ports of Surat and
Hoogly through which local merchants had operated. Exports from
these ports fell dramatically, the credit that had financed the earlier
trade began drying up, and the local bankers slowly went bankrupt.
In the last years of the seventeenth century, the gross value of trade
that passed through Surat had been Rs 16 million. By the 1740s it
had slumped to Rs 3 million.
89
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 13 – The English factory at Surat, a seventeenth-century drawing.

India and the Contemporary World

While Surat and Hoogly decayed, Bombay and Calcutta grew. This
shift from the old ports to the new ones was an indicator of the
growth of colonial power. Trade through the new ports came to
be controlled by European companies, and was carried in European
ships. While many of the old trading houses collapsed, those that
wanted to survive had to now operate within a network shaped by
European trading companies.
How did these changes affect the life of weavers and other artisans?

3.2 What Happened to Weavers?
The consolidation of East India Company power after the 1760s
did not initially lead to a decline in textile exports from India. British
cotton industries had not yet expanded and Indian fine textiles were
in great demand in Europe. So the company was keen on expanding
textile exports from India.
Before establishing political power in Bengal and Carnatic in the
1760s and 1770s, the East India Company had found it difficult to
ensure a regular supply of goods for export. The French, Dutch,
90
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 14 – A weaver at work, Gujarat.

Portuguese as well as the local traders competed in the market
to secure woven cloth. So the weaver and supply merchants
could bargain and try selling the produce to the best buyer. In
their letters back to London, Company officials continuously
complained of difficulties of supply and the high prices.
However, once the East India Company established political
power, it could assert a monopoly right to trade. It proceeded
to develop a system of management and control that would
eliminate competition, control costs, and ensure regular supplies
of cotton and silk goods. This it did through a series of steps.
First: the Company tried to eliminate the existing traders and
brokers connected with the cloth trade, and establish a more
direct control over the weaver. It appointed a paid servant called
the gomastha to supervise weavers, collect supplies, and examine
the quality of cloth.

As loans flowed in and the demand for fine textiles expanded,
weavers eagerly took the advances, hoping to earn more. Many
weavers had small plots of land which they had earlier cultivated
along with weaving, and the produce from this took care of their
family needs. Now they had to lease out the land and devote all their
time to weaving. Weaving, in fact, required the labour of the entire
family, with children and women all engaged in different stages of
the process.
Soon, however, in many weaving villages there were reports of
clashes between weavers and gomasthas. Earlier supply merchants had
very often lived within the weaving villages, and had a close
relationship with the weavers, looking after their needs and helping
them in times of crisis. The new gomasthas were outsiders, with no
long-term social link with the village. They acted arrogantly, marched
into villages with sepoys and peons, and punished weavers for delays
in supply – often beating and flogging them. The weavers lost the
space to bargain for prices and sell to different buyers: the price they
received from the Company was miserably low and the loans they
had accepted tied them to the Company.

New words
Sepoy – This is how the British pronounced
the word sipahi, meaning an Indian soldier in
the service of the British

91
Reprint 2025-26

The Age of Industrialisation

Second: it prevented Company weavers from dealing with other
buyers. One way of doing this was through the system of advances.
Once an order was placed, the weavers were given loans to purchase
the raw material for their production. Those who took loans had to
hand over the cloth they produced to the gomastha. They could not
take it to any other trader.

In many places in Carnatic and Bengal, weavers deserted villages
and migrated, setting up looms in other villages where they had
some family relation. Elsewhere, weavers along with the village
traders revolted, opposing the Company and its officials. Over time
many weavers began refusing loans, closing down their workshops
and taking to agricultural labour.
By the turn of the nineteenth century, cotton weavers faced a
new set of problems.

3.3 Manchester Comes to India
In 1772, Henry Patullo, a Company official, had ventured to
say that the demand for Indian textiles could never reduce, since
no other nation produced goods of the same quality. Yet by
the beginning of the nineteenth century we see the beginning of
a long decline of textile exports from India. In 1811-12
piece-goods accounted for 33 per cent of India’s exports; by
1850-51 it was no more than 3 per cent.

India and the Contemporary World

Why did this happen? What were its implications?
As cotton industries developed in England, industrial groups began
worrying about imports from other countries. They pressurised
the government to impose import duties on cotton textiles so that
Manchester goods could sell in Britain without facing any
competition from outside. At the same time industrialists persuaded
the East India Company to sell British manufactures in Indian
markets as well. Exports of British cotton goods increased
dramatically in the early nineteenth century. At the end of the
eighteenth century there had been virtually no import of cotton
piece-goods into India. But by 1850 cotton piece-goods constituted
over 31 per cent of the value of Indian imports; and by the 1870s
this figure was over 50 per cent.
Cotton weavers in India thus faced two problems at the same time:
their export market collapsed, and the local market shrank, being
glutted with Manchester imports. Produced by machines at lower
costs, the imported cotton goods were so cheap that weavers could
not easily compete with them. By the 1850s, reports from most
weaving regions of India narrated stories of decline and desolation.
By the 1860s, weavers faced a new problem. They could not get
sufficient supply of raw cotton of good quality. When the American
92
Reprint 2025-26

Source C
The Commissioner of Patna wrote:
‘It appears that twenty yeas ago, a brisk trade
was carried on in the manufacture of cloth at
Jahanabad, and Behar, which has in the former
place entirely ceased, while in the latter the
amount of manufacture is very limited, in
consequence of the cheap and durable goods
from Manchester with which the Native
manufactures are unable to compete.’
Quoted in J. Krishnamurty, ‘Deindustrialisation in
Gangetic Bihar during the nineteenth century’,
The Indian Economic and Social History Review,
1985.

Source

Source D
Reporting on the Koshtis, a community of
weavers, the Census Report of Central Provinces
stated:
‘The Koshtis, like the weavers of the finer kinds
of cloth in other parts of India, have fallen upon
evil times. They are unable to compete with the
showy goods which Manchester sends in such
profusion, and they have of late years emigrated
in great numbers, chiefly to Berar, where as day
labourers they are able to obtain wages …’

Census Report of Central Provinces, 1872, quoted
in Sumit Guha, ‘The handloom industry in Central
India, 1825-1950’, The Indian Economic and Social
History Review.

Source

Fig. 15 – Bombay harbour, a late-eighteenth-century drawing.
Bombay and Calcutta grew as trading ports from the 1780s. This marked the decline of the old trading order
and the growth of the colonial economy.

Civil War broke out and cotton supplies from the US were cut
off, Britain turned to India. As raw cotton exports from India
increased, the price of raw cotton shot up. Weavers in India
were starved of supplies and forced to buy raw cotton at
exorbitant prices. In this, situation weaving could not pay.

The Age of Industrialisation

Then, by the end of the nineteenth century, weavers and other
craftspeople faced yet another problem. Factories in India began
production, flooding the market with machine-goods. How could
weaving industries possibly survive?

93
Reprint 2025-26

4 Factories Come Up
The first cotton mill in Bombay came up in 1854 and it went into
production two years later. By 1862 four mills were at work with
94,000 spindles and 2,150 looms. Around the same time jute mills
came up in Bengal, the first being set up in 1855 and another one
seven years later, in 1862. In north India, the Elgin Mill was started
in Kanpur in the 1860s, and a year later the first cotton mill of
Ahmedabad was set up. By 1874, the first spinning and weaving
mill of Madras began production.
Who set up the industries? Where did the capital come from? Who
came to work in the mills?

4.1 The Early Entrepreneurs

India and the Contemporary World

Industries were set up in different regions by varying sorts of people.
Let us see who they were.
The history of many business groups goes back to trade with China.
From the late eighteenth century, as you have read in your book last
year, the British in India began exporting opium to China and took
tea from China to England. Many Indians became junior players in
this trade, providing finance, procuring supplies, and shipping
consignments. Having earned through trade, some of these
businessmen had visions of developing industrial enterprises in India.
In Bengal, Dwarkanath Tagore made his fortune in the China trade
before he turned to industrial investment, setting up six joint-stock
companies in the 1830s and 1840s. Tagore’s enterprises sank along
with those of others in the wider business crises of the 1840s, but
later in the nineteenth century many of the China traders became
successful industrialists. In Bombay, Parsis like Dinshaw Petit and
Jamsetjee Nusserwanjee Tata who built huge industrial empires in
India, accumulated their initial wealth partly from exports to China,
and partly from raw cotton shipments to England. Seth Hukumchand,
a Marwari businessman who set up the first Indian jute mill in
Calcutta in 1917, also traded with China. So did the father as well as
grandfather of the famous industrialist G.D. Birla.
Capital was accumulated through other trade networks. Some
merchants from Madras traded with Burma while others had links
with the Middle East and East Africa. There were yet other

94
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 16 – Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy.
Jeejeebhoy was the son of a Parsi weaver. Like
many others of his time, he was involved in
the China trade and shipping. He owned a
large fleet of ships, but competition from
English and American shippers forced him to
sell his ships by the 1850s.

Fig. 17 – Dwarkanath Tagore.
Dwarkanath Tagore believed that India would
develop through westernisation and
industrialisation. He invested in shipping,
shipbuilding, mining, banking, plantations
and insurance.

commercial groups, but they were not directly involved in external
trade. They operated within India, carrying goods from one place
to another, banking money, transferring funds between cities, and
financing traders. When opportunities of investment in industries
opened up, many of them set up factories.
As colonial control over Indian trade tightened, the space within
which Indian merchants could function became increasingly limited.
They were barred from trading with Europe in manufactured goods,
and had to export mostly raw materials and food grains – raw
cotton, opium, wheat and indigo – required by the British. They
were also gradually edged out of the shipping business.
Till the First World War, European Managing Agencies in fact
controlled a large sector of Indian industries. Three of the biggest
ones were Bird Heiglers & Co., Andrew Yule, and Jardine Skinner
& Co. These Agencies mobilised capital, set up joint-stock companies
and managed them. In most instances Indian financiers provided
the capital while the European Agencies made all investment and
business decisions. The European merchant-industrialists had their
own chambers of commerce which Indian businessmen were not
allowed to join.

Fig. 18 – Partners in enterprise – J.N. Tata,
R.D. Tata, Sir R.J. Tata, and Sir D.J. Tata.
In 1912, J.N. Tata set up the first iron and steel
works in India at Jamshedpur. Iron and steel
industries in India started much later than
textiles. In colonial India industrial machinery,
railways and locomotives were mostly imported.
So capital goods industries could not really
develop in any significant way till Independence.

4.2 Where Did the Workers Come From?
Factories needed workers. With the expansion of factories, this
demand increased. In 1901, there were 584,000 workers in Indian
factories. By 1946 the number was over 2,436, 000. Where did the
workers come from?

Over time, as news of employment spread, workers travelled great
distances in the hope of work in the mills. From the United Provinces,
for instance, they went to work in the textile mills of Bombay and in
the jute mills of Calcutta.

The Age of Industrialisation

In most industrial regions workers came from the districts around.
Peasants and artisans who found no work in the village went to the
industrial centres in search of work. Over 50 per cent workers in the
Bombay cotton industries in 1911 came from the neighbouring
district of Ratnagiri, while the mills of Kanpur got most of their
textile hands from the villages within the district of Kanpur. Most
often millworkers moved between the village and the city, returning
to their village homes during harvests and festivals.
Fig. 19 – Young workers of a Bombay
mill, early twentieth century.
When workers went back to their village
homes, they liked dressing up.

95
Reprint 2025-26

Getting jobs was always difficult, even when mills multiplied and
the demand for workers increased. The numbers seeking work were
always more than the jobs available. Entry into the mills was also
restricted. Industrialists usually employed a jobber to get new recruits.
Very often the jobber was an old and trusted worker. He got people
from his village, ensured them jobs, helped them settle in the city
and provided them money in times of crisis. The jobber therefore
became a person with some authority and power. He began
demanding money and gifts for his favour and controlling the lives
of workers.
The number of factory workers increased over time. However,
as you will see, they were a small proportion of the total
industrial workforce.
Source E
Vasant Parkar, who was once a millworker in Bombay, said:
‘The workers would pay the jobbers money to get their sons work
in the mill … The mill worker was closely associated with his village,
physically and emotionally. He would go home to cut the harvest
and for sowing. The Konkani would go home to cut the paddy
and the Ghati, the sugarcane. It was an accepted practice for
which the mills granted leave.’

Fig. 20 – A head jobber.
Notice how the posture and clothes
emphasise the jobber’s position of
authority.

Meena Menon and Neera Adarkar, One Hundred Years: One Hundred
Voices, 2004.

Source

Source F
Bhai Bhosle, a trade unionist of Bombay,
recollected his childhood in the 1930s and 1940s:

India and the Contemporary World

‘In those days, the shift was 10 hours – from
5 pm to 3 am – terrible working hours. My father
worked for 35 years; he got the asthma like
disease and could not work any more…Then my
father went back to village.’
Meena Menon and Neera Adarkar, One Hundred
Years: One Hundred Voices.

Source

Fig. 21 – Spinners at work in an Ahmedabad mill.
Women worked mostly in the spinning departments.

96
Reprint 2025-26

5 The Peculiarities of Industrial Growth

European Managing Agencies, which dominated industrial
production in India, were interested in certain kinds of products.
They established tea and coffee plantations, acquiring land at cheap
rates from the colonial government; and they invested in mining,
indigo and jute. Most of these were products required primarily for
export trade and not for sale in India.
When Indian businessmen began setting up industries in the late
nineteenth century, they avoided competing with Manchester goods
in the Indian market. Since yarn was not an important part of British
imports into India, the early cotton mills in India produced coarse
cotton yarn (thread) rather than fabric. When yarn was imported it
was only of the superior variety. The yarn produced in Indian spinning
mills was used by handloom weavers in India or exported to China.

Yet, till the First World War, industrial growth
was slow. The war created a dramatically
new situation. With British mills busy with
war production to meet the needs of the
army, Manchester imports into India
declined. Suddenly, Indian mills had a vast
home market to supply. As the war
prolonged, Indian factories were called
upon to supply war needs: jute bags, cloth
for army uniforms, tents and leather boots,
horse and mule saddles and a host of other
items. New factories were set up and old

The Age of Industrialisation

By the first decade of the twentieth century a series of changes
affected the pattern of industrialisation. As the swadeshi movement
gathered momentum, nationalists mobilised people to boycott foreign
cloth. Industrial groups organised themselves to protect their collective
interests, pressurising the government to increase tariff protection
and grant other concessions. From 1906, moreover, the export of
Indian yarn to China declined since produce from Chinese and
Japanese mills flooded the Chinese market.
So industrialists in India began shifting from
yarn to cloth production. Cotton piecegoods production in India doubled between
1900 and 1912.

Fig. 22 – The first office of the Madras Chamber of Commerce.
By the late nineteenth century merchants in different regions began
meeting and forming Chambers of Commerce to regulate business and
decide on issues of collective concern.

97
Reprint 2025-26

ones ran multiple shifts. Many new workers were employed and
everyone was made to work longer hours. Over the war years
industrial production boomed.
After the war, Manchester could never recapture its old position in
the Indian market. Unable to modernise and compete with the US,
Germany and Japan, the economy of Britain crumbled after the
war. Cotton production collapsed and exports of cotton cloth from
Britain fell dramatically. Within the colonies, local industrialists
gradually consolidated their position, substituting foreign
manufactures and capturing the home market.

5.1 Small-scale Industries Predominate
While factory industries grew steadily after the war, large industries
formed only a small segment of the economy. Most of them –
about 67 per cent in 1911 – were located in Bengal and Bombay.
Over the rest of the country, small-scale production continued to
predominate. Only a small proportion of the total industrial labour
force worked in registered factories: 5 per cent in 1911 and 10 per
cent in 1931. The rest worked in small workshops and household
units, often located in alleys and bylanes, invisible to the passer-by.

India and the Contemporary World

In fact, in some instances, handicrafts production actually expanded
in the twentieth century. This is true even in the case of the handloom
sector that we have discussed. While cheap machine-made thread
wiped out the spinning industry in the nineteenth century, the weavers
survived, despite problems. In the twentieth century, handloom
cloth production expanded steadily: almost trebling between 1900
and 1940.

Fig. 23 – A Hand-woven
Cloth.
The intricate designs of
hand-woven cloth could
not be easily copied by the
mills.

How did this happen?
This was partly because of technological changes. Handicrafts people
adopt new technology if that helps them improve production
without excessively pushing up costs. So, by the second decade of
the twentieth century we find weavers using looms with a fly shuttle.
This increased productivity per worker, speeded up production and
reduced labour demand. By 1941, over 35 per cent of handlooms
in India were fitted with fly shuttles: in regions like Travancore,
Madras, Mysore, Cochin, Bengal the proportion was 70 to 80 per
cent. There were several other small innovations that helped weavers
improve their productivity and compete with the mill sector.
98
Reprint 2025-26

New words
Fly shuttle – It is a mechanical device used for
weaving, moved by means of ropes and pullies.
It places the horizontal threads ( called the weft)
into the verticle threads (called the warp). The
invention of the fly shuttle made it possible
for weavers to operate large looms and weave
wide pieces of cloth.

Certain groups of weavers were in a better position than others to
survive the competition with mill industries. Amongst weavers some
produced coarse cloth while others wove finer varieties. The coarser
cloth was bought by the poor and its demand fluctuated violently.
In times of bad harvests and famines, when the rural poor had little
to eat, and their cash income disappeared, they could not possibly
buy cloth. The demand for the finer varieties bought by the
well-to-do was more stable. The rich could buy these even when the
poor starved. Famines did not affect the sale of Banarasi or
Baluchari saris. Moreover, as you have seen, mills could not imitate
specialised weaves. Saris with woven borders, or the famous lungis
and handkerchiefs of Madras, could not be easily displaced by
mill production.
Weavers and other craftspeople who continued to expand
production through the twentieth century, did not necessarily prosper.
They lived hard lives and worked long hours. Very often the entire
household – including all the women and children – had to work at
various stages of the production process. But they were not simply
remnants of past times in the age of factories. Their life and labour
was integral to the process of industrialisation.

Punjab
United Provinces

The Age of Industrialisation

Bihar

Central Provinces
Bengal

Bombay

Madras

Fig. 24 – Location of large-scale industries in India, 1931.
The circles indicate the size of industries in the different
regions.

99
Reprint 2025-26

6 Market for Goods
We have seen how British manufacturers attempted to take over
the Indian market, and how Indian weavers and craftsmen, traders
and industrialists resisted colonial controls, demanded tariff
protection, created their own spaces, and tried to extend the market
for their produce.
But when new products are produced people have to be
persuaded to buy them. They have to feel like using the product.
How was this done?
One way in which new consumers are created is through
advertisements. As you know, advertisements make products appear
desirable and necessary. They try to shape the minds of people and
create new needs. Today we live in a world where advertisements
surround us. They appear in newspapers, magazines, hoardings, street
walls, television screens. But if we look back into history we find
that from the very beginning of the industrial age, advertisements
have played a part in expanding the markets for products, and in
shaping a new consumer culture.

India and the Contemporary World

When Manchester industrialists began selling cloth in India, they put
labels on the cloth bundles. The label was needed to make the place
of manufacture and the name of the company familiar to the buyer.
The label was also to be a mark of quality. When buyers saw ‘MADE
IN MANCHESTER’ written in bold on the label, they were
expected to feel confident about buying the cloth.

Fig. 25 – Gripe Water calendar of 1928 by
M.V. Dhurandhar.
The image of baby Krishna was most
commonly used to popularise baby products.

Fig. 26(a) – Manchester labels, early
twentieth century.
Images of numerous Indian gods and
goddesses – Kartika, Lakshmi,
Saraswati – are shown in imported
cloth labels approving the quality of
the product being marketed.
Fig. 26(b) – Maharaja Ranjit Singh on
a Manchester label.
Historic figures are used to create
respect for the product.
Fig. 26(a)

Fig. 26(b)

100
Reprint 2025-26

But labels did not only carry words and texts. They also carried
images and were very often beautifully illustrated. If we look
at these old labels, we can have some idea of the mind of the
manufacturers, their calculations, and the way they appealed to
the people.
Images of Indian gods and goddesses regularly appeared on these
labels. It was as if the association with gods gave divine approval to
the goods being sold. The imprinted image of Krishna or Saraswati
was also intended to make the manufacture from a foreign land
appear somewhat familiar to Indian people.
By the late nineteenth century, manufacturers were printing calendars
to popularise their products. Unlike newspapers and magazines,
calendars were used even by people who could not read. They were
hung in tea shops and in poor people’s homes just as much as in
offices and middle-class apartments. And those who hung the
calendars had to see the advertisements, day after day, through the
year. In these calendars, once again, we see the figures of gods being
used to sell new products.
Like the images of gods, figures of important personages, of
emperors and nawabs, adorned advertisement and calendars. The
message very often seemed to say: if you respect the royal figure,
then respect this product; when the product was being used by
kings, or produced under royal command, its quality could not
be questioned.

Fig. 27 – Sunlight soap calendar of 1934.
Here God Vishnu is shown bringing sunlight
from across the skies.

The Age of Industrialisation

When Indian manufacturers advertised the nationalist message was
clear and loud. If you care for the nation then buy products that
Indians produce. Advertisements became a vehicle of the nationalist
message of swadeshi.

Conclusion
Clearly, the age of industries has meant major technological changes,
growth of factories, and the making of a new industrial labour
force. However, as you have seen, hand technology and small-scale
production remained an important part of the industrial landscape.
Look again at Figs. 1 and 2. What would you now say of the images
they project?

Fig. 28 – An Indian mill cloth label.
The goddess is shown offering cloth produced
in an Ahmedabad mill, and asking people to
use things made in India.
101

Reprint 2025-26

Write in brief
1. Explain the following:
a) Women workers in Britain attacked the Spinning Jenny.
b) In the seventeenth century merchants from towns in Europe began employing
peasants and artisans within the villages.
c) The port of Surat declined by the end of the eighteenth century.
2. Write True or False against each statement:
a) At the end of the nineteenth century, 80 per cent of the total workforce in
Europe was employed in the technologically advanced industrial sector.
b) The international market for fine textiles was dominated by India till the
eighteenth century.
c) The American Civil War resulted in the reduction of cotton exports from India.
d) The introduction of the fly shuttle enabled handloom workers to improve their
productivity.

Write in brief

d) The East India Company appointed gomasthas to supervise weavers in India.

3. Explain what is meant by proto-industrialisation.

Discuss
1. Why did some industrialists in nineteenth-century Europe prefer hand labour over machines?

3. Imagine that you have been asked to write an article for an encyclopaedia on Britain and the
history of cotton. Write your piece using information from the entire chapter.
4. Why did industrial production in India increase during the First World War?

Discuss

India and the Contemporary World

2. How did the East India Company procure regular supplies of cotton and silk textiles from
Indian weavers?

Project work
Project
Select any one industry in your region and find out its history. How has the technology changed?
Where do the workers come from? How are the products advertised and marketed? Try and talk
to the employers and some workers to get their views about the industry’s history.

102
Reprint 2025-26

SECTION III

EVERYDAY LIFE, CULTURE AND POLITICS

Reprint 2025-26

Reprint 2025-26

##5##
Chapter V

Print Culture and the Modern World

P r i n t Print
C u Culture
lture and the Modern World

It is difficult for us to imagine a world without printed matter. We
find evidence of print everywhere around us – in books, journals,
newspapers, prints of famous paintings, and also in everyday things
like theatre programmes, official circulars, calendars, diaries,
advertisements, cinema posters at street corners. We read printed
literature, see printed images, follow the news through newspapers,
and track public debates that appear in print. We take for granted
this world of print and often forget that there was a time before
print. We may not realise that print itself has a history which has, in
fact, shaped our contemporary world. What is this history? When
did printed literature begin to circulate? How has it helped create
the modern world?
In this chapter we will look at the development of print, from its
beginnings in East Asia to its expansion in Europe and in India. We
will understand the impact of the spread of technology and consider
how social lives and cultures changed with the coming of print.

Fig. 1 – Book making before the age of print, from
Akhlaq-i-Nasiri, 1595.
This is a royal workshop in the sixteenth century,
much before printing began in India. You can see
the text being dictated, written and illustrated. The
art of writing and illustrating by hand was
important in the age before print. Think about
what happened to these forms of art with the
coming of printing machines.

105
Reprint 2025-26

1 The First Printed Books
The earliest kind of print technology was developed in China, Japan
and Korea. This was a system of hand printing. From AD 594
onwards, books in China were printed by rubbing paper – also
invented there – against the inked surface of woodblocks. As both
sides of the thin, porous sheet could not be printed, the traditional
Chinese ‘accordion book’ was folded and stitched at the side.
Superbly skilled craftsmen could duplicate, with remarkable accuracy,
the beauty of calligraphy.

New words
Calligraphy – The art of beautiful and stylised
writing

The imperial state in China was, for a very long time, the major
producer of printed material. China possessed a huge bureaucratic
system which recruited its personnel through civil service
examinations. Textbooks for this examination were printed in vast
numbers under the sponsorship of the imperial state. From the
sixteenth century, the number of examination candidates went up
and that increased the volume of print.

India and the Contemporary World

By the seventeenth century, as urban culture bloomed in China, the
uses of print diversified. Print was no longer used just by scholarofficials. Merchants used print in their everyday life, as they collected
trade information. Reading increasingly became a leisure activity.
The new readership preferred fictional narratives, poetry,
autobiographies, anthologies of literary masterpieces, and romantic
plays. Rich women began to read, and many women began
publishing their poetry and plays. Wives of scholar-officials published
their works and courtesans wrote about their lives.
This new reading culture was accompanied by a new technology.
Western printing techniques and mechanical presses were imported
in the late nineteenth century as Western powers established their
outposts in China. Shanghai became the hub of the new print culture,
catering to the Western-style schools. From hand printing there was
now a gradual shift to mechanical printing.

1.1 Print in Japan
Buddhist missionaries from China introduced hand-printing
technology into Japan around AD 768-770. The oldest Japanese book,
printed in AD 868, is the Buddhist Diamond Sutra, containing six sheets
of text and woodcut illustrations. Pictures were printed on textiles,
106
Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 2 a – A page from the Diamond Sutra.

playing cards and paper money. In
medieval Japan, poets and prose
writers were regularly published,
and books were cheap and abundant.

Belonging to the mid-13th
century, printing woodblocks of
the Tripitaka Koreana are a Korean
collection of Buddhist scriptures.
They were engraved on about
80,000 woodblocks. They were
inscribed on the UNESCO Memory
of the World Register in 2007.

Printing of visual material led to
interesting publishing practices. In
the late eighteenth century, in the
Source: http://www.cha.go.kr
flourishing urban circles at Edo
(later to be known as Tokyo),
illustrated collections of paintings
depicted an elegant urban culture, involving artists, courtesans,
and teahouse gatherings. Libraries and bookstores were packed
with hand-printed material of various types – books on women,
musical instruments, calculations, tea ceremony, flower
arrangements, proper etiquette, cooking and famous places.

Fig. 2b – Tripitaka Koreana

Box 1

Fig. 3 – An ukiyo
print by Kitagawa
Utamaro.

Print Culture

Kitagawa Utamaro, born in Edo in 1753, was widely known for
his contributions to an art form called ukiyo (‘pictures of the floating
world’) or depiction of ordinary human experiences, especially urban
ones. These prints travelled to contemporary US and Europe and
influenced artists like Manet, Monet and Van Gogh. Publishers like
Tsutaya Juzaburo identified subjects and commissioned artists who
drew the theme in outline. Then a skilled woodblock carver pasted
the drawing on a woodblock and carved a printing block to
reproduce the painter’s lines. In the process, the original drawing
would be destroyed and only prints would survive.

Fig. 4a – A morning scene,
ukiyo print by Shunman
Kubo, late eighteenth
century.
A man looks out of the
window at the snowfall while
women prepare tea and
perform other domestic
duties.

107
Reprint 2025-26

2 Print Comes to Europe

For centuries, silk and spices from China flowed into Europe through
the silk route. In the eleventh century, Chinese paper reached Europe
via the same route. Paper made possible the production of

New words
Vellum – A parchment made from the skin
of animals

manuscripts, carefully written by scribes. Then, in 1295, Marco Polo,
a great explorer, returned to Italy after many years of exploration in
China. As you read above, China already had the technology of
woodblock printing. Marco Polo brought this knowledge back with
him. Now Italians began producing books with woodblocks, and
soon the technology spread to other parts of Europe. Luxury
editions were still handwritten on very expensive vellum, meant for
aristocratic circles and rich monastic libraries which scoffed at printed
books as cheap vulgarities. Merchants and students in the university
towns bought the cheaper printed copies.
As the demand for books increased, booksellers all over Europe
began exporting books to many different countries. Book fairs were
held at different places. Production of handwritten manuscripts was

Fig. 4b – Jikji

also organised in new ways to meet the expanded demand. Scribes
or skilled handwriters were no longer solely employed by wealthy
or influential patrons but increasingly by booksellers as well. More
than 50 scribes often worked for one bookseller.
But the production of handwritten manuscripts could not satisfy
the ever-increasing demand for books. Copying was an expensive,
India and the Contemporary World

laborious and time-consuming business. Manuscripts were fragile,
awkward to handle, and could not be carried around or read easily.

The Jikji of Korea is among the world’s oldest
existing books printed with movable metal type.
It contains the essential features of Zen
Buddhism. About 150 monks of India, China and
Korea are mentioned in the book. It was printed
in late 14th century. While the first volume of
the book is unavailable, the second one is available
in the National Library of France. This work marked
an important technical change in the print
culture. That is why it was inscribed on the
UNESCO Memory of the World Register in 2001.

Their circulation therefore remained limited. With the growing
demand for books, woodblock printing gradually became more
and more popular. By the early fifteenth century, woodblocks were
being widely used in Europe to print textiles, playing cards, and
religious pictures with simple, brief texts.
There was clearly a great need for even quicker and cheaper
reproduction of texts. This could only be with the invention of a
new print technology. The breakthrough occurred at Strasbourg,
Germany, where Johann Gutenberg developed the first-known
printing press in the 1430s.
108
Reprint 2025-26

Activity
Imagine that you are Marco Polo. Write a letter
from China to describe the world of print which
you have seen there.

2.1 Gutenberg and the Printing Press

The new technology did not entirely displace the existing art of
producing books by hand.
In fact, printed books at first closely resembled the written
manuscripts in appearance and layout. The metal letters imitated the
ornamental handwritten styles. Borders were illuminated by hand
with foliage and other patterns, and illustrations were painted. In the
books printed for the rich, space for decoration was kept blank on
the printed page. Each purchaser could choose the design and decide
on the painting school that would do the illustrations.
In the hundred years between 1450 and 1550, printing presses were
set up in most countries of Europe. Printers from Germany travelled
to other countries, seeking work and helping start new presses. As
the number of printing presses grew, book production boomed.
The second half of the fifteenth century saw 20 million copies of
printed books flooding the markets in Europe. The number went
up in the sixteenth century to about 200 million copies.
This shift from hand printing to mechanical printing led to the
print revolution.

New words
Platen – In letterpress printing, platen is a board which is
pressed onto the back of the paper to get the impression from
the type. At one time it used to be a wooden board; later it
was made of steel

Fig. 5 – A Portrait of
Johann Gutenberg,
1584.

Frame

Screw

Handle
Platen

Printing block
placed over
paper

Fig. 6 – Gutenberg Printing Press.
Notice the long handle attached to the screw.
This handle was used to turn the screw and
press down the platen over the printing block
that was placed on top of a sheet of damp
paper. Gutenberg developed metal types for
each of the 26 characters of the Roman
alphabet and devised a way of moving them
around so as to compose different words of the
text. This came to be known as the moveable
type printing machine, and it remained the basic
print technology over the next 300 years.
Books could now be produced much faster than
was possible when each print block was
prepared by carving a piece of wood by hand.
The Gutenberg press could print 250 sheets
on one side per hour.

109
Reprint 2025-26

Print Culture

Gutenberg was the son of a merchant and grew up on a large
agricultural estate. From his childhood he had seen wine and olive
presses. Subsequently, he learnt the art of polishing stones, became a
master goldsmith, and also acquired the expertise to create lead
moulds used for making trinkets. Drawing on this knowledge,
Gutenberg adapted existing technology to design his innovation.
The olive press provided the model for the printing press, and moulds
were used for casting the metal types for the letters of the alphabet.
By 1448, Gutenberg perfected the system. The first book he printed
was the Bible. About 180 copies were printed and it took three
years to produce them. By the standards of the time this was fast
production.

Fig. 7 – Pages of Gutenberg’s Bible, the first printed book in Europe.

India and the Contemporary World

Gutenberg printed about 180 copies, of which no more than 50 have
survived.
Look at these pages of Gutenberg’s Bible carefully. They were not just
products of new technology. The text was printed in the new Gutenberg
press with metal type, but the borders were carefully designed, painted and
illuminated by hand by artists. No two copies were the same. Every page of
each copy was different. Even when two copies look similar, a careful
comparison will reveal differences. Elites everywhere preferred this lack of
uniformity: what they possessed then could be claimed as unique, for no
one else owned a copy that was exactly the same.
In the text you will notice the use of colour within the letters in various
places. This had two functions: it added colour to the page, and highlighted
all the holy words to emphasise their significance. But the colour on every
page of the text was added by hand. Gutenberg printed the text in black,
leaving spaces where the colour could be filled in later.

Fig. 8 – A printer’s workshop, sixteenth century.
This picture depicts what a printer’s shop looked like in the
sixteenth century. All the activities are going on under one roof.
In the foreground on the right, compositors are at work, while
on the left galleys are being prepared and ink is being applied on
the metal types; in the background, the printers are turning the
screws of the press, and near them proofreaders are at work.
Right in front is the final product – the double-page printed
sheets, stacked in neat piles, waiting to be bound.

110
Reprint 2025-26

New words
Compositor – The person who composes the
text for printing
Galley – Metal frame in which types are laid
and the text composed

3 The Print Revolution and Its Impact
What was the print revolution? It was not just a development, a new
way of producing books; it transformed the lives of people,
changing their relationship to information and knowledge, and with
institutions and authorities. It influenced popular perceptions and
opened up new ways of looking at things.
Let us explore some of these changes.

3.1 A New Reading Public
With the printing press, a new reading public emerged. Printing
reduced the cost of books. The time and labour required to produce
each book came down, and multiple copies could be produced
with greater ease. Books flooded the market, reaching out to an
ever-growing readership.

Activity
You are a bookseller advertising the availability
of new cheap printed books. Design a poster
for your shop window.

But the transition was not so simple. Books could be read only by
the literate, and the rates of literacy in most European countries
were very low till the twentieth century. How, then, could publishers
persuade the common people to welcome the printed book? To do
this, they had to keep in mind the wider reach of the printed work:
even those who did not read could certainly enjoy listening to books
being read out. So printers began publishing popular ballads and
folk tales, and such books would be profusely illustrated with pictures.
These were then sung and recited at gatherings in villages and in
taverns in towns.
Oral culture thus entered print and printed material was orally
transmitted. The line that separated the oral and reading cultures
became blurred. And the hearing public and reading public became
intermingled.

New words
Ballad – A historical account or folk tale in
verse, usually sung or recited
Taverns – Places where people gathered to
drink alcohol, to be served food, and to meet
friends and exchange news
111

Reprint 2025-26

Print Culture

Access to books created a new culture of reading. Earlier, reading
was restricted to the elites. Common people lived in a world of oral
culture. They heard sacred texts read out, ballads recited, and folk
tales narrated. Knowledge was transferred orally. People collectively
heard a story, or saw a performance. As you will see in Chapter 8,
they did not read a book individually and silently. Before the age of
print, books were not only expensive but they could not be produced
in sufficient numbers. Now books could reach out to wider sections
of people. If earlier there was a hearing public, now a reading public
came into being.

3.2 Religious Debates and the Fear of Print
Print created the possibility of wide circulation of
ideas, and introduced a new world of debate and
discussion. Even those who disagreed with
established authorities could now print and circulate
their ideas. Through the printed message, they could
persuade people to think differently, and move them
to action. This had significance in different spheres
of life.
Not everyone welcomed the printed book, and those
who did also had fears about it. Many were
apprehensive of the effects that the easier access to
the printed word and the wider circulation of books,
could have on people’s minds. It was feared that if
there was no control over what was printed and
read then rebellious and irreligious thoughts might
spread. If that happened the authority of ‘valuable’
literature would be destroyed. Expressed by religious
authorities and monarchs, as well as many writers
and artists, this anxiety was the basis of widespread
criticism of the new printed literature that had begun
to circulate.

India and the Contemporary World

Let us consider the implication of this in one sphere
of life in early modern Europe – namely, religion.

Fig. 9 – J.V. Schley, L’Imprimerie, 1739.
This is one of the many images produced in early modern
Europe, celebrating the coming of print. You can see the
printing press descending from heaven, carried by a goddess.
On two sides of the goddess, blessing the machine, are
Minerva (the goddess of wisdom) and Mercury (the messenger
god, also symbolising reason). The women in the foreground
are holding plaques with the portraits of six pioneer printers of
different countries. In the middle ground on the left (figure
encircled) is the portrait of Gutenberg.

In 1517, the religious reformer Martin Luther wrote
Ninety Five Theses criticising many of the practices
and rituals of the Roman Catholic Church. A printed
copy of this was posted on a church door in Wittenberg. It challenged
the Church to debate his ideas. Luther’s writings were immediately
reproduced in vast numbers and read widely. This lead to a division
within the Church and to the beginning of the Protestant
Reformation. Luther’s translation of the New Testament sold 5,000
copies within a few weeks and a second edition appeared within
three months. Deeply grateful to print, Luther said, ‘Printing is the
ultimate gift of God and the greatest one.’ Several scholars, in fact,
think that print brought about a new intellectual atmosphere and
helped spread the new ideas that led to the Reformation.
112
Reprint 2025-26

New words
Protestant Reformation – A sixteenth-century
movement to reform the Catholic Church
dominated by Rome. Martin Luther was one
of the main Protestant reformers. Several
traditions of anti-Catholic Christianity
developed out of the movement

3.3 Print and Dissent

New words

Print and popular religious literature stimulated many distinctive
individual interpretations of faith even among little-educated working
people. In the sixteenth century, Menocchio, a miller in Italy, began
to read books that were available in his locality. He reinterpreted the
message of the Bible and formulated a view of God and Creation
that enraged the Roman Catholic Church. When the Roman Church
began its inquisition to repress heretical ideas, Menocchio was hauled
up twice and ultimately executed. The Roman Church, troubled by
such effects of popular readings and questionings of faith, imposed
severe controls over publishers and booksellers and began to maintain
an Index of Prohibited Books from 1558.

Inquisition – A former Roman Catholic court
for identifying and punishing heretics
Heretical – Beliefs which do not follow the
accepted teachings of the Church. In medieval
times, heresy was seen as a threat to the right
of the Church to decide on what should be
believed and what should not. Heretical beliefs
were severely punished
Satiety – The state of being fulfilled much
beyond the point of satisfaction
Seditious – Action, speech or writing that is
seen as opposing the government

Source A
Fear of the book
Erasmus, a Latin scholar and a Catholic reformer,
who criticised the excesses of Catholicism but kept
his distance from Luther, expressed a deep anxiety
about printing. He wrote in Adages (1508):

Source

Print Culture

Fig. 10 – The macabre dance.
This sixteenth-century print shows how the fear of printing was
dramatised in visual representations of the time. In this highly
interesting woodcut the coming of print is associated with the end
of the world. The interior of the printer’s workshop here is the site
of a dance of death. Skeletal figures control the printer and his
workers, define and dictate what is to be done and what is to be
produced.

‘To what corner of the world do they not fly,
these swarms of new books? It may be that one
here and there contributes something worth
knowing, but the very multitude of them is hurtful
to scholarship, because it creates a glut, and even
in good things satiety is most harmful ... [printers]
fill the world with books, not just trifling things
(such as I write, perhaps), but stupid, ignorant,
slanderous, scandalous, raving, irreligious and
seditious books, and the number of them
is such that even the valuable publications lose
their value.’

Discuss
Write briefly why some people feared that the development of
print could lead to the growth of dissenting ideas.

113
Reprint 2025-26

4 The Reading Mania

Through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries literacy rates went
up in most parts of Europe. Churches of different denominations
set up schools in villages, carrying literacy to peasants and artisans.
By the end of the eighteenth century, in some parts of Europe
literacy rates were as high as 60 to 80 per cent. As literacy and schools
spread in European countries, there was a virtual reading mania.
People wanted books to read and printers produced books in everincreasing numbers.
New forms of popular literature appeared in print, targeting new
audiences. Booksellers employed pedlars who roamed around
villages, carrying little books for sale. There were almanacs or ritual

New words
Denominations – Sub groups within a religion
Almanac – An annual publication giving
astronomical data, information about the
movements of the sun and moon, timing of
full tides and eclipses, and much else that was
of importance in the everyday life of people
Chapbook – A term used to describe pocketsize books that are sold by travelling pedlars
called chapmen. These became popular from
the time of the sixteenth-century print revolution

calendars, along with ballads and folktales. But other forms of reading
matter, largely for entertainment, began to reach ordinary readers as
well. In England, penny chapbooks were carried by petty pedlars
known as chapmen, and sold for a penny, so that even the poor
could buy them. In France, were the “Biliotheque Bleue”, which
were low-priced small books printed on poor quality paper, and
bound in cheap blue covers. Then there were the romances, printed
on four to six pages, and the more substantial ‘histories’ which were
stories about the past. Books were of various sizes, serving many
different purposes and interests.
The periodical press developed from the early eighteenth century,

Box 2

India and the Contemporary World

combining information about current affairs with entertainment.
Newspapers and journals carried information about wars and trade,
as well as news of developments in other places.
Similarly, the ideas of scientists and philosophers now became more
accessible to the common people. Ancient and medieval scientific
texts were compiled and published, and maps and scientific diagrams
were widely printed. When scientists like Isaac Newton began to
publish their discoveries, they could influence a much wider circle
of scientifically minded readers. The writings of thinkers such as
Thomas Paine, Voltaire and Jean Jacques Rousseau were also widely
printed and read. Thus their ideas about science, reason and rationality
found their way into popular literature.

114
Reprint 2025-26

In 1791, a London publisher, James Lackington,
wrote in his diary:
‘The sale of books in general has increased
prodigiously within the last twenty years. The
poorer sort of farmers and even the poor country
people in general who before that period spent
their winter evenings in relating stories of witches,
ghosts, hobgoblins … now shorten the winter
night by hearing their sons and daughters read
them tales, romances, etc. If John goes to town
with a load of hay, he is charged to be sure not
to forget to bring home Peregrine Pickle’s
Adventure … and when Dolly is sent to sell her
eggs, she is commissioned to purchase The
History of Joseph Andrews.’

4.1 ‘Tremble, therefore, tyrants of the world!’
By the mid-eighteenth century, there was a common conviction that
books were a means of spreading progress and enlightenment. Many
believed that books could change the world, liberate society from
despotism and tyranny, and herald a time when reason and intellect
would rule. Louise-Sebastien Mercier, a novelist in eighteenth-century
France, declared: ‘The printing press is the most powerful engine of
progress and public opinion is the force that will sweep despotism
away.’ In many of Mercier’s novels, the heroes are transformed by
acts of reading. They devour books, are lost in the world books
create, and become enlightened in the process. Convinced of the
power of print in bringing enlightenment and destroying the basis
of despotism, Mercier proclaimed: ‘Tremble, therefore, tyrants of
the world! Tremble before the virtual writer!’

4.2 Print Culture and the French Revolution
Many historians have argued that print culture created the conditions
within which French Revolution occurred. Can we make such
a connection?

Source B
This is how Mercier describes the impact of the
printed word, and the power of reading in one
of his books:
‘Anyone who had seen me reading would have
compared me to a man dying of thirst who was
gulping down some fresh, pure water … Lighting
my lamp with extraordinary caution, I threw
myself hungrily into the reading. An easy
eloquence, effortless and animated, carried me
from one page to the next without my noticing
it. A clock struck off the hours in the silence of
the shadows, and I heard nothing. My lamp began
to run out of oil and produced only a pale light,
but still I read on. I could not even take out time
to raise the wick for fear of interrupting my
pleasure. How those new ideas rushed into my
brain! How my intelligence adopted them!’
Quoted by Robert Darnton, The Forbidden BestSellers of Pre-Revolutionary France, 1995.

Source

Three types of arguments have been usually put forward.
New words
Despotism – A system of governance in which
absolute power is exercised by an individual,
unregulated by legal and constitutional checks

Print Culture

First: print popularised the ideas of the Enlightenment thinkers.
Collectively, their writings provided a critical commentary on tradition,
superstition and despotism. They argued for the rule of reason rather
than custom, and demanded that everything be judged through the
application of reason and rationality. They attacked the sacred
authority of the Church and the despotic power of the state, thus
eroding the legitimacy of a social order based on tradition. The
writings of Voltaire and Rousseau were read widely; and those who
read these books saw the world through new eyes, eyes that were
questioning, critical and rational.
Second: print created a new culture of dialogue and debate. All
values, norms and institutions were re-evaluated and discussed by a
public that had become aware of the power of reason, and
recognised the need to question existing ideas and beliefs. Within
this public culture, new ideas of social revolution came into being.
Third: by the 1780s there was an outpouring of literature that mocked
the royalty and criticised their morality. In the process, it raised

115
Reprint 2025-26

questions about the existing social order. Cartoons and caricatures
typically suggested that the monarchy remained absorbed only in
sensual pleasures while the common people suffered immense
hardships. This literature circulated underground and led to the
growth of hostile sentiments against the monarchy.

India and the Contemporary World

How do we look at these arguments? There can be no doubt that
print helps the spread of ideas. But we must remember that people
did not read just one kind of literature. If they read the ideas of
Voltaire and Rousseau, they were also exposed to monarchical and
Church propaganda. They were not influenced directly by everything
they read or saw. They accepted some ideas and rejected others.
They interpreted things their own way. Print did not directly shape
their minds, but it did open up the possibility of thinking differently.

Activity
Imagine that you are a cartoonist in France
before the revolution. Design a cartoon as it
would have appeared in a pamphlet.

Fig. 11 – The nobility and the common people before the French Revolution, a
cartoon of the late eighteenth century.
The cartoon shows how the ordinary people – peasants, artisans and workers – had a
hard time while the nobility enjoyed life and oppressed them. Circulation of cartoons
like this one had an impact on the thinking of people before the revolution.

Discuss
Why do some historians think that print culture created the basis for the French Revolution?

116
Reprint 2025-26

5 The Nineteenth Century
The nineteenth century saw vast leaps in mass literacy in Europe,
bringing in large numbers of new readers among children,
women and workers.

5.1 Children, Women and Workers

Women became important as readers as well as writers. Penny
magazines (see Fig. 12) were especially meant for women, as
Fig. 12 – Frontispiece of Penny Magazine.
were manuals teaching proper behaviour and housekeeping. Penny Magazine was published between 1832 and 1835
When novels began to be written in the nineteenth century, in England by the Society for the Diffusion of Useful
Knowledge. It was aimed primarily at the working class.
women were seen as important readers. Some of the bestknown novelists were women: Jane Austen, the Bronte sisters,
George Eliot. Their writings became important in defining a new
type of woman: a person with will, strength of personality,
determination and the power to think.
Box 3

Lending libraries had been in existence from the seventeenth century
onwards. In the nineteenth century, lending libraries in England
became instruments for educating white-collar workers, artisans
and lower-middle-class people. Sometimes, self-educated working
class people wrote for themselves. After the working day was
gradually shortened from the mid-nineteenth century, workers had
some time for self-improvement and self-expression. They wrote
political tracts and autobiographies in large numbers.

Thomas Wood, a Yorkshire mechanic, narrated
how he would rent old newspapers and read
them by firelight in the evenings as he could not
afford candles. Autobiographies of poor people
narrated their struggles to read against grim
obstacles: the twentieth-century Russian
revolutionary author Maxim Gorky’s My Childhood
and My University provide glimpses of such
struggles.

117
Reprint 2025-26

Print Culture

As primary education became compulsory from the late
nineteenth century, children became an important category
of readers. Production of school textbooks became critical
for the publishing industry. A children’s press, devoted to
literature for children alone, was set up in France in 1857.
This press published new works as well as old fairy tales
and folk tales. The Grimm Brothers in Germany spent years
compiling traditional folk tales gathered from peasants. What
they collected was edited before the stories were published
in a collection in 1812. Anything that was considered
unsuitable for children or would appear vulgar to the elites,
was not included in the published version. Rural folk tales
thus acquired a new form. In this way, print recorded old
tales but also changed them.

5.2 Further Innovations
By the late eighteenth century, the press came to be made out of
metal. Through the nineteenth century, there were a series of further
innovations in printing technology. By the mid-nineteenth century,
Richard M. Hoe of New York had perfected the power-driven
cylindrical press. This was capable of printing 8,000 sheets per hour.
This press was particularly useful for printing newspapers. In the
late nineteenth century, the offset press was developed which could
print up to six colours at a time. From the turn of the twentieth
century, electrically operated presses accelerated printing operations.
A series of other developments followed. Methods of feeding paper
improved, the quality of plates became better, automatic paper reels
and photoelectric controls of the colour register were introduced.
The accumulation of several individual mechanical improvements
transformed the appearance of printed texts.

Activity
Look at Fig. 13. What impact do such
advertisements have on the public mind?
Do you think everyone reacts to printed material
in the same way?

India and the Contemporary World

Printers and publishers continuously developed new strategies
to sell their product. Nineteenth-century periodicals serialised
important novels, which gave birth to a particular way of writing
novels. In the 1920s in England, popular works were sold in
cheap series, called the Shilling Series. The dust cover or the
book jacket is also a twentieth-century innovation. With the
onset of the Great Depression in the 1930s, publishers feared a
decline in book purchases. To sustain buying, they brought
out cheap paperback editions.

Fig. 13 – Advertisements at a railway station in England, a lithograph by Alfred Concanen, 1874.
Printed advertisements and notices were plastered on street walls, railway platforms and public buildings.

118
Reprint 2025-26

6 India and the World of Print
Let us see when printing began in India and how ideas and information
were written before the age of print.

6.1 Manuscripts Before the Age of Print
India had a very rich and old tradition of handwritten manuscripts –
in Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian, as well as in various vernacular languages.
Manuscripts were copied on palm leaves or on handmade paper.
Pages were sometimes beautifully illustrated. They would be either
pressed between wooden covers or sewn together to ensure
preservation. Manuscripts continued to be produced till well after
the introduction of print, down to the late nineteenth century.

Print Culture

Manuscripts, however, were highly expensive and fragile. They had
to be handled carefully, and they could not be read easily as the

Fig. 14 – Pages
from the Gita
Govinda of
Jayadeva,
eighteenth century.
This is a palm-leaf
handwritten
manuscript in
accordion format.

Fig. 15 – Pages from the Diwan of Hafiz, 1824.
Hafiz was a fourteenth-century poet whose collected works are known as Diwan. Notice the
beautiful calligraphy and the elaborate illustration and design. Manuscripts like this continued
to be produced for the rich even after the coming of the letterpress.

119
Reprint 2025-26

script was written in different styles. So
manuscripts were not widely used in
everyday life. Even though pre-colonial
Bengal had developed an extensive network
of village primary schools, students very
often did not read texts. They only learnt
to write. Teachers dictated portions of
texts from memory and students wrote
them down. Many thus became literate
without ever actually reading any kinds
of texts.

Fig. 16 – Pages from the Rigveda.
Handwritten manuscripts continued to be produced in India till much after
the coming of print. This manuscript was produced in the eighteenth
century in the Malayalam script.

6.2 Print Comes to India
The printing press first came to Goa with Portuguese missionaries
in the mid-sixteenth century. Jesuit priests learnt Konkani and
printed several tracts. By 1674, about 50 books had been printed
in the Konkani and in Kanara languages. Catholic priests printed
the first Tamil book in 1579 at Cochin, and in 1713 the first
Malayalam book was printed by them. By 1710, Dutch Protestant
missionaries had printed 32 Tamil texts, many of them translations
of older works.

India and the Contemporary World

The English language press did not grow in India till quite late even
though the English East India Company began to import presses
from the late seventeenth century.
From 1780, James Augustus Hickey began to edit the Bengal Gazette,
a weekly magazine that described itself as ‘a commercial paper open
to all, but influenced by none’. So it was private English enterprise,
proud of its independence from colonial influence, that began English
printing in India. Hickey published a lot of advertisements, including
those that related to the import and sale of slaves. But he also Source C
published a lot of gossip about the Company’s senior officials in
As late as 1768, a William Bolts affixed a notice
India. Enraged by this, Governor-General Warren Hastings
on a public building in Calcutta:
persecuted Hickey, and encouraged the publication of officially
‘To the Public: Mr. Bolts takes this method of
informing
the public that the want of a printing
sanctioned newspapers that could counter the flow of information
press in this city being of a great disadvantage in
that damaged the image of the colonial government. By the
business ... he is going to give the best
close of the eighteenth century, a number of newspapers and
encouragement to any ... persons who are
versed in the business of printing.’
journals appeared in print. There were Indians, too, who began
Bolts, however, left for England soon after and
to publish Indian newspapers. The first to appear was the weekly
nothing came of the promise.
Bengal Gazette, brought out by Gangadhar Bhattacharya, who
Source
was close to Rammohun Roy.
120
Reprint 2025-26

7 Religious Reform and Public Debates
From the early nineteenth century, as you know, there were intense
debates around religious issues. Different groups confronted the
changes happening within colonial society in different ways, and
offered a variety of new interpretations of the beliefs of different
religions. Some criticised existing practices and campaigned for
reform, while others countered the arguments of reformers. These
debates were carried out in public and in print. Printed tracts and
newspapers not only spread the new ideas, but they shaped the
nature of the debate. A wider public could now participate in these
public discussions and express their views. New ideas emerged
through these clashes of opinions.

In north India, the ulama were deeply anxious about the collapse
of Muslim dynasties. They feared that colonial rulers would
encourage conversion, change the Muslim personal laws. To counter
this, they used cheap lithographic presses, published Persian and
Urdu translations of holy scriptures, and printed religious
newspapers and tracts. The Deoband Seminary, founded in 1867,
published thousands upon thousands of fatwas telling Muslim
readers how to conduct themselves in their everyday lives, and
explaining the meanings of Islamic doctrines. All through the
nineteenth century, a number of Muslim sects and seminaries
appeared, each with a different interpretation of faith, each keen
on enlarging its following and countering the influence of its
opponents. Urdu print helped them conduct these battles in public.
Among Hindus, too, print encouraged the reading of religious texts,
especially in the vernacular languages. The first printed edition of

New words
Ulama – Legal scholars of Islam and the sharia
( a body of Islamic law)
Fatwa – A legal pronouncement on Islamic
law usually given by a mufti (legal scholar) to
clarify issues on which the law is uncertain

121
Reprint 2025-26

Print Culture

This was a time of intense controversies between social and religious
reformers and the Hindu orthodoxy over matters like widow
immolation, monotheism, Brahmanical priesthood and idolatry. In
Bengal, as the debate developed, tracts and newspapers proliferated,
circulating a variety of arguments. To reach a wider audience, the
ideas were printed in the everyday, spoken language of ordinary
people. Rammohun Roy published the Sambad Kaumudi from 1821
and the Hindu orthodoxy commissioned the Samachar Chandrika
to oppose his opinions. From 1822, two Persian newspapers were
published, Jam-i-Jahan Nama and Shamsul Akhbar. In the same year,
a Gujarati newspaper, the Bombay Samachar, made its appearance.

the Ramcharitmanas of Tulsidas, a sixteenth-century text, came out
from Calcutta in 1810. By the mid-nineteenth century, cheap
lithographic editions flooded north Indian markets. From the 1880s,
the Naval Kishore Press at Lucknow and the Shri Venkateshwar
Press in Bombay published numerous religious texts in vernaculars.
In their printed and portable form, these could be read easily by the
faithful at any place and time. They could also be read out to large
groups of illiterate men and women.
Religious texts, therefore, reached a very wide circle of people,
encouraging discussions, debates and controversies within and
among different religions.
Print did not only stimulate the publication of conflicting opinions
amongst communities, but it also connected communities and people
in different parts of India. Newspapers conveyed news from one
place to another, creating pan-Indian identities.
Source D
Why Newspapers?
‘Krishnaji Trimbuck Ranade inhabitant of Poona intends to publish a Newspaper in the Marathi Language with a view of
affording useful information on every topic of local interest. It will be open for free discussion on subjects of general utility,
scientific investigation and the speculations connected with the antiquities, statistics, curiosities, history and geography of
the country and of the Deccan especially… the patronage and support of all interested in the diffusion of knowledge and
Welfare of the People is earnestly solicited.’

Bombay Telegraph and Courier, 6 January 1849
‘The task of the native newspapers and political associations is identical to the role of the Opposition in the House of
Commons in Parliament in England. That is of critically examining government policy to suggest improvements, by removing
those parts that will not be to the benefit of the people, and also by ensuring speedy implementation.

India and the Contemporary World

These associations ought to carefully study the particular issues, gather diverse relevant information on the nation as well
as on what are the possible and desirable improvements, and this will surely earn it considerable influence.’

Native Opinion, 3 April 1870.

Source

122
Reprint 2025-26

8 New Forms of Publication
Printing created an appetite for new kinds of writing. As more and
more people could now read, they wanted to see their own lives,
experiences, emotions and relationships reflected in what they read.
The novel, a literary firm which had developed in Europe, ideally
catered to this need. It soon acquired distinctively Indian forms and
styles. For readers, it opened up new worlds of experience, and
gave a vivid sense of the diversity of human lives.
Other new literary forms also entered the world of reading –
lyrics, short stories, essays about social and political matters. In
different ways, they reinforced the new emphasis on human lives
and intimate feelings, about the political and social rules that shaped
such things.
By the end of the nineteenth century, a new visual
culture was taking shape. With the setting up of an
increasing number of printing presses, visual images
could be easily reproduced in multiple copies. Painters
like Raja Ravi Varma produced images for mass
circulation. Poor wood engravers who made
woodblocks set up shop near the letterpresses, and
were employed by print shops. Cheap prints and
calendars, easily available in the bazaar, could be
bought even by the poor to decorate the walls of
their homes or places of work. These prints began
shaping popular ideas about modernity and tradition,
religion and politics, and society and culture.

Print Culture

By the 1870s, caricatures and cartoons were being
published in journals and newspapers, commenting
on social and political issues. Some caricatures
ridiculed the educated Indians’ fascination with
Western tastes and clothes, while others expressed
the fear of social change. There were imperial
caricatures lampooning nationalists, as well as
nationalist cartoons criticising imperial rule.

Fig. 17 – Raja Ritudhwaj rescuing Princess Madalsa
from the captivity of demons, print by Ravi Varma.
Raja Ravi Varma produced innumerable mythological
paintings that were printed at the Ravi Varma Press.

123
Reprint 2025-26

8.1 Women and Print
Lives and feelings of women began to be written in particularly
vivid and intense ways. Women’s reading, therefore, increased
enormously in middle-class homes. Liberal husbands and fathers
began educating their womenfolk at home, and sent them to schools
when women’s schools were set up in the cities and towns after the
mid-nineteenth century. Many journals began carrying writings by
women, and explained why women should be educated. They also
carried a syllabus and attached suitable reading matter which could
be used for home-based schooling.

India and the Contemporary World

But not all families were liberal. Conservative Hindus believed
that a literate girl would be widowed and Muslims feared that
educated women would be corrupted by reading Urdu romances.
Sometimes, rebel women defied such prohibition. We know the
story of a girl in a conservative Muslim family of north India
who secretly learnt to read and write in Urdu. Her family wanted
her to read only the Arabic Quran which she did not understand.
So she insisted on learning to read a language that was her own. In
East Bengal, in the early nineteenth century, Rashsundari Debi, a
young married girl in a very orthodox household, learnt to read in
the secrecy of her kitchen. Later, she wrote her autobiography
Amar Jiban which was published in 1876. It was the first full-length
autobiography published in the Bengali language.

Fig. 18 – The cover page of Indian Charivari.
The Indian Charivari was one of the many
journals of caricature and satire published in
the late nineteenth century.
Notice that the imperial British figure is
positioned right at the centre. He is
authoritative and imperial; telling the natives
what is to be done. The natives sit on either
side of him, servile and submissive. The
Indians are being shown a copy of Punch, the
British journal of cartoons and satire. You can
almost hear the British master say – ‘This is
the model, produce Indian versions of it.’

Since social reforms and novels had already created a great interest
in women’s lives and emotions, there was also an interest in what
women would have to say about their own lives. From the 1860s,
a few Bengali women like Kailashbashini Debi wrote books
highlighting the experiences of women – about how women were
imprisoned at home, kept in ignorance, forced to do hard domestic
labour and treated unjustly by the very people they served. In the Source E
1880s, in present-day Maharashtra, Tarabai Shinde and Pandita
In 1926, Begum Rokeya Sakhawat Hossein, a
Ramabai wrote with passionate anger about the miserable lives
noted educationist and literary figure, strongly
condemned men for withholding education from
of upper-caste Hindu women, especially widows. A woman in a
women in the name of religion as she addressed
Tamil novel expressed what reading meant to women who were
the Bengal Women’s Education Conference:
so greatly confined by social regulations: ‘For various reasons, my
‘The opponents of female education say that
world is small … More than half my life’s happiness has come
women will become unruly … Fie! They call
from books …’
themselves Muslims and yet go against the basic
While Urdu, Tamil, Bengali and Marathi print culture had developed
early, Hindi printing began seriously only from the 1870s. Soon, a
large segment of it was devoted to the education of women. In
124
Reprint 2025-26

tenet of Islam which gives Women an equal right
to education. If men are not led astray once
educated, why should women?’

Source

the early twentieth century, journals, written for and sometimes
edited by women, became extremely popular. They discussed
issues like women’s education, widowhood, widow remarriage
and the national movement. Some of them offered household
and fashion lessons to women and brought entertainment through
short stories and serialised novels.
In Punjab, too, a similar folk literature was widely printed from
the early twentieth century. Ram Chaddha published the fast-selling
Istri Dharm Vichar to teach women how to be obedient wives.
The Khalsa Tract Society published cheap booklets with a similar
message. Many of these were in the form of dialogues about the
qualities of a good woman.

Fig. 19 – Ghor Kali (The End of the
World), coloured woodcut, late
nineteenth century.
The artist’s vision of the destruction
of proper family relations. Here the
husband is totally dominated by his
wife who is perched on his shoulder.
He is cruel towards his mother,
dragging her like an animal, by the
noose.

Fig. 20 – An Indian
couple, black and white
woodcut.
The image shows the
artist’s fear that the
cultural impact of the
West has turned the
family upside down.
Notice that the man is
playing the veena while
the woman is smoking a
hookah. The move
towards women’s
education in the late
nineteenth century
created anxiety about the
breakdown of traditional
family roles.

125
Reprint 2025-26

Print Culture

In Bengal, an entire area in central Calcutta – the Battala – was
devoted to the printing of popular books. Here you could buy
cheap editions of religious tracts and scriptures, as well as literature
that was considered obscene and scandalous. By the late nineteenth
century, a lot of these books were being profusely illustrated with
woodcuts and coloured lithographs. Pedlars took the Battala
publications to homes, enabling women to read them in their
leisure time.

Fig. 21 – A European couple sitting on chairs,
nineteenth-century woodcut.
The picture suggests traditional family roles. The
Sahib holds a liquor bottle in his hand while the
Memsahib plays the violin.

8.2 Print and the Poor People

India and the Contemporary World

Very cheap small books were brought to markets in nineteenth-century
Madras towns and sold at crossroads, allowing poor people travelling
to markets to buy them. Public libraries were set up from the early
twentieth century, expanding the access to books. These libraries were
located mostly in cities and towns, and at times in prosperous villages.
For rich local patrons, setting up a library was a way of acquiring prestige.
From the late nineteenth century, issues of caste discrimination began to
be written about in many printed tracts and essays. Jyotiba Phule, the
Maratha pioneer of ‘low caste’ protest movements, wrote about the
injustices of the caste system in his Gulamgiri (1871). In the twentieth
century, B.R. Ambedkar in Maharashtra and E.V. Ramaswamy Naicker
in Madras, better known as Periyar, wrote powerfully on caste and
their writings were read by people all over India. Local protest
movements and sects also created a lot of popular journals and tracts
criticising ancient scriptures and envisioning a new and just future.
Workers in factories were too overworked and lacked the education to
write much about their experiences. But Kashibaba, a Kanpur
millworker, wrote and published Chhote Aur Bade Ka Sawal in 1938 to
show the links between caste and class exploitation. The poems of
another Kanpur millworker, who wrote under the name of Sudarshan
Chakr between 1935 and 1955, were brought together and published
in a collection called Sacchi Kavitayan. By the 1930s, Bangalore cotton
millworkers set up libraries to educate themselves, following the example
of Bombay workers. These were sponsored by social reformers who
tried to restrict excessive drinking among them, to bring literacy and,
sometimes, to propagate the message of nationalism.
126
Reprint 2025-26

Activity
Look at Figs. 19, 20 and 21 carefully.
Ø What comment are the artists making on the
social changes taking place in society?
Ø What changes in society were taking place to
provoke this reaction?
Ø Do you agree with the artist’s view?

Fig. 22 – Lakshminath
Bezbaruah (1868–1938)

He was a doyen of modern Assamese literature.
Burhi Aair Sadhu (Grandma’s Tales) is among his
notable works. He penned the popular song of
Assam, ‘O Mor Apunar Desh’ (O’ my beloved land).

9 Print and Censorship

By the 1820s, the Calcutta Supreme Court passed certain regulations
to control press freedom and the Company began encouraging
publication of newspapers that would celebrate Britsh rule. In 1835,
faced with urgent petitions by editors of English and vernacular
newspapers, Governor-General Bentinck agreed to revise press laws.
Thomas Macaulay, a liberal colonial official, formulated new rules
that restored the earlier freedoms.
After the revolt of 1857, the attitude to freedom of the press
changed. Enraged Englishmen demanded a clamp down on the
‘native’ press. As vernacular newspapers became assertively
nationalist, the colonial government began debating measures of
stringent control. In 1878, the Vernacular Press Act was passed,
modelled on the Irish Press Laws. It provided the government
with extensive rights to censor reports and editorials in the vernacular
press. From now on the government kept regular track of the
vernacular newspapers published in different provinces. When a
report was judged as seditious, the newspaper was warned, and if
the warning was ignored, the press was liable to be seized and the
printing machinery confiscated.
Despite repressive measures, nationalist newspapers grew in numbers
in all parts of India. They reported on colonial misrule and
encouraged nationalist activities. Attempts to throttle nationalist
criticism provoked militant protest. This in turn led to a renewed
cycle of persecution and protests. When Punjab revolutionaries were
deported in 1907, Balgangadhar Tilak wrote with great sympathy
about them in his Kesari. This led to his imprisonment in 1908,
provoking in turn widespread protests all over India.

Box 4

Sometimes, the government found it hard to
find candidates for editorship of loyalist papers.
When Sanders, editor of the Statesman that had
been founded in 1877, was approached, he
asked rudely how much he would be paid
for suffering the loss of freedom. The Friend
of India refused a government subsidy, fearing
that this would force it to be obedient to
government commands.

Box 5

The power of the printed word is most often
seen in the way governments seek to regulate
and suppress print. The colonial government kept
continuous track of all books and newspapers
published in India and passed numerous laws to
control the press.
During the First World War, under the Defence
of India Rules, 22 newspapers had to furnish
securities. Of these, 18 shut down rather than
comply with government orders. The Sedition
Committee Report under Rowlatt in 1919 further
strengthened controls that led to imposition of
penalties on various newspapers. At the outbreak
of the Second World War, the Defence of India
Act was passed, allowing censoring of reports of
war-related topics. All reports about the Quit India
movement came under its purview. In August
1942, about 90 newspapers were suppressed.

Source F
Gandhi said in 1922:
‘Liberty of speech ... liberty of the press ...
freedom of association. The Government of India
is now seeking to crush the three powerful
vehicles of expressing and cultivating public
opinion. The fight for Swaraj, for Khilafat ...
means a fight for this threatened freedom
before all else ...’

Source

127
Reprint 2025-26

Print Culture

Before 1798, the colonial state under the East India Company was
not too concerned with censorship. Strangely, its early measures to
control printed matter were directed against Englishmen in India
who were critical of Company misrule and hated the actions of
particular Company officers. The Company was worried that such
criticisms might be used by its critics in England to attack its trade
monopoly in India.

Write in brief
1. Give reasons for the following:

Write in brief

a) Woodblock print only came to Europe after 1295.
b) Martin Luther was in favour of print and spoke out in praise of it.
c) The Roman Catholic Church began keeping an Index of Prohibited books from
the mid-sixteenth century.
d) Gandhi said the fight for Swaraj is a fight for liberty of speech, liberty of the
press, and freedom of association.
2. Write short notes to show what you know about:
a) The Gutenberg Press
b) Erasmus’s idea of the printed book
c) The Vernacular Press Act
3. What did the spread of print culture in nineteenth century India mean to:
a) Women
b) The poor
c) Reformers

1. Why did some people in eighteenth century Europe think that print culture would bring
enlightenment and end despotism?

India and the Contemporary World

2. Why did some people fear the effect of easily available printed books? Choose one example
from Europe and one from India.

Discuss

Discuss

3. What were the effects of the spread of print culture for poor people in nineteenth century India?
4. Explain how print culture assisted the growth of nationalism in India.

Project
Find out more about the changes in print technology in the last 100 years. Write about the
changes, explaining why they have taken place, what their consequences have been.

Project

128
Reprint 2025-26

