##1##
Introduction to Accounting 1

Over the centuries, accounting has remained 
confined to the financial record-keeping 

functions of the accountant. But, today’s rapidly 
changing business environment has forced the 
accountants to reassess their roles and functions 
both within the organisation and the society. The 
role of an accountant has now shifted from that of a 
mere recorder of transactions to that of the member 

Learning Objectives providing relevant information to the decision-
making team. Broadly speaking, accounting today 

	After studying this chapter 
you will be able to: is much more than just book-keeping and the 

	 •	 state the meaning and preparation of financial reports. Accountants are 
need of accounting; now capable of working in exciting new growth 

	 •	 discuss accounting as areas such as: forensic accounting (solving crimes 
a source of information;

such as computer hacking and the theft of large 
	 •	 identify the internal 

and external users of amounts of money on the internet); e-commerce 
accounting information; (designing web-based payment system); financial 

	 •	 explain the objectives planning, environmental accounting, etc. This 
of accounting;

realisation came due to the fact that accounting is 
	 •	 describe the role of 

accounting; capable of providing the kind of information that 
	 •	 explain the basic terms managers and other interested persons need in order 

used in accounting. to make better decisions. This aspect of accounting 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   1 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



2 Accountancy

gradually assumed so much importance that it has now been raised to the 
level of an information system. As an information system, it collects data 
and communicates economic information about the organisation to a wide 
variety of users whose decisions and actions are related to its performance. 
This introductory chapter therefore, deals with the nature, need and scope of 
accounting in this context.

1.1	 Meaning of Accounting
In 1941, The American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA) had 
defined accounting as the art of recording, classifying, and summarising in a 
significant manner and in terms of money, transactions and events which are, 
in part at least, of financial character, and interpreting the results thereof’.
With greater economic development resulting in changing role of accounting, 
its scope, became broader. In 1966, the American Accounting Association (AAA) 
defined accounting as ‘the process of identifying, measuring and communicating 
economic information to permit informed judgments and decisions by users 
of information’.

Fig. 1.1 : Showing the process of accounting

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   2 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



Introduction to Accounting 3	

In 1970, the Accounting Principles Board of AICPA also emphasised that 
the function of accounting is to provide quantitative information, primarily 
financial in nature, about economic entities, that is intended to be useful in 
making economic decisions.

Accounting can therefore be defined as the process of identifying, measuring, 
recording and communicating the required information relating to the economic 
events of an organisation to the interested users of such information. In order 
to appreciate the exact nature of accounting, we must understand the following 
relevant aspects of the definition:
•	 Economic Events
•	 Identification, Measurement, Recording and Communication
•	 Organisation
•	 Interested Users of Information

Box  1
History and Development of Accounting

Accounting enjoys a remarkable heritage. The history of accounting is as old as 
civilisation. The seeds of accounting were most likely first sown in Babylonia and Egypt 
around 4000 B.C. who recorded transactions of payment of wages and taxes on clay 
tablets. Historical evidences reveal that Egyptians used some form of accounting for 
their treasuries where gold and other valuables were kept. The incharge of treasuries 
had to send day wise reports to their superiors known as Wazirs (the prime minister) 
and from there month wise reports were sent to kings. Babylonia, known as the city of 
commerce, used accounting for business to uncover losses taken place due to frauds 
and lack of efficiency. In Greece, accounting was used for apportioning the revenues 
received among treasuries, maintaining total receipts, total payments and balance of 
government financial transactions. Romans used memorandum or daybook where in 
receipts and payments were recorded and wherefrom they were posted to ledgers on 
monthly basis. (700 B.C to 400 A.D). China used sophisticated form of government 
accounting as early as 2000 B.C. Accounting practices in India could be traced back 
to a period when twenty three centuries ago, Kautilya, a minister in Chandragupta’s 
kingdom wrote a book named Arthashasthra, which also described how accounting 
records had to be maintained.

       Luca Pacioli’s, a Franciscan friar (merchant class), book Summa de 
Arithmetica, Geometria, Proportion at Proportionality  (Review of Arithmetic and Geometric 
proportions) in Venice (1494) is considered as the first book on double entry book-
keeping. A portion of this book contains knowledge of business and book-keeping. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   3 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



4 Accountancy

However, Pacioli did not claim that he was the inventor of double entry book-keeping 
but spread the knowledge of it. It shows that he probably relied on then–current book-
keeping manuals as the basis for his masterpiece. In his book, he used the present 
day popular terms of accounting Debit (Dr.) and Credit (Cr.). These were the concepts 
used in Italian terminology. Debit comes from the Italian debito which comes from 
the Latin debita and debeo which means owed to the proprietor. Credit comes from 
the Italian credito which comes from the Latin ‘credo’ which means trust or belief (in 
the proprietor or owed by the proprietor. In explaining double entry system, Pacioli 
wrote that ‘All entries… have to be double entries, that is if you make one creditor, 
you must make some debtor’. He also stated that a merchants responsibility include 
to give glory to God in their enterprises, to be ethical in all business activities and to 
earn a profit. He discussed the details of memorandum, journal, ledger and specialised 
accounting procedures.

1.1.1		 Economic Events
Business organisations involves economic events. An economic event is known 
as a happening of consequence to a business organisation which consists 
of  transactions and which are measurable in monetary terms. For example, 
purchase of machinery, installing and keeping it ready for manufacturing is 
an event which comprises  number of financial transactions such as buying 
a machine, transportation of machine, site preparation for installation of 
a machine, expenditure incurred on its installation and trial runs. Thus, 
accounting identifies bunch of transactions relating to an economic event. If an 
event involves transactions between an outsider and an organisation, these are 
known as external events. The following are the examples of such transactions:
•	 Sale of merchandise to the customers.
•	 Rendering services to the customers by ABC Limited.
•	 Purchase of materials from suppliers.
•	 Payment of monthly rent to the landlord.

An internal event is an economic event that occurs entirely between the 
internal wings of an enterprise, e.g., supply of raw material or components by 
the stores department to the manufacturing department, payment of wages to 
the employees, etc.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   4 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



Introduction to Accounting 5	

1.1.2	 Identification, Measurement, Recording and Communication
Identification : It means determining what transactions to record, i.e., to identity 
events which are to be recorded. It involves observing activities and selecting 
those events that are of considered financial character and relate to the 
organisation. The business transactions and other economic events therefore 
are evaluated for deciding whether it has to be recorded in books of account. 
For example, the value of human resources, changes in managerial policies or 
appointment of personnel are important but none of these are recorded in  books 
of account. However, when a company makes a sale or purchase, whether on 
cash or credit, or pays salary it is recorded in the books of account.
Measurement : It means quantification (including estimates) of business 
transactions into financial terms by using monetary unit, viz. rupees and paise 
as a measuring unit.  If an event cannot be quantified in monetary terms, it 
is not considered for recording in financial accounts.  That is why important 
items like the appointment of a new managing director, signing of contracts or 
changes in personnel are not shown in the books of accounts. 
Recording : Once the economic events are identified and measured in financial 
terms, these are recorded in books of account in monetary terms and in a 
chronological order. Recording is done in a manner that the necessary financial 
information is summarised as per well-established practice and is made 
available as and when required.
Communication :  The economic events are identified, measured and recorded 
in order that the pertinent information is generated and communicated in 
a certain form to management and other internal and external users.  The 
information is regularly communicated through  accounting reports. These 
reports provide information that are useful to a variety of users who have an 
interest in assessing the financial performance and the position of an enterprise, 
planning and controlling business activities and making necessary decisions 
from time to time. The accounting information system should be designed in 
such a way that the right information is communicated to the right person at 
the right time. Reports can be daily, weekly, monthly, or quarterly, depending 
upon the needs of the users.  An important element in the communication 
process is the accountant’s ability and efficiency in presenting the relevant 
information.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   5 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



6 Accountancy

1.1.3	 Organisation
Organisation refers to a business enterprise, whether for profit or not-for-profit 
motive. Depending upon the size of activities and level of business operation, 
it can be a sole-proprietory concern, partnership firm, cooperative society, 
company, local authority, municipal corporation or any other association of 
persons.

1.1.4	 Interested Users of Information
Accounting is a means by which necessary financial information about business 
enterprise is communicated and is also called the language of business. Many 
users need financial information in order to make important decisions. These 
users can be divided into two broad categories: internal users and external 
users.  Internal users include: Chief Executive, Financial Officer, Vice President, 
Business Unit Managers, Plant Managers, Store Managers, Line Supervisors, 
etc. External users include: present and potential Investors (shareholders), 
Creditors (Banks and other Financial Institutions, Debenture-holders and 
other Lenders), Tax Authorities, Regulatory Agencies (Department of Company 
Affairs, Registrar of Companies, Securities Exchange Board of India, Labour 
Unions, Trade Associations, Stock Exchange and Customers, etc. Since the 
primary function of accounting is to provide useful information for decision-
making, it is a means to an end, with the end being the decision that is helped 
by the availability of accounting information. You will study about the types 
of accounting information and its users later in this chapter.

Box  2
Why do the Users Want Accounting Information?

	 •	 The owners/shareholders use them to see if they are getting a satisfactory return 
on their investment, and to assess the financial health of their company/business.

	 •	 The directors/managers use them for making both internal and external 
comparisons in their attempts to evaluate the performance. They may compare the 
financial analysis of their company with the industry figures in order to ascertain 
the company’s strengths and weaknesses. Management is also concerned with 
ensuring that the money invested in the company/organisation is generating an 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   6 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



Introduction to Accounting 7	

adequate return and that the company/organisation is able to pay its debts and 
remain solvent.

	 •	 The creditors (lenders) want to know if they are likely to get paid and look 
particularly at liquidity, which is the ability of the company/organisation to pay 
its debts as they become due.

	 •	 The prospective investors use them to assess whether or not to invest their money 
in the company/organisation.

	 •	 The government and regulatory agencies such as Registrar of companies, Custom 
departments IRDA, RBI, etc. require information for the payment of various taxes 
such as Value Added Tax (VAT), Income Tax (IT), Customs and Excise duties for 
protecting the interests of investors, creditors(lenders), and also to satisfy the legal 
obligations imposed by The Companies Act 2013 and SEBI from time-to-time.

1.2	 Accounting as a Source of Information
As discussed earlier, accounting is a definite processes of interlinked activities, 
(refer figure 1.1) that begins with the identification of transactions and ends 
with the preparation of financial statements. Every step in the process of 
accounting generates information. Generation of information is not an end 
in itself. It is a means to facilitate the dissemination of information among 
different user groups. Such information enables the interested parties to take 
appropriate decisions. Therefore, dissemination of information is an essential 
function of accounting. To be useful, the accounting information should 
ensure to:
	 •	 provide information for making economic decisions;
	 •	 serve the users who rely on financial statements as their principal source 

of information;
	 •	 provide information useful for predicting and evaluating the amount, 

timing and uncertainty of potential cash-flows;
	 •	 provide information for judging management’s ability to utilise resources 

effectively in meeting goals;
	 •	 provide factual and interpretative information by disclosing underlying 

assumptions on matters subject to interpretation, evaluation, prediction, 
or estimation; and

	 •	 provide information on activities affecting the society.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   7 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



8 Accountancy

Test Your Understanding - I
		  Complete the following sentences with appropriate words:

		  (a)	 Information in financial reports is based on ..................... 
		  (b)	 Internal users are the ..................... of the business entity.
		  (c)	 A ..................... would most likely use an entities financial report to determine 

whether or not the business entity is eligible for a loan.
		  (d)	 The Internet has assisted in decreasing the ..................... in issuing financial 

reports to users.
		  (e)	 ..................... users are groups outside the business entity, who uses the 

information to make decisions about the business entity.
		  (f)	 Information is said to be relevent if it is ......................
		  (g)	 The process of accounting starts with ............ and ends with ............
		  (h)	 Accounting  measures the business transactions in terms of ............  units.
		  (i)	 Identified and measured economic events should be recording in ............  order.

The role of an accountant in generating accounting information is to observe, 
screen and recognise events and transactions to measure and process them, 
and thereby compile reports comprising accounting information that are 
communicated to the users.  These are then interpreted, decoded and used by 
management and other user groups. It must be ensured that the information 
provided is relevant, adequate and reliable for decision-making. The apparently 
divergent needs of internal and external users of accounting information have 
resulted in the development of  sub-disciplines within the accounting discipline 
namely, financial accounting, cost accounting and management accounting (refer 
box 3).

Financial accounting assists keeping a systematic record of financial 
transactions the preparation and presentation of financial reports in order 
to arrive at a measure of organisational success and financial soundness.  It 
relates to the past period, serves the stewardship function and is monetary in 
nature. It is primarily concerned with the provision of financial information to 
all stakeholders.

Cost accounting assists in analysing the expenditure for ascertaining the 
cost of various products manufactured or services rendered by the firm and 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   8 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



Introduction to Accounting 9	

fixation of prices thereof. It also helps in controlling the costs and providing 
necessary costing information to management for decision-making.

Management accounting deals with the provision of necessary accounting 
information to people within the organisation to enable them in decision-making, 
planning and controlling business operations. Management accounting draws 
the relevant information mainly from financial accounting and cost accounting 
which helps the management in budgeting, assessing profitability, taking pricing 
decisions, capital expenditure decisions and so on. Besides, it generates other 
information (quantitative and qualitative, financial and non-financial) which 
relates to the future and is relevant for decision-making in the organisation. 
Such information includes: sales forecast, cash flows, purchase requirement, 
manpower needs, environmental data about effects on air, water, land, natural 
resources, flora, fauna, human health, social responsibilities, etc.

As a result, the scope of accounting has become so vast, that new areas 
like human resource accounting, social accounting, responsibility accounting 
have also gained prominance.

Let’s Do It
Many People in today’s society think of an accountant as simply a glorified book-keeper. 
But the role of an accountant is continually changing. Discuss in the classroom what 
really the role of accounting  is?

1.2.1	 Qualitative Characteristics of Accounting Information
Qualitative characteristics are the attributes of accounting information which 
tend to enhance its understandability and usefulness.  In order to assess 
whether accounting information is decision useful, it must possess the 
characteristics of reliability, relevance, understandability and comparability.

Reliability
Reliability means the users must be able to depend on the information. 
The reliability of accounting information is determined by the degree of 
correspondence between what the information conveys about the transactions 
or events that have occurred, measured and displayed.  A reliable information 
should be free from error and bias and faithfully represents what it is meant 
to represent.  To ensure reliability, the information disclosed must be credible, 
verifiable by independent parties use the same method of measuring, and be 
neutral and faithful (refer figure 1.3).

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   9 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



10 Accountancy

Box  3
Branches of Accounting

The economic development and technological advancements have resulted in an 
increase in the scale of operations and the advent of the company form of business 
organisation. This has made the management function more and more complex and 
increased the importance of accounting information. This gave rise to special branches 
of accounting. These are briefly explained below :
Financial accounting : The purpose of this branch of accounting is to keep a record 
of all financial transactions so that:
(a)	 the profit earned or loss sustained by the business during an accounting period  
	 can be worked out,
(b)	 the financial position of the business as at the end of the accounting period  
	 can be ascertained, and
(c)	 the financial information required by the management and other interested  
	 parties can be provided.
Cost Accounting : The purpose of cost accounting is to analyse the expenditure so as 
to ascertain the cost of various products manufactured by the firm and fix the prices. 
It also helps in controlling the costs and providing necessary costing information to 
management for decision-making.
Management Accounting : The purpose of management accounting is to assist the 
management in taking rational policy decisions and to evaluate the impact of its 
decisons and actions.

Relevance
To be relevant, information must be available in time, must help in prediction 
and feedback, and must influence the decisions of users  by :
	 (a)	 helping them form prediction about the outcomes of past, present or 

future events; and/or 
	 (b)	 confirming or correcting their past evaluations.

Understandability
Understandability means decision-makers must interpret accounting 
information in the same sense as it is prepared and conveyed to them.  The 
qualities that distinguish between good and bad communication in a message 
are fundamental to the understandability of the message. A message is said 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   10 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



Introduction to Accounting 11	

Qualitative Characteristics of Accounting Information

Decision Makers
(Users of Accounting Information)

Understandability

Decision Usefulness

	 Relevance			   Reliability

		  Timeliness

Dedicative 	 Feedback		  Verifiability	 Faithfulness
Value	 Value	

			                      Neutrality
					   

Comparability

Fig. 1.3 : The qualitative characteristics of accounting information

to be effectively communicated when it is interpreted by the receiver of the 
message in the same sense in which the sender has sent. Accountants should 
present the comparable information in the most intenlligible manner without 
sacrificing relevance and reliability.

Comparability
It is not sufficient that the financial information is relevant and reliable at a 
particular time, in a particular circumstance or for a particular reporting entity. 
But it is equally important that the users of the general purpose financial reports 
are able to compare various aspects of an entity over different time period and 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   11 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



12 Accountancy

with other entities. To be comparable, accounting reports must belong to a 
common period and use common unit of measurement and format of reporting.

Test Your Understanding - II

You are a senior accountant of Ramona Enterprises Limited. What three steps would 
you take to make your company’s financial statements understandable and decision 
useful?
	 1.	 ——————————————————————————————
	 2.	 ——————————————————————————————
	 3.	 ——————————————————————————————

		  [Hint : Refer to qualitative characteristics of accounting information]

1.3	 Objectives of Accounting
As an information system, the basic objective of accounting is to provide useful 
information to the interested group of users, both external and internal. The 
necessary information, particularly in case of external users, is provided in 
the form of financial statements, viz., profit and loss account and balance 
sheet. Besides these, the management is provided with additional information 
from time to time from the accounting records of business. Thus, the primary 
objectives of accounting include the following:

1.3.1	 Maintenance of Records of Business Transactions
Accounting  is used for the maintenance of a systematic record of all financial 
transactions in book of accounts. Even the most brilliant executive or manager 
cannot accurately remember the numerous amount of varied transactions 
such as purchases, sales, receipts, payments, etc. that takes place in business 
everyday. Hence, a proper and complete records of all business transactions 
are kept regularly. Moreover, the recorded information enables verifiability and 
acts as an evidence.

1.3.2	 Calculation of Profit and Loss
The owners of business are keen to have an idea about the net results of their 
business operations periodically, i.e. whether the business has earned profits or 
incurred losses. Thus, another objective of accounting is to ascertain the profit 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   12 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



Introduction to Accounting 13	

earned or loss sustained by a business during an accounting period which can 
be easily workout with help of record of incomes and expenses relating to the 
business by preparing a profit or loss account for the period. Profit represents 
excess of revenue (income), over expenses. If the total revenue of a given period 
is ` 6,00,000 and total expenses are ` 5,40,000 the profit will be equal to 
` 60,000(` 6,00,000 – ` 5,40,000). If however, the total expenses exceed the 
total revenue, the difference reflects the loss.

1.3.3	 Depiction of Financial Position
Accounting also aims at ascertaining the financial position of the business 
concern in the form of its assets and liabilities at the end of every accounting 
period. A proper record of resources owned by business organisation (Assets) 
and claims against such resources (Liabilities) facilitates the preparation of a 
statement known as balance sheet position statement.
1.3.4	 Providing Accounting Information to its Users
The accounting information generated by the accounting process is 
communicated in the form of reports, statements, graphs and charts to the 
users who need it in different decision situations. As already stated, there are 
two main user groups, viz. internal users, mainly management, who needs 
timely information on cost of sales, profitability, etc. for planning, controlling 
and decision-making and external users who have limited authority, ability and 
resources to obtain the necessary information and have to rely on financial 
statements (Balance Sheet, Profit and Loss account). Primarily, the external 
users are interested in the following:
•	 Investors and potential investors-information on the risks and return on 

investment;
•	 Unions and employee groups-information on the stability, profitability and 

distribution of wealth within the business;
•	 Lenders and financial institutions-information on the creditworthiness of 

the company and its ability to repay loans and pay interest;
•	 Suppliers and creditors-information on whether amounts owed will be 

repaid when due, and on the continued existence of the business;
•	 Customers-information on the continued existence of the business and 

thus the probability of a continued supply of products, parts and after 
sales service;

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   13 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



14 Accountancy

•	 Government and other regulators- information on the allocation of 
resources and the compliance to regulations;

•	 Social responsibility groups, such as environmental groups-information 
on the impact on environment and its protection;

•	 Competitors-information on the relative strengths and weaknesses of their 
competition and for comparative and benchmarking purposes. Whereas the 
above categories of users share in the wealth of the company, competitors 
require the information mainly for strategic purposes.

Test Your Understanding - III
Which stakeholder group…	 would be most interested in
_____________________________	 (a)	 the VAT and other tax liabilities of the firm
_____________________________	 (b)	 the potential for pay awards and bouns deals
_____________________________	 (c)	 the ethical or environmental activities of the firm
_____________________________	 (d)	 whether the firm has a long-term future
_____________________________	 (e)	 profitability and share performance
_____________________________	 (f)	 the ability of the firm to carry on providing a 

service or producing a product.

1.4	 Role of Accounting
For centuries, the role of accounting has been changing with the changes 
in economic development and increasing societal demands. It describes and 
analyses a mass of data of an enterprise through measurement, classification 
and summarisation, and reduces those date into reports and statements, 
which show the financial condition and results of operations of that enterprise. 
Hence, it is regarded as a language of business. It also performs the service 
activity by providing quantitative financial information that helps the users in 
various ways. Accounting as an information system collects and communicates 
economic information about an enterprise to a wide variety of interested 
parties. However, accounting information relates to the past transactions and 
is quantitative and financial in nature, it does not provide qualitative and non-
financial information. These limitations of accounting must be kept in view 
while making use of the accounting information.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   14 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



Introduction to Accounting 15	

Test Your Understanding - IV

Tick the Correct Answer
1.	 Which of the following is not a business transaction?
	 a.	Bought furniture of `10,000 for business
	 b.	Paid for salaries of employees ` 5,000
	 c.	 Paid sons fees from her personal bank account ` 20,000
	 d.  Paid sons fees from the business ` 2,000
2.	 Deepti wants to buy a building for her business today. Which of the following is the 

relevant data for his decision?
	 a.	 Similar business acquired the required building in 2000 for ` 10,00,000
	 b.	Building cost details of 2003
	 c.	 Building cost details of 1998
	 d.	Similar building cost in August, 2005 ` 25,00,000
3.	 Which is the last step of accounting as a process of information?
	 a.	Recording of data in the books of accounts
	 b. Preparation of summaries in the form of financial statements
	 c.	 Communication of information
	 d.	Analysis and interpretation of information
4.	 Which qualitative characteristics of accounting information is reflected when 

accounting information is clearly presented?
	 a.	Understandability 
	 b.	Relevance
	 c.	 Comparability
	 d.	Reliability
5.	 Use of common unit of measurement and common format of reporting promotes;
	 a.	Comparability
	 b.	Understandability 
	 c.	 Relevance
	 d.	Reliability

Box  4
Different Roles of Accounting

	 As a language – it is perceived as the language of business which is used to 
communicate information  on enterprises;

	 As a historical record- it is viewed as chronological record of financial transactions 
of an organisation at actual amounts involved;

	 As current economic reality- it is viewed as the means of determining the true income 
of an entity namely the change of wealth over time;

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   15 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



16 Accountancy

	 As an information system – it is viewed as a process that links an information source 
(the accountant) to a set of receivers (external users) by means of a channel of 
communication;

	 As a commodity- specialised information is viewed as a service which is in demand 
in society, with accountants being willing to and capable of providing it.

1.5	 Basic Terms in Accounting
1.5.1		 Entity
Entity means a reality that has a definite individual existence. Business entity 
means a specifically identifiable business enterprise like Super Bazaar, Hire 
Jewellers, ITC Limited, etc. An accounting system is always devised for a specific 
business entity (also called accounting entity).

1.5.2	 Transaction
An event involving some value between two or more entities. It can be a purchase 
of goods, receipt of money, payment to a creditor, incurring expenses, etc. It 
can be a cash transaction or a credit transaction.

1.5.3		 Assets
Assets are economic resources of an enterprise that can be usefully expressed 
in monetary terms. Assets are items of value used by the business in its 
operations. For example, Super Bazar owns a fleet of trucks, which is used 
by it for delivering foodstuffs; the trucks, thus, provide economic benefit to 
the enterprise. This item will be shown on the asset side of the balance sheet 
of Super Bazaar. Assets can be broadly classified into two types: current and 
Non-current (Figure 1.4).

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   16 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM



Introduction to Accounting 17	

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   17 9/29/2022   2:18:54 PM

Figure 1.4 :  Classification of Assets



18 Accountancy

1.5.4 Liabilities
Liabilities are obligations or debts that an enterprise has to pay at some time 
in the future. They represent creditors’ claims on the firm’s assets. Both small 
and big businesses find it necessary to borrow money at one time or the other, 
and to purchase goods on credit. Super Bazar, for example, purchases goods for 
` 10,000 on credit for a month from Fast Food Products on March 25, 2005. 
If the balance sheet of Super Bazaar is prepared as at March 31, 2005, Fast 
Food Products will be shown as creditors on the liabilities side of the balance 
sheet. If Super Bazaar takes a loan for a period of three years from Delhi State 
Co-operative Bank, this will also be shown as a liability in the balance sheet of 
Super Bazaar. Liabilities are classified as current and non-current (Figure 1.5).

Liabilities

Non-Current Current
Liabilities Liabilities

Long Term Deferred Tax Other Long Long Terms Short Term Trade
Term Other Current Short Term

Liabilities
Borrowings Provisions Borrowings Payables Provisions

(Net) Liabilities Liabilities

Figure 1.5 : Classification of Liabilities

Box 5
  Distinction between current and non-current items: 

	 1.	 Current assets or liabilities are involved in operating  cycle. 
	 2.	 Current assets or liabilities are realised/settled within 12 months. 
	 3.	 Current items are primarily for trading. 
	 4.	 Current items are cash or cash equivalent. 

1.5.5	 Capital
Amount invested by the owner in the firm is known as capital. It may be brought 
in the form of cash or assets by the owner for the business entity capital is 
an obligation and a claim on the assets of business. It is, therefore, shown as 
capital on the liabilities side of the balance sheet.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   18 9/29/2022   2:18:55 PM



Introduction to Accounting 19	

1.5.6	 Sales
Sales are total revenues from goods or services sold or provided to customers. 
Sales may be cash sales or credit sales.

1.5.7	 Revenues
These are the amounts of the business earned by selling its products or 
providing services to customers, called sales revenue. Other items of revenue 
common to many businesses are: commission, interest, dividends, royalities, 
rent received, etc. Revenue is also called income.

1.5.8		 Expenses
Costs incurred by a business in the process of earning revenue are known as 
expenses. Generally, expenses are measured by the cost of assets consumed 
or services used during an accounting period. The usual items of expenses are: 
depreciation, rent, wages, salaries, interest, cost of heater, light and water, 
telephone, etc.

1.5.9	 Expenditure
Spending money or incurring a liability for some benefit, service or property 
received is called expenditure. Purchase of goods, purchase of machinery, 
purchase of furniture, etc. are examples of expenditure. If the benefit of 
expenditure is exhausted within a year, it is treated as an expense (also called 
revenue expenditure). On the other hand, the benefit of an expenditure lasts 
for more than a year, it is treated as an asset (also called capital expenditure) 
such as purchase of machinery, furniture, etc.

1.5.10	 Profit
The excess of revenues of a period over its related expenses during an accounting 
year is profit. Profit increases the investment of the owners.

1.5.11	 Gain
A profit that arises from events or transactions which are incidental to business 
such as sale of fixed assets, winning a court case, appreciation in the value of 
an asset.

1.5.12 Loss
The excess of expenses of a period over its related revenues its termed as loss. 
It decreases in owner’s equity. It also refers to money or money’s worth lost 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   19 9/29/2022   2:18:55 PM



20 Accountancy

(or cost incurred) without receiving any benefit in return, e.g., cash or goods 
lost by theft or a fire accident, etc. It also includes loss on sale of fixed assets.

1.5.13	 Discount
Discount is the deduction in the price of the goods sold. It is offered in two 
ways. Offering deduction of agreed percentage of list price at the time selling 
goods is one way of giving discount. Such discount is called ‘trade discount’. 
It is generally offered by manufactures to wholesellers and by wholesellers 
to retailers. After selling the goods on credit basis the debtors may be given 
certain deduction in amount due in case if they pay the amount within the 
stipulated period or earlier. This deduction is given at the time of payment on 
the amount payable. Hence, it is called as cash discount. Cash discount acts 
as an incentive that encourages prompt payment by the debtors.

1.5.14	 Voucher
The documentary evidence in support of a transaction is known as voucher. 
For example, if we buy goods for cash, we get cash memo, if we buy on credit, 
we get an invoice; when we make a payment we get a receipt and so on.

1.5.15	 Goods
It refers to the products in which the business unit is dealing, i.e. in terms of 
which it is buying and selling or producting and selling. The items that are 
purchased for use in the business are not called goods. For example, for a 
furniture dealer purchase of chairs and tables is termed as goods, while for 
other it is furniture and is treated as an asset. Similarly, for a stationery merchant, 
stationery is goods, whereas for others it is an item of expense (not purchases)

1.5.16	 Drawings
Withdrawal of money and/or goods by the owner from the business for personal 
use is known as drawings. Drawings reduces the investment of the owners.

1.5.17	 Purchases
Purchases are total  amount of goods procured by a business on credit and on 
cash, for use or sale. In a trading concern, purchases are made of merchandise 
for resale with or without processing. In a manufacturing concern, raw materials 
are purchased, processed further into finished goods and then sold. Purchases 
may be cash purchases or credit purchases.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   20 9/29/2022   2:18:55 PM



Introduction to Accounting 21	

1.5.18	 Stock
Stock (inventory) is a measure of something on hand-goods, spares and other 
items in a business. It is called Stock in hand. In a trading concern, the stock 
on hand is the amount of goods which are lying unsold as at the end of an 
accounting period is called closing stock (ending inventory). In a manufacturing 
company, closing stock comprises raw materials, semi-finished goods and 
finished goods on hand on the closing date. Similarly, opening stock (beginning 
inventory) is the amount of stock at the beginning of the accounting period.

1.5.19	 Debtors
Debtors are persons and/or other entities who owe to an enterprise an amount 
for buying goods and services on credit. The total amount standing against such 
persons and/or entities on the closing date, is shown in the balance sheet as 
sundry debtors on the asset side.

1.5.20 Creditors
Creditors are persons and/or other entities who have to be paid by an enterprise 
an amount for providing the enterprise goods and services on credit. The total 
amount standing to the favour of such persons and/or entities on the closing 
date, is shown in the Balance Sheet as sundry creditors on  the liabilities side.

Test Your Understanding - V

Mr. Sunrise started a business for buying and selling of stationery with ` 5,00,000 as 
an initial investment. Of which he paid `1,00,000 for furniture, ` 2,00,000 for buying 
stationery items. He employed a sales person and clerk. At the end of the month he 
paid ̀  5,000 as their salaries. Out of the stationery bought he sold some stationery for 
`1,50,000 for cash and some other stationery for ̀ 1,00,000 on credit basis to Mr.Ravi. 
Subsequently, he bought stationery items of `1,50,000 from Mr. Peace. In the first 
week of next month there was a fire accident and he lost ` 30,000 worth of stationery. 
A part of the machinery, which cost ` 40,000, was sold for ` 45,000.
From the above, answer the following :
	 1.	 What is the amount of capital with which Mr. Sunrise started business.
	 2.	 What are the fixed assets he bought?
	 3.	 What is the value of the goods purchased?
	 4.	 Who is the creditor and state the amount payable to him?
	 5.	 What are the expenses?
	 6.	 What is the gain he earned?

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   21 9/29/2022   2:18:55 PM



22 Accountancy

	 7.	 What is the loss he incurred?
	 8.	 Who is the debtor? What is the amount receivable from him?
	 9.	 What is the total amount of expenses and losses incurred?
	10.	 Determine if the following are assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses or none of the 

these: sales, debtors, creditors, salary to manager, discount to debtors, drawings 
by the owner.

Summary with Reference to Learning Objectives

1.	 Meaning of Accounting : Accounting is a process of identifying, measuring, recording 
the business transactions and communicating thereof the required information to the 
interested users.

2.	 Accounting as a source of  information : Accounting as a source of information system 
is the process of identifying, measuring, recording and communicating the economic 
events of an organisation to interested users of the information.

3.	 Users of accounting information : Accounting plays a significant role in society by 
providing information to management at all levels and to those having a direct financial 
interest in the enterprise, such as present and potential investors and creditors. 
Accounting information is also important to those having indirect financial interest, such 
as regulatory agencies, tax authorities, customers, labour unions, trade associations, 
stock exchanges and others.

4.	 Qualitative characteristics of Accounting : To make accounting information decision 
useful, it should possess the following qualitative characteristics.

	 •	 Reliability	 •	 Understandability
	 •	 Relevance	 •	 Comparability
5.	 Objective of accounting : The primary objectives of accounting are to :
	 •	 maintain records of business;
	 •	 calculate profit or loss;
	 •	 depict the financial position; and
	 •	 make information available to various groups and users.
6.	 Role of accounting : Accounting is not an end in itself. It is a means to an end. It plays 

the role of a :
	 •	 Language of a business
	 •	 Historical record
	 •	 Current economic reality
	 •	 Information system
	 •	 Service to users

Questions for Practice
Short Answers
	 1.	 Define accounting.
	 2.	 State the end product of financial accounting.
	 3.	 Enumerate main objectives of accounting.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   22 9/29/2022   2:18:55 PM



Introduction to Accounting 23	

	 4.	 Who are the users of accounting information.
	 5.	 State the nature of accounting information required by long-term lenders.
	 6.	 Who are the external users of information?
	 7.	 Enumerate information needs of management.
	 8.	 Give any three examples of revenues.
	 9.	 Distinguish between debtors and creditors; profit and gain
	10.	 ‘Accounting information should be comparable’. Do you agree with this statement. 

Give two reasons.
	11.	 If the accounting information is not clearly presented, which of the qualitative 

characteristic of the accounting information is violated? 
	12.	 “The role of accounting has changed over the period of time”- Do you agree? Explain. 
	13.	 Giving examples, explain each of the following accounting terms :
		  •	 Fixed assets			   •	 Revenue  	 •	 Expenses	
		  •	 Short-term liability	 •	 Capital
	14.	 Define revenues and expenses?
	15.	 What is the primiary reason for the business students and others to familiarise 

themselves with the accounting discipline?
Long Answers
	 1.	 What is accounting? Define its objectives.
	 2.	 Explain the factors which necessitated systematic accounting.
	 3.	 Describe the informational needs of external users.
	 4.	 What do you mean by an asset and what are different types of assets?
	 5.	 Explain the meaning of gain and profit. Distinguish between these two terms.
	 6.	 Explain the qualitative characteristics of accounting information.
	 7.	 Describe the role of accounting in the modern world.

	 Checklist to Test Your Understanding
Test Your Understanding – I
(a)	 Economic Transactions	 (b) Management/Employees (c) Creditor	
(d)	 Time-gap		   (e) External		        (f) Free from bias
(g)	 Identifying the transactions and communicating information
(h)	 Monetary	 (i)	 Chronological
Test Your Understanding - II
1.	 Reliability, i.e. Verifiability, Faithfulness, Nutrality
2.	 Relevance, i.e. Timeliness
3.	 Understandability and Comparibility
Test Your Understanding - III
(a)	 Government and other regulators
(b)	 Management
(c)	 Social responsibility groups
(d)	 Lenders

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   23 9/29/2022   2:18:55 PM



24 Accountancy

(e)	 Suppliers and Creditors
(f)	 Customers
Test Your Understanding - IV
1. (c)	 2. (a)	 3. (c)	 4. (a)	 5. (a)
Test Your Understanding - V
	 1.	 ` 5,00,000	 2.	 ` 1,00,000,	 3.	 ` 2,00,000
	 4.	 Mr. Reace, ` 1,50,000	 5.	 ` 5,000	 6.	 ` 5,000
	 7.	 ` 30,000	 8.	 Mr. Ravi, ` 1,00,000	 9.	 ` 35,000
	10.	 Assets : debtors; Liabilities : creditors; drawings; Revenues : sales expenses, 

	 discount, salary.

  Activity 1 : Tick () the appropriate one:
      Items 	                  Curren          Non-Current         Current        Non-Current
	   Assets	           Assets 	         Liabilities         Liabilities 

Machinery				  
Sundry Creditors				  
Cash at Bank				  
Goodwill				  
Bills Payable				  
Land & Building				  
Furniture				  
Computer Software				  
Motor Vehicles				  
Inventory				  
Investments				  
Loan from Bank				  
Sundry Debtors				  
Patents				  
Air-Conditioners				  
Loose tools	 			 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch01.indd   24 9/29/2022   2:18:55 PM



##2##
Theory Base of Accounting 25	

Theory Base of Accounting 2

As discussed in the previous chapter, accounting 
is concerned with the recording, classifying 

and summarising of financial transactions and 
events and interpreting the results thereof. It 
aims at providing information about the financial 
performance of a firm to its various users such as 
owners, managers employees, investors, creditors, 
suppliers of goods and services and tax authorities 
and help them in taking important decisions. The 

Learning Objectives investors, for example, may be interested in knowing 
After studying this chapter, the extent of profit or loss earned by the firm during 
you will be able to:  a given period and compare it with the performance 
•	 identify the need for of other similar enterprises. The suppliers of credit, 

theory base of acco- say a banker, may, in addition, be interested in 
unting; liquidity position of the enterprise. All these people 

•	 explain the nature of look forward to accounting for appropriate, useful 
Generally Accepted and reliable information.
Accounting Principles For making the accounting information 
(GAAP); meaningful to its internal and external users, it is 

•	 state the meaning and important that such information is reliable as well 
purpose of the basic as comparable. The comparability of information 
accounting concepts; is required both to make inter-firm comparisons, 

•	 l is t  the accounting i.e. to see how a firm has performed as compared 
standards issued by 
Institute of Chartered to the other firms, as well as to make inter-period 
Accountants of India; comparison, i.e. how it has performed as compared 

•	 describe the systems of to the previous years. This becomes possible 
accounting; and only if the information provided by the financial 

•	 describe the basis of statements is based on consistent accounting 
accounting. policies, principles and practices. Such consistency 

is required throughout the process of identifying the 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   25 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



26 Accountancy

events and transactions to be accounted for, measuring them, communicating 
them in the book of accounts, summarising the results thereof and reporting 
them to the interested parties. This calls for developing a proper theory base 
of accounting.

The importance of accounting theory  need not be over-emphasised as no 
discipline can develop without a sound theoretical base. The theory base of 
accounting consists of principles, concepts, rules and guidelines developed over 
a period of time to bring uniformity and consistency to the process of accounting 
and enhance its utility to different users of accounting information. Apart from 
these, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, (ICAI), which is the 
regulatory body for standardisation of accounting policies in the country has 
issued Accounting Standards which are expected to be uniformly adhered to, 
in order to bring consistency in the accounting practices. These are discussed 
in the sections to follow.

2.1	 Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
In order to maintain uniformity and consistency in accounting records, certain 
rules or principles have been developed which are generally accepted by the 
accounting profession. These rules are called by different names such as 
principles, concepts, conventions, postulates, assumptions and modifying 
principles.

The term ‘principle’ has been defined by AICPA as ‘A general law or rule 
adopted or professed as a guide to action, a settled ground or basis of conduct 
or practice’. The word ‘generally’ means ‘in a general manner’, i.e., pertaining 
to many persons or cases or occasions. Thus, Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (GAAP) refers to the rules or guidelines adopted for recording 
and reporting of business transactions, in order to bring uniformity in the 
preparation and the presentation of financial statements. For example, one of 
the important rule is to record all transactions on the basis of historical cost, 
which is verifiable from the documents such as cash receipt for the money paid. 
This brings in objectivity in the process of recording and makes the accounting 
statements more acceptable to various users.

The Generally Accepted Accounting Principles have evolved over a long 
period of time on the basis of past experiences, usages or customs, statements 
by individuals and professional bodies and regulations by government agencies 
and have general acceptability among most accounting professionals. However, 
the principles of accounting are not static in nature. These are constantly 
influenced by changes in the legal, social and economic environment as well 
as the needs of the users.

These principles are also referred as concepts and conventions. The term 
concept refers to the necessary assumptions and ideas which are fundamental 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   26 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



Theory Base of Accounting 27	

to accounting practice, and the term convention connotes customs or traditions 
as a guide to the preparation of accounting statements. In practice, the same 
rules or guidelines have been described by one author as a concept, by another 
as a postulate and still by another as convention. This at times becomes 
confusing to the learners. Instead of going into the semantics of these terms, 
it is important to concentrate on the practicability of their usage. From the 
practicability view point, it is observed that the various terms such as principles, 
postulates, conventions, modifying principles, assumptions, etc. have been 
used inter-changeably and are referred to as Basic Accounting Concepts in the 
present chapter. 

2.2	 Basic Accounting Concepts
The basic accounting concepts are referred to as the fundamental ideas or 
basic assumptions underlying the theory and practice of financial accounting 
and are broad working rules for all accounting activities and developed by the 
accounting profession. The important concepts have been listed as below:

	 •	 Business entity; 	 •	 Matching;
	 •	 Money measurement; 	 •	 Full disclosure;
	 •	 Going concern; 	 •	 Consistency;
	 •	 Accounting period; 	 •	 Conservatism (Prudence);
	 •	 Cost 	 •	 Materiality;
	 •	 Dual aspect (or Duality); 	 •	 Objectivity.
	 •	 Revenue recognition (Realisation);

2.2.1		 Business Entity Concept
The concept of business entity assumes that business has a distinct and 
separate entity from its owners. It means that for the purposes of accounting, 
the business and its owners are to be treated as two separate entities. Keeping 
this in view, when a person brings in some money as capital into his business, 
in accounting records, it is treated as liability of the business to the owner. Here, 
one separate entity (owner) is assumed to be giving money to another distinct 
entity (business unit). Similarly, when the owner withdraws any money from the 
business for his personal expenses(drawings), it is treated as reduction of the 
owner’s capital and consequently a reduction in the liabilities of the business. 
The accounting records are made in the book of accounts from the point of view 
of the business unit and not that of the owner. The personal assets and liabilities 
of the owner are, therefore, not considered while recording and reporting the 
assets and liabilities of the business. Similarly, personal transactions of the 
owner are not recorded in the books of the business, unless it involves inflow 
or outflow of business funds.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   27 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



28 Accountancy

2.2.2		 Money Measurement Concept
The concept of money measurement states that only those transactions and 
happenings in an organisation which can be expressed in terms of money 
such as sale of goods or payment of expenses or receipt of income, etc., are 
to be recorded in the book of accounts. All such transactions or happenings 
which can not be expressed in monetary terms, for example, the appointment 
of a manager, capabilities of its human resources or creativity of its research 
department or image of the organisation among people in general do not find 
a place in the accounting records of a firm.

Another important aspect of the concept of money measurement is that the 
records of the transactions are to be kept not in the physical units but in the 
monetary unit. For example, an organisation may, on a particular day, have 
a factory on a piece of land measuring 2 acres, office building containing 10 
rooms, 30 personal computers, 30 office chairs and tables, a bank balance of 
`5 lakh, raw material weighing 20-tons, and 100 cartons of finished goods. 
These assets are expressed in different units, so can not be added to give any 
meaningful information about the total worth of business. For accounting 
purposes, therefore, these are shown in money terms and recorded in rupees 
and paise. In this case, the cost of factory land may be say ` 2 crore; office 
building ` 1 crore; computers `15 lakh; office chairs and tables ` 2 lakh; raw 
material ` 33 lakh and finished goods ` 4 lakh. Thus, the total assets of the 
enterprise are valued at ` 3 crore and 59 lakh. Similarly, all transactions are 
recorded in rupees and paise as and when they take place.

The money measurement assumption is not free from limitations. Due to the 
changes in prices, the value of money does not remain the same over a period 
of time. The value of rupee today on account of rise in prices is much less than 
what it was, say ten years back. Therefore, in the balance sheet, when we add 
different assets bought at different points of time, say building purchased in 
1995 for ` 2 crore, and plant purchased in 2005 for ` 1 crore, we are in fact 
adding heterogeneous values, which can not be clubbed together. As the change 
in the value of money is not reflected in the book of accounts, the accounting 
data does not reflect the true and fair view of the affairs of an enterprise.

2.2.3		 Going Concern Concept
The concept of going concern assumes that a business firm would continue to 
carry out its operations indefinitely, i.e. for a fairly long period of time and would 
not be liquidated in the foreseeable future. This is an important assumption 
of accounting as it provides the very basis for showing the value of assets in 
the balance sheet. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   28 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



Theory Base of Accounting 29	

An asset may be defined as a bundle of services. When we purchase an asset, 
for example, a personal computer, for a sum of ` 50,000, what we are buying 
really is the services of the computer that we shall be getting over its estimated 
life span, say 5 years. It will not be fair to charge the whole amount of ̀  50,000, 
from the revenue of the year in which the asset is purchased. Instead, that 
part of the asset which has been consumed or used during a period should be 
charged from the revenue of that period. The assumption regarding continuity 
of business allows us to charge from the revenues of a period only that part of 
the asset which has been consumed or used to earn that revenue in that period 
and carry forward the remaining amount to the next years, over the estimated 
life of the asset. Thus, we may charge ` 10,000 every year for 5 years from the 
profit and loss account. In case the continuity assumption is not there, the 
whole cost (` 50,000 in the present example) will need to be charged from the 
revenue of the year in which the asset was purchased. 
2.2.4		 Accounting Period Concept
Accounting period refers to the span of time at the end of which the financial 
statements of an enterprise are prepared, to know whether it has earned profits 
or incurred losses during that period and what exactly is the position of its assets 
and liabilities at the end of that period. Such information is required by different 
users at regular interval for various purposes, as no firm can wait for long to know 
its financial results as various decisions are to be taken at regular intervals on 
the basis of such information. The financial statements are, therefore, prepared 
at regular interval, normally after a period of one year, so that timely information 
is made available to the users. This interval of time is called accounting period. 

The Companies Act 2013 and the Income Tax Act require that the income 
statements should be prepared annually. However, in case of certain situations, 
preparation of interim financial statements become necessary. For example, at 
the time of retirement of a partner, the accounting period can be different from 
twelve months period. Apart from these companies whose shares are listed on 
the stock exchange, are required to publish quarterly results to ascertain the 
profitability and financial position at the end of every three months period.

Test Your Understanding - I

Choose the Correct Answer
1.	During the life-time of an entity accounting produce financial statements in 

accordance with which basic accounting concept:
	 (a)	 Conservation
	 (b)	 Matching
	 (c)	 Accounting period
	 (d)	 None of the above

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   29 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



30 Accountancy

2.	When information about two different enterprises have been prepared presented in 
a similar manner the information exhibits the characteristic of:

	 (a)	 Verifiability
	 (b)	 Relevance
	 (c)	 Reliability
	 (d)	 None of the above
3.	A concept that a business enterprise will not be sold or liquidated in the near future 

is known as :
	 (a)	 Going concern
	 (b)	 Economic entity
	 (c)	 Monetary unit
	 (d)	 None of the above
4.	The primary qualities that make accounting information useful for decision-making 

are :
	 (a)	 Relevance and freedom from bias
	 (b)	 Reliability and comparability
	 (c)	 Comparability and consistency
	 (d)	 None of the above

2.2.5		 Cost Concept
The cost concept requires that all assets are recorded in the book of accounts 
at their purchase price, which includes cost of acquisition, transportation, 
installation and making the asset ready to use. To illustrate, on June 2005, 
an old plant was purchased for ` 50 lakh by Shiva Enterprise,  which 
is into the business of manufacturing detergent powder. An amount of 
` 10,000 was spent on transporting the plant to the factory site. In addition, 
`  15,000 was spent on repairs for bringing the plant into running position 
and `  25,000 on its installation. The total amount at which the plant will 
be recorded in the books of account would be the sum of all these, i.e. 
` 50,50,000.

The concept of cost is historical in nature as it is something, which has 
been paid on the date of acquisition and does not change year after year. 
For example, if a building has been purchased by a firm for ` 2.5 crore, the 
purchase price will remain the same for all years to come, though its market 
value may change. Adoption of historical cost brings in objectivity in recording 
as the cost of acquisition is easily verifiable from the purchase documents. The 
market value basis, on the other hand, is not reliable as the value of an asset 
may change from time to time, making the comparisons between one period 
to another rather difficult. 

However, an important limitation of the historical cost basis is that it does 
not show the true worth of the business and may lead to hidden profits. During 
the period of rising prices, the market value or the cost at (which the assets can 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   30 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



Theory Base of Accounting 31	

be replaced are higher than the value at which these are shown in the book of 
accounts) leading to hidden profits.

2.2.6 	Dual Aspect Concept
Dual aspect is the foundation or basic principle of accounting. It provides the 
very basis for recording business transactions into the book of accounts. This 
concept states that every transaction has a dual or two-fold effect and should 
therefore be recorded at two places. In other words, at least two accounts will 
be involved in recording a transaction. This can be explained with the help of 
an example. Ram started business by investing in a sum of ` 50,00,000. The 
amount of money brought in by Ram will result in an increase in the assets 
(cash) of business by ̀  50,00,000. At the same time, the owner’s equity or capital 
will also increase by an equal amount. It may be seen that the two items that 
got affected by this transaction are cash and capital account. 

Let us take another example to understand this point further. Suppose the 
firm purchase goods worth ` 10,00,000 on cash. This will increase an asset 
(stock of goods) on the one hand and reduce another asset (cash) on the other. 
Similarly, if the firm purchases a machine worth ` 30,00,000 on credit from 
Reliable Industries. This will increase an asset (machinery) on the one hand 
and a liability (creditor) on the other. This type of dual effect takes place in case 
of all business transactions and is also known as duality principle.

The duality principle is commonly expressed in terms of fundamental 
Accounting Equation, which is as follows :

Assets = Liabilities + Capital

In other words, the equation states that the assets of a business are 
always equal to the claims of owners and the outsiders. The claims also called 
equity of owners is termed as Capital(owners’ equity) and that of outsiders, as 
Liabilities(creditors equity). The two-fold effect of each transaction affects in 
such a manner that the equality of both sides of equation is maintained.

The two-fold effect in respect of all transactions must be duly recorded 
in the book of accounts of the business. In fact, this concept forms the core 
of Double Entry System of accounting, which has been dealt in detail, in 
chapter 3.
2.2.7		 Revenue Recognition (Realisation) Concept
The concept of revenue recognition requires that the revenue for a business 
transaction should be included in the accounting records only when it is 
realised. Here arises two questions in mind. First, is termed as revenue and 
the other, when the revenue is realised. Let us take the first one first.  Revenue 
is the gross inflow of cash arising from (i) the sale of goods and services by an 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   31 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



32 Accountancy

enterprise; and (ii) use by others of the enterprise’s resources yielding interest, 
royalties and dividends. Secondly, revenue is assumed to be realised when a 
legal right to receive it arises, i.e. the point of time when goods have been sold 
or service has been rendered. Thus, credit sales are treated as revenue on the 
day sales are made and not when money is received from the buyer. As for 
the income such as rent, commission, interest, etc. these are recongnised on 
a time basis. For example, rent for the month of March 2017, even if received 
in April 2017, will be taken into the profit and loss account of the financial 
year ending March 31, 2017 and not into financial year beginning with April 
2017. Similarly, if interest for April 2017 is received in advance in March 
2017, it will be taken to the profit and loss account of the financial year ending 
March 2018.

There are some exceptions to this general rule of revenue recognition. In 
case of contracts like construction work, which take long time, say 2-3 years 
to complete, proportionate amount of revenue, based on the part of contract 
completed by the end of the period is treated as realised. Similarly, when goods 
are sold on hire purchase, the amount collected in installments is treated as 
realised. 

2.2.8 		 Matching Concept
The process of ascertaining the amount of profit earned or the loss incurred 
during a particular period involves deduction of related expenses from the 
revenue earned during that period. The matching concept emphasises exactly 
on this aspect. It states that expenses incurred in an accounting period should 
be matched with revenues during that period. It follows from this that the 
revenue and expenses incurred to earn these revenues must belong to the 
same accounting period.

As already stated, revenue is recognised when a sale is complete or service 
is rendered rather when cash is received. Similarly, an expense is recognised 
not when cash is paid but when an asset or service has been used to generate 
revenue. For example, expenses such as salaries, rent, insurance are recognised 
on the basis of period to which they relate and not when these are paid. 
Similarly, costs like depreciation of fixed asset is divided over the periods during 
which the asset is used.

Let us also understand how cost of goods are matched with their sales 
revenue. While ascertaining the profit or loss of an accounting year, we should 
not take the cost of all the goods produced or purchased during that period 
but consider only the cost of goods that have been sold during that year. For 
this purpose, the cost of unsold goods should be deducted from the cost of the 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   32 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



Theory Base of Accounting 33	

goods produced or purchased. You will learn about this aspect in detail in the 
chapter on financial statement.

The matching concept, thus, implies that all revenues earned during 
an accounting year, whether received during that year, or not and all costs 
incurred, whether paid during the year, or not should be taken into account 
while ascertaining profit or loss for that year.
2.2.9 		 Full Disclosure Concept
Information provided by financial statements are used by different groups 
of people such as investors, lenders, suppliers and others in taking various 
financial decisions. In the corporate form of organisation, there is a distinction 
between those managing the affairs of the enterprise and those owning it. 
Financial statements, however, are the only or basic means of communicating 
financial information to all interested parties. It becomes all the more important, 
therefore, that the financial statements makes a full, fair and adequate 
disclosure of all information which is relevant for taking financial decisions.

The principle of full disclosure requires that all material and relevant facts 
concerning financial performance of an enterprise must be fully and completely 
disclosed in the financial statements and their accompanying footnotes. This 
is to enable the users to make correct assessment about the profitability and 
financial soundness of the enterprise and help them to take informed decisions.

To ensure proper disclosure of material accounting information, the Indian 
Companies Act 1956 has provided a format for the preparation of profit and 
loss account and balance sheet of a company, which needs to be compulsorily 
adhered to, for the preparation of these statements. The regulatory bodies like 
SEBI, also mandates complete disclosures to be made by the companies, to 
give a true and fair view of profitability and the state of affairs.

2.2.10  Consistency Concept
The accounting information provided by the financial statements would be 
useful in drawing conclusions regarding the working of an enterprise only when 
it allows comparisons over a period of time as well as with the working of other 
enterprises. Thus, both inter-firm and inter-period comparisons are required 
to be made.  This can be possible only when accounting policies and practices 
followed by enterprises are uniform and are consistent over the period of time. 

To illustrate, an investor wants to know the financial performance of an 
enterprise in the current year as compared to that in the previous year. He may 
compare this year’s net profit with that in the last year. But, if the accounting 
policies adopted, say with respect to depreciation in the two years are different, 
the profit figures will not be comparable. Because the method adopted for the 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   33 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



34 Accountancy

valuation of stock in the past two years is inconsistent. It is, therefore, important 
that the concept of consistency is followed in preparation of financial statements 
so that the results of two accounting periods are comparable. Consistency 
eliminates personal bias and helps in achieving results that are comparable. 

Also the comparison between the financial results of two enterprises would 
be meaningful only if same kind of accounting methods and policies are adopted 
in the preparation of financial statements.

However, consistency does not prohibit change in accounting policies. 
Necessary required changes are fully disclosed by presenting them in the 
financial statements indicating their probable effects on the financial results 
of business.

2.2.11 Conservatism Concept
The concept of conservatism (also called ‘prudence’) provides guidance for 
recording transactions in the book of accounts and is based on the policy of 
playing safe. The concept states that a conscious approach should be adopted 
in ascertaining income so that profits of the enterprise are not overstated. If 
the profits ascertained are more than the actual, it may lead to distribution of 
dividend out of capital, which is not fair as it will lead to reduction in the capital 
of the enterprise.

The concept of conservatism requires that profits should not to be recorded 
until realised but all losses, even those which may have a remote possibility, are 
to be provided for in the books of account. To illustrate, valuing closing stock at 
cost or market value whichever is lower; creating provision for doubtful debts, 
discount on debtors; writing of intangible assets like goodwill, patents, etc. from 
the book of accounts are some of the examples of the application of the principle 
of conservatism. Thus, if market value of the goods purchased has fallen down, 
the stock will be shown at cost price in the books but if the market value has 
gone up, the gain is not to be recorded until the stock is sold. This approach 
of providing for the losses but not recognising the gains until realised is called 
conservatism approach. This may be reflecting a generally pessimist attitude 
adopted by the accountants but is an important way of dealing with uncertainty 
and protecting the interests of creditors against an unwanted distribution of 
firm’s assets. However, deliberate attempt to underestimate the value of assets 
should be discouraged as it will lead to hidden profits, called secret reserves.

2.2.12 	 Materiality Concept
The concept of materiality requires that accounting should focus on material 
facts. Efforts should not be wasted in recording and presenting facts, which 
are immaterial in the determination of income. The question that arises here is 
what is a material fact. The materiality of a fact depends on its nature and the 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   34 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



Theory Base of Accounting 35	

amount involved. Any fact would be considered as material if it is reasonably 
believed that its knowledge would influence the decision of informed user 
of financial statements. For example, money spent on creation of additional 
capacity of a theatre would be a material fact as it is going to increase the 
future earning capacity of the enterprise. Similarly, information about any 
change in the method of depreciation adopted or any liability which is likely to 
arise in the near future would be significant information. All such information 
about material facts should be disclosed through the financial statements and 
the accompanying notes so that users can take informed decisions. In certain 
cases, when the amount involved is very small, strict adherence to accounting 
principles is not required. For example, stock of erasers, pencils, scales, etc. are 
not shown as assets, whatever amount of stationery is  bought in an accounting 
period is treated as the expense of that period, whether consumed or not. The 
amount spent is treated as revenue expenditure and taken to the profit and 
loss account of the year in which the expenditure is incurred.

2.2.13  Objectivity Concept
The concept of objectivity requires that accounting transaction should be 
recorded in an objective manner, free from the bias of accountants and others. 
This can be possible when each of the transaction is supported by verifiable 
documents or vouchers. For example, the transaction for the purchase of 
materials may be supported by the cash receipt for the money paid, if the 
same is purchased on cash or copy of invoice and delivery challan, if the same 
is purchased on credit. Similarly, receipt for the amount paid for purchase of 
a machine becomes the documentary evidence for the cost of machine and 
provides an objective basis for verifying this transaction. One of the reasons 
for the  adoption of ‘Historical Cost’ as the basis of recording accounting 
transaction is that adherence to the principle of objectivity is made possible 
by it. As stated above, the cost actually paid for an asset can be verified from 
the documents but it is very difficult to ascertain the market value of an asset 
until it is actually sold. Not only that, the market value may vary from person 
to person and from place to place, and so ‘objectivity’ cannot be maintained if 
such value is adopted for accounting purposes.

Test Your Understanding - II

Fill in the correct word:
1.	 Recognition of expenses in the same period as associated revenues is called 

_______________concept.
2.	 The accounting concept that refers to the tendency of accountants to resolve 

uncertainty and doubt in favour of understating assets and revenues and 
overstating liabilities and expenses is known as _______________.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   35 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



36 Accountancy

3.	 Revenue is generally recongnised at the point of sale denotes the concept 
of _______________.

4.	 The _______________concept requires that the same accounting method should be 
used from one accounting period to the next.

5.	 The_______________concept requires that accounting transaction should be free 
from the bias of accountants and others.

2.3	 Systems of Accounting
The systems of recording transactions in the book of accounts are generally 
classified  into two types, viz. Double entry system and Single entry system. 
Double entry system is based on the principle of  “Dual Aspect” which states 
that every transaction has two effects, viz. receiving of a benefit and giving of 
a benefit. Each transaction, therefore, involves two or more accounts and is 
recorded at different places in the ledger. The basic principle followed is that 
every debit must have a corresponding credit. Thus, one account is debited 
and the other is credited.

Double entry system is a complete system as both the aspects of a 
transaction are recorded in the book of accounts. The system is accurate and 
more reliable as the possibilities of frauds and mis-appropriations are 
minimised. The arithmetic inaccuracies in records can mostly be checked by 
preparing the trial balance. The system of double entry can be implemented 
by big as well as small organisations.

Single entry system is not a complete system of maintaining records of 
financial transactions. It does not record two-fold effect of each and every 
transaction. Instead of maintaining all the accounts, only personal accounts and 
cash book are maintained under this system. In fact, this is not a system but a 
lack of system as no uniformity is maintained in the recording of transactions. 
For some transactions, only one aspect is recorded, for others, both the aspects 
are recorded. The accounts maintained under this system are incomplete and 
unsystematic and therefore, not reliable. The system is, however, followed by 
small business firms as it is very simple and flexible (you will study about them 
in detail later in this book).

2.4	 Basis of Accounting
From the point of view the timing of recognition of revenue and costs, there 
can be two broad approaches to accounting. These are:

(i)	 Cash basis; and 
(ii)	 Accrual basis.
Under the cash basis, entries in the book of accounts are made when cash is 

received or paid and not when the receipt or payment becomes due. Let us say, 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   36 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



Theory Base of Accounting 37	

for example, if office rent for the month of December 2014, is paid in January 
2015, it would be recorded in the book of account only in January 2015.

Similarly sale of goods on credit in the month of January 2015 would not 
be recorded in January but say in April, when the payment for the same is 
received. Thus this system is incompatible with the matching principle, which 
states that the revenue of a period is matched with the cost of the same period. 
Though simple, this method is inappropriate for most organisations as profit 
is calculated as a difference between the receipts and disbursement of money 
for the given period rather than on happening of the transactions.

Under the accrual basis, however, revenues and costs are recognised in the 
period in which they occur rather when they are paid. A distinction is made 
between the receipt of cash and the right to receive cash and payment of cash 
and legal obligation to pay cash. Thus, under this system, the monitory effect 
of a transaction is taken into account in the period in which they are earned 
rather than in the period in which cash is actually received or paid by the 
enterprise. This is a more appropriate basis for the calculation of profits as 
expenses are matched against revenue earned in relation thereto. For example, 
raw material consumed are matched against the cost of goods sold.

2.5	 Accounting Standards
Accounting standards are written policy documents covering the aspects of 
recognition, measurement, treatment, presentation and disclosure of accounting 
transactions in financial statements. Accounting standard is an authoritative 
statement issued by ICAI, a professional body of accounting in our country. The 
objective of accounting standard is to bring uniformity in different accounting 
policies in order to eliminate non comparability of financial statements for 
enhancing reliability of financial statements. Secondly, the accounting standard 
provides a set of standard accounting policies, valuation norms and disclosure 
requirements. In addition to improving credibility of accounting data, accounting 
standard enhances comparability of financial statements, both intra and inter 
enterprises. Such comparisons are very effective and widely used for assessment 
of firms’ performance by the users of accounting.

Need for Accounting Standards
Accounting extends information to various users of information. Accounting 
information can serve the interest of different users only if it possesses 
uniformity and full disclosure of relevant information. There can be alternate 
accounting treatment and valuation norms which may be used by any business 
entity. Accounting standard facilitate the scope of those alternatives which 
fulfil the basic qualitative characteristics of true and fair financial statement.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   37 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



38 Accountancy

Benefits of Accounting Standards
1.	 Accounting standard helps in eliminating variations in accounting 

treatment to prepare financial statements.
2.	 Accounting standard may call for disclosures of certain information 

which may not be required by law, but such information might be useful 
for general public, investors and creditors.

3.	 Accounting standard facilitate comparability between financial 
statements of inter and intra companies.

Limitations of Accounting Standards
1.	 Accounting standard makes choice between different alternate 

accounting treatments difficult to apply.
2.	 It is rigidly followed and fails to extend flexibility in applying accounting 

standards.
3.	 Accounting standard cannot override the statue. The standards are 

required to be farmed within the ambit of prevailing status.

Goods and Services Tax
(One Country One Tex)

GST is a destination based tax on consumption of goods and services. It 
is proposed to be levied at all stages right from manufacture up to final 
consumption with credit of taxes paid at previous stages available as setoff.  In 
a nutshell, only value addition will be taxed and burden of tax is to be borne 
by the final consumer. The concept of destination based tax on consumption 
implies has the tax would accrue to the taxing authority which has jurisdiction 
over the place of consumption which is also termed as place of supply. 

GST has a dual aspect with the Centre and States simultaneously levying 
on a common tax base. There are three main components of GST which are 
CGST, SGST, CGST means Central Goods and Services Tax. Taxes collected 
under CGST will constitute the revenues of the Central Government . The 
present central taxes like central excise duty, additional  excise duty, special 
excise duty, central sales tax etc., will be subsumed under CGST. SGST means 
State Good and Services Tax. A collection of SGST is the revenue of the State 
Government. With GST all state taxes like VAT, entertainment tax, luxury tax, 
entry tax etc, will be merged with GST. For example, Ramesh a dealer in Punjab 
sell goods to Seema in Punjab worth ` 10,000. If the GST rate is 18%, i.e., 9% 
CGST and 9% SGST, ` 900 will go to Central Government and 900 will go to 
Punjab Government. 

IGST means Integrated Goods and Services Tax. Revenue collected under 
IGST is divided between Central and State Government as per the rates specified 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   38 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



Theory Base of Accounting 39	

by the Government. IGST is charged on transfer of goods and services from one 
state to another. Import of goods and services are also covered under IGST. For 
example, if the goods are transferred from Madhya Pradesh to Rajasthan then 
this transaction will attract IGST. Lets extend the above example to understand 
SGST. If Ramesh in Madhya Pradesh sell goods to Anand in Rajasthan worth 
` 1,000,000. Applicable GST late is 18% i.e., 9% CGST and 9% SGST. In this 
case, the dealer will charge 18,000 as IGST and will go the Central Government.

India is a federal country where both the Centre and the States 
have been assigned the powers to levy and collect taxes through 
appropriate legislation. Both the levels of government have 
distinct responsibilities to perform according to the division of 
powers prescribed in the Constitution for which they need to 
rise resources. A dual GST will, therefore, be in keeping with the 
Constitutional requirement of fiscal federalism. Hence, Centre 
will levy and administer CGST & IGST while respective states will 
levy and administer SGST. The Constitution of India has been 
amended for this purpose. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   39 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



40 Accountancy

Characteristics of Goods and Services Tax
GST

1.	 GST is a common law and procedure throughout the country under 
single administration.

2.	 GST is a destination based tax and levied at a single point at the time 
of consumption of goods and services by the end consumer.

3.	 GST is a comprehensive levy and collection on both goods and services Intra-State Inter-State
Movement Movement

at the same rate with benefit of input tax credit or subtraction of value.
4.	 Minimum number of rates of tax does not exceed two.
5.	 There is no scope for levy of cess, resale tax, additional tax, turnover IGST

tax etc. CGST
6.	 There is no multiple levy of tax on goods and services, such as sales SGST

tax, entry tax, octroi, entertainment tax or luxury tax etc.
GST levied by the GST levied by the GST levied by the Centre

Do it yourself Centre State and States Concurrently
State how the GST rates will be applicable if CGST is 9%, SGST is 9% and 
IGST 18% in each of the following situations:

1.	 Goods worth ` 10,000 is sold by a Manufacturer 1 in Maharashtra to 
a Dealer A in Maharastra.

2.	 Dealer A sell goods worth ` 25,000 to Dealer B in Gujarat.
3.	 Dealer B sell goods to Sunita in Gujarat worth ` 30,000.
4.	 Sunita sell goods to Ravindra in Rajasthan worth ` 65,000.

Advantages
1.	 Introduction of GST has resulted in the abolition of multiple types of 

taxes in goods and services. 
2.	 GST widens the tax base and increased revenue to Centre and State 

thereby reducing administrative cost for the Government.
3.	 GST has reduced compliance cost and increases voluntary compliance. 
4.	 GST has affected rates of tax to the maximum of two floor rates. 
5.	 GST has removed the cascading effect on taxation. 
6.	 GST will result in enhancing manufacturing and distribution system 

affecting the cost of production of goods and services and consequently 
the demand and production of goods and services will increase. 

7.	 It will eventually promote economic efficiency and sustainable long term 
economic growth as GST is neutral to business processes, business 
models, organisational structure and geographical location.

8.	 GST would help to extend competitive edge in international market for 
goods and services produced in the country leading to increased exports.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   40 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



Theory Base of Accounting 41	

Characteristics of Goods and Services Tax
GST

1.	 GST is a common law and procedure throughout the country under 
single administration.

2.	 GST is a destination based tax and levied at a single point at the time 
of consumption of goods and services by the end consumer.

3.	 GST is a comprehensive levy and collection on both goods and services Intra-State Inter-State
Movement Movement

at the same rate with benefit of input tax credit or subtraction of value.
4.	 Minimum number of rates of tax does not exceed two.
5.	 There is no scope for levy of cess, resale tax, additional tax, turnover IGST

tax etc. CGST
6.	 There is no multiple levy of tax on goods and services, such as sales SGST

tax, entry tax, octroi, entertainment tax or luxury tax etc.
GST levied by the GST levied by the GST levied by the Centre

Do it yourself Centre State and States Concurrently
State how the GST rates will be applicable if CGST is 9%, SGST is 9% and 
IGST 18% in each of the following situations:

1.	 Goods worth ` 10,000 is sold by a Manufacturer 1 in Maharashtra to 
a Dealer A in Maharastra. Key Terms Introduced in the Chapter

2.	 Dealer A sell goods worth ` 25,000 to Dealer B in Gujarat. •	 Cost	 •	 Going concern •	 Accounting period
•	 Matching	 •	 Comparibility •	 Money measurement

3.	 Dealer B sell goods to Sunita in Gujarat worth ` 30,000. •	 Materiality	 •	 Full discloser •	 Accounting concept
4.	 Sunita sell goods to Ravindra in Rajasthan worth ` 65,000. •	 Objectivity	 •	 Generally accepted •	 Accounting Principles (GAAP)

•	 Consistency	 •	 Revenue Relisation •	 GAAP
Advantages •	 Dual aspect •	 Operating guidelines •	 GST

•	 Conservatism(Prudence)
1.	 Introduction of GST has resulted in the abolition of multiple types of 

taxes in goods and services. 
2.	 GST widens the tax base and increased revenue to Centre and State Summary with Reference to Learning Objectives

thereby reducing administrative cost for the Government. 	 1.	 Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP): Generally Accepted Accounting 
3.	 GST has reduced compliance cost and increases voluntary compliance. principles refer to the rules or guidelines adopted for recording and reporting of business 

4.	 GST has affected rates of tax to the maximum of two floor rates. transactions in order to bring uniformity in the preparation and presentation of financial 
statements. These principles are also referred to as concepts and conventions. From the 

5.	 GST has removed the cascading effect on taxation. practicality view point, the various terms such as principles, postulates, conventions 
6.	 GST will result in enhancing manufacturing and distribution system modifying principles, assumptions, etc. have been used interchangeably and are referred 

affecting the cost of production of goods and services and consequently to as basic accounting concepts, in the present book.

the demand and production of goods and services will increase. 	 2.	 Basic Accounting Concepts: The basic accounting concepts are referred to as the 
fundamental ideas or basic assumptions underlying the theory and practice of financial 

7.	 It will eventually promote economic efficiency and sustainable long term accounting and are broad working rules of accounting activities.
economic growth as GST is neutral to business processes, business 	 3.	 Business Entity: This concept assumes that business has distinct and separate entity 
models, organisational structure and geographical location. from its owners. Thus, for the purpose of accounting, business and its owners are to 

8.	 GST would help to extend competitive edge in international market for be treated as two separate entities.

goods and services produced in the country leading to increased exports.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   41 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



42 Accountancy

	 4.	 Money Measurement: The concept of money measurement states that only those 
transactions and happenings in an organisation, which can be expressed in terms of 
money are to be recorded in the book of accounts. Also, the records of the transactions 
are to be kept not in the physical units but in the monetary units.

	 5.	 Going Concern: The concept of going concern assumes that a business firm would 
continue to carry out its operations indefinitely (for a fairly long period of time) and 
would not be liquidated in the near future.

	 6.	 Accounting Period: Accounting period refers to the span of time at the end of which the 
financial statements of an enterprise are prepared to know whether it has earned profits 
or incurred losses during that period and what exactly is the position of its assets and 
liabilities, at the end of that period.

	 7.	 Cost Concept: The cost concept requires that all assets are recorded in the book 
of accounts at their cost price, which includes cost of acquisition, transportation, 
installation and making the asset ready for the use.

	 8.	 Dual Aspect: This concept states that every transaction has a dual or two-fold effect on 
various accounts and should therefore be recorded at two places. The duality principle 
is commonly expressed in terms of fundamental accounting equation, which is:

	 Assets  =  Liabilities + Capital
	 9.	 Revenue Recognition: Revenue is the gross in-flow of cash arising from the sale of goods 

and services by an enterprise and use by others of the enterprise resources yielding 
interest royalities and divididends. The concept of revenue recognition requires that the 
revenue for a business transaction should be considered realised when a legal right to 
receive it arises.

	10.	 Matching: The concept of matching emphasises that expenses incurred  in an accounting 
period should be matched with revenues during that period. It follows from this that 
the revenue and expenses incurred to earn these revenue must belong to the same 
accounting period.

	11.	 Full Disclosure: This concept requires that all material and relevant  facts concerning 
financial performance of an enterprise must be fully and completely disclosed in the 
financial statements and their accompanying  footnotes.

	12.	 Consistency: This concepts states that accounting policies and practices followed by 
enterprises should be uniform and consistent one the period of time so that results are 
composable. Comparability results when the same accounting principles are consistently 
being applied by different enterprises for the period under comparison, or the same 
firm for a number of periods.

13.	 Conservatism: This concept requires that business transactions should be recorded in 
such a manner that profits are not overstated. All anticipated losses should be accounted 
for but all unrealised gains should be ignored.

14.	 Materiality: This concept states that accounting should focus on material facts. If the 
item is likely to influence the decision of a reasonably prudent investor or creditor, it 
should be regarded as material, and shown in the financial statements.

15.	 Objectivity: According to this concept, accounting transactions should be recorded in 
the manner so that it is free from the bias of accountants and others.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   42 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



Theory Base of Accounting 43	

16.	 Systems of Accounting: There are two systems of recording business transactions, 
viz. double entry system and single entry system. Under double entry system every 
transaction has two-fold effects where as single entry system is known as incomplete 
records.

17.	 Basis of Accounting: The two broad approach of accounting are cash basis and accrual 
basis. Under cash basis transactions are recorded only when cash are received or paid. 
Whereas under accrual basis, revenues or costs are recognises when they occur rather 
than when they are paid.	

18.	 Accounting Standards: Accounting standards are written statements of uniform 
accounting rules and guidelines in practice for preparing the uniform and consistent 
financial statements. These standards cannot over ride the provisions of applicable 
laws, customs, usages and business environment in the country.

19.	 GST is a destination tax on the consumption of goods and services levied at all stages 
right from manufacturing up to the final consumption with credit of taxes paid at 
previous stages. 

Questions for Practice
Short Answers
1.	 Why is it necessary for accountants to assume that business entity will remain a going 

concern?
2.	 When should revenue be recognised? Are there exceptions to the general rule?
3.	 What is the basic accounting equation?
4.	 The realisation concept determines when goods sent on credit to customers are to 

be included in the sales figure for the purpose of computing the profit or loss for the 
accounting period. Which of the following tends to be used in practice to determine 
when to include a transaction in the sales figure for the period. When the goods have 
been:

		  a. dispatched        b. invoiced        c. delivered        d. paid for
	 Give reasons for your answer.
5.	 Complete the following worksheet:

(i)	 If a firm believes that some of its debtors may ‘default’, it should act on this by 
making sure that all possible losses are recorded in the books. This is an example 
of the ___________ concept.

(ii)	 The fact that a business is separate and distinguishable from its owner is best 
exemplified by the ___________ concept.

(iii)	 Everything a firm owns, it also owns out to somebody. This co-incidence is 
explained by the ___________ concept.

(iv)	 The ___________ concept states that if straight line method of depreciation is used 
in one year, then it should also be used in the next year.

(v)	 A firm may hold stock which is heavily in demand. Consequently, the market 
value of this stock may be increased. Normal accounting procedure is to ignore 
this because of the ___________.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   43 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



44 Accountancy

(vi)	 If a firm receives an order for goods, it would not be included in the sales figure 
owing to the ___________.

(vii)	 The management of a firm is remarkably incompetent, but the  firms accountants 
can not take this into account while preparing book of accounts because of 
___________ concept.

Long Answers
1.	 ‘The accounting concepts and accounting standards are generally referred to as the 

essence of financial accounting’. Comment.
2.	 Why is it important to adopt a consistent basis for the preparation of financial 

statements? Explain.
3.	 Discuss the concept-based on the premise ‘do not anticipate profits but provide for all 

losses’.
4.	 What is matching concept? Why should a business concern follow this concept? Discuss.
5.	 What is the money measurement concept? Which one factor can make it difficult to 

compare the monetary values of one year with the monetary values of another year?

Activity 1
Ruchica’s father is the sole proprietor of ‘Friends Gifts’, a firm engaged in the sale of 
gift items. In the process of preparing financial statements, the accountant of the firm 
Mr. Goyal fell ill and had to proceed on leave. Ruchica’s father was urgently in need of the 
statements as these had to be submitted to the bank, in pursuance of a loan of ` 5 lakh 
applied for the expansion of the business of the firm. Ruchica who is studying Accounting 
in her school, volunteered to complete the work. On scrutinising the accounts, the banker 
found that the value of building bought a few years back for ̀  7 lakh has been shown in the 
books at ̀  20 lakh, which is its present market value. Similarly, as compared to the last year, 
the method of valuation of stock was changed, resulting in value of goods to be about 15 per 
cent higher. Also, the whole amount of ` 70,000 spent on purchase of personal computer 
(expected life 5 years) during the year had been charged to the profits of the current year. 
The banker did not rely on the financial data provided by Ruchica. Advise Ruchica for the 
mistakes committed by her in the preparation of financial statements in the context of basic 
concepts in accounting.

Activity 2
A customer has filed a suit against a trader who has supplied poor quality goods to him. 
It is known that the court judgment will be in favour of the customer and the trader will 
be required to pay the damages. However, the amount of legal damages is not known with 
certainity. The accounting year has already been ended and the books are now finalised to 
ascertain true profit or loss. The accountant of the trader has advised him not to consider 
the expected loss on account of payment of legal damages because the amount is not certain 
and the final judgment of the court is not yet out. Do you think the accountant is right in 
his approach.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   44 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



Theory Base of Accounting 45	

Checklist to Test Your Understanding
Test Your Understanding - I
	 1. (c)        2. (d)        3. (a)        4. (b)
Test Your Understanding - II

1.	Matching	 2.	Conservatism	 3.	Revenue Realisation
4.	Consistency	 5.	Objectivity

Reprint 2025-26

Ch02.indd   45 9/29/2022   4:40:30 PM



46 Accountancy

##3##
Recording of Transactions-I 3

In chapter 1 and 2, while explaining the
development and importance of accounting as a

source of disseminating the financial information
along with the discussion on basic accounting
concepts that guide the recording of business
transactions, it has been indicated that accounting
involves a process of identifying and analysing the
business transactions, recording them, classifying

L and summarising their effects and finally
EARNING OBJECTIVES

communicating it to the interested users of
After studying this accounting information.
chapter, you will be able
to: In this chapter, we will discuss the details of each

step involved in the accounting process. The first
• describe the nature of

transaction and source step involves identifying the transactions to be
documents; recorded and preparing the source documents

• explain the prepa- which are in turn recorded in the basic book of
ration of accounting original entry called journal and are then posted to
vouchers; individual accounts in the principal book called

• apply  accounting ledger.
equation to explain the
effect of transactions; 3.1 Business Transactions and Source Document

• record  transactions
using rules of debit After securing good percentage in your previous
and credit; examination, as promised, your father wishes to

• explain  the concept of buy you a computer. You go to the market along
book of original entry with your father to buy a computer. The dealer gives
and recording of a cash memo along with the computer and in
transactions in journal; exchange your father makes cash payment of

• explain the concept of ` 35,000. Purchase of computer for cash is an
ledger and posting of example of a transaction, which involves reciprocal
journal entries to the exchange of two things: (i) payment of cash,
ledger accounts.

(ii) delivery of a computer. Hence, the transaction

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 47

involves this aspect, i.e. Give and Take.  Payment of cash involves give aspect
and delivery of computer is a take aspect. Thus, business transactions are
exchanges of economic consideration between parties and have two-fold effects
that are recorded in at least two accounts.

Business transactions are usually evidenced by an appropriate documents
such as Cash memo, Invoice, Sales bill, Pay-in-slip, Cheque, Salary slip, etc. A
document which provides evidence of the transactions is called the Source
Document or a Voucher. At times, there may be no documentary for certain items
as in case of petty expenses. In such case voucher may be prepared showing the
necessary details and got approved by appropriate authority within the firm. All
such documents (vouchers) are arranged in chronological order and are serially
numbered and kept in a separate file. All recording in books of account is done
on the basis of vouchers.

Transaction Voucher
Name of Firm :

Voucher No :
Date :
Debit account :
Credit account:
Amount (`) :
Narration :

Authorised By : Prepared By :

Fig. 3.1 : Showing specimen transaction voucher

3.1.1 Preparation of Accounting Vouchers

Accounting vouchers may be classified as cash vouchers, debit vouchers, credit
vouchers, journal vouchers, etc. There is no set format of accounting vouchers.
A specimen of a simple transaction voucher is used in practice is shown in
figure 3.1.

These must be preserved in any case till the audit of the accounts and tax
assessments for the relevant period are completed. Now a days, accounting is
computerised and the necessary accounting vouchers showing the code
number and name of the accounts to be debited and credited are prepared for
the purpose of necessary recording of transactions. A transaction with one
debit and one credit is a simple transaction and the accounting vouchers
prepared for such transaction is known as Transaction Voucher, the format of

Reprint 2025-26



48 Accountancy

which is shown in figure 3.1. Voucher which records a transaction that entails
multiple debits/credits and one credit/debit is called compound voucher.
Compound voucher may be: (a) Debit Voucher o7r (b) Credit Voucher; the
specimen is shown in figure 3.2.

Debit Voucher
Name of Firm :

Voucher No : Date :
Credit Account :
Amount :

Debit Accounts

S. No. Code Account Name Amount Narration (i.e. Explanation)
`

Authorised By : Prepared By :

Credit Voucher
Name of Firm :

Voucher No : Date :
Debit Account :
Amount :

Credit Accounts

S. No. Code Account Name Amount Narration (i.e. Explanation)
`

Authorised By : Prepared By :

Fig. 3.2 : Showing debit and credit vouchers

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 49

Transactions with multiple debits and multiple credits are called complex
transactions and the accounting voucher prepared for such transaction is
known as Complex Voucher/ Journal Voucher.  The format of a complex
transaction voucher is shown in figure 3.3.

Journal Voucher

Name of Firm :
Voucher No : Date :

Debit Accounts

S. No. Code Account Name Amount Narration (i.e. Explanation)
`

Credit Accounts

S. No. Code Account Name Amount Narration (i.e. Explanation)
`

Authorised By : Prepared By :

Fig. 3.3 :  Showing specimen of complex transaction voucher

The design of the accounting vouchers depends upon the nature, requirement
and convenience of the business. There is no set format of an accounting
voucher. To distinguish various vouchers, different colour papers and different
fonts of printing are used. Some of the specimen of the accounting vouchers
are given in the earlier pages. An accounting voucher must contain the following
essential elements :

• It is written on a good quality paper;

• Name of the firm must be printed on the top;
• Date of transaction is filled up against the date and not the date of recording

of transaction is to be mentioned;
• The number of the voucher is to be in a serial order;
• Name of the account to be debited or credited is mentioned;

Reprint 2025-26



50 Accountancy

• Debit and credit amount is to be written in figures against the amount;
• Description of the transaction is to be given account wise;
• The person who prepares the voucher must mention his name along with

signature; and
• The name and signature of the authorised person are mentioned on the

voucher.

3.2 Accounting Equation

Accounting equation signifies that the assets of a business are always equal
to the total of its liabilities and capital (owner’s equity). The equation reads as
follows:

A = L + C
Where,
A  = Assets
L  = Liabilities
C  = Capital

The above equation can also be presented in the following forms as its
derivatives to enable the determination of missing figures of Capital(C) or
Liabilities(L).

(i) A – L = C
(ii) A – C = L

Since, the accounting equation depicts the fundamental relationship among
the components of the balance sheet, it is also called the Balance Sheet
Equation. As the name suggests, the balance sheet is a statement of assets,
liabilities and capital.

At any point of time resources of the business entity must be equal to the
claims of those who have financed these resources.  The proprietors and
outsiders provide the resources of the business. The claim of the proprietors
is called capital and that of the outsides is known as liabilities. Each element
of the equation is the part of balance sheet, which states the financial position
of the business on a particular date. When we analyse the transactions, we
actually try to know that how balance sheet of a business entity gets affected.

Asset side of the balance sheet is the list of assets, which the business
entity owns. The liabilities side of the balance sheet is the list of owner’s
claims and outsider’s claims, i.e., what the business entity owes. The equality
of the assets side and the liabilities side of the balance sheet is an undeniable
fact and this justifies the name of accounting equation as balance sheet
equation also.

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 51

For example, Rohit started business with a capital of ̀  5,00,000. From the
accounting point of view, the resources of this business entity is in the form of
cash, i.e., ` 5,00,000. Sources of this business entity is the contribution by
Rohit (Proprietor) ̀  5,00,000 as Capital .

(For the purpose of understanding we will refer this example as example 1,
throughout the chapter) .

If we put this information in the form of equality of resources and sources,
the picture would emerge somewhat as follows:

Books of Rohit
Balance Sheet as at ..........

Liabilities Amount Assets Amount
` `

Capital 5,00,000 Cash in hand 5,00,000

5,00,000 5,00,000

In the above balance sheet, the total assets are equal to the liabilities of
the business. Since, the business has not yet started its activities and has not
earned any profits; the amount invested in business is still ̀  5,00,000. In case
any profits are earned, it will increase the invested amount in business. On the
other hand, if business suffers any losses, it will decrease the invested amount
in business.

We will now analyse the transactions listed in example 1 and its effect on
different elements and you will observe that the accounting equation always
remain balanced:

Example 1.

1. Opened a bank account in State Bank of India with an amount of
` 4,80,000.

Analysis of transaction: This transaction increases the cash at bank (assets)
and decreases cash (asset) by ̀  4,80,000.

2. Bought furniture for ̀  60,000 and cheque was issued on the same day.

Analysis of transaction: This transaction increases furniture (assets) and
decreases bank (assets) by ̀  60,000.

3. Bought plant and machinery for the business for ̀  1,25,000 and an advance
of ̀  10,000 in cash is paid to M/s Ramjee Lal.

Analysis of transaction: This transaction increases plant and machinery
(assets) by ̀  1,25,000, decreases cash by ̀  10,000 and increases liabilities
(M/s Ramjee lal as creditor) by ̀  1,15,000.

Reprint 2025-26



52 Accountancy

4. Goods purchased from M/s Sumit Traders for ̀  55,000.
Analysis of transaction: This transaction increases goods (assets) and
increases liabilities (M/s Sumit Traders as creditors) by ̀  55,000.

5. Goods costing ̀  25,000 sold to Rajani Enterprises for ̀  35,000.
Analysis of transaction: This transaction decreases stock of goods (assets)
by ` 25,000 and increases assets (Rajani Enterprises as debtors
` 35,000) and capital (with the profit of ̀  10,000)

The final equation as per the above analysis table can be summarised in the
form of a balance sheet as under:

Balance Sheet as at.....2017

          Liabilities Amount Assets Amount
` `

Outsider’s Claims (Creditors) 1,70,000 Cash 10,000
Capital 5,10,000 Bank 4,20,000

Debtors 35,000
Stock 30,000
Furniture 60,000
Plant & Machinery 1,25,000

6,80,000 6,80,000

In terms of accounting equation
A = L + C
` 6,80,000 = ̀  1,70,000 + ̀  5,10,000

3.3 Using Debit and Credit

As already stated every transaction involves give and take aspect. In double
entry accounting, every transaction affects and is recorded in at least two
accounts. When recording each transaction, the total amount debited must equal
to the total amount credited.  In accounting, the terms — debit and credit indicate
whether the transactions are to be recorded on the left hand side or right hand
side of the account. In its simplest form, an account looks like the letter T. Because
of its shape, this simple form called a T-account (refer
figure 3.4). Notice that the T format has a left side and a right side for recording
increases and decreases in the item. This  helps in ascertaining the ultimate
position of each item at the end of an accounting period. For example, if it is
an account of a customer all goods sold shall appear on the left (debit) side of
customer’s account and all payments received on the right side. The difference
between the totals of the two sides called balance shall reflect the amount due
to the customer. In a T account, the left side is called debit (often abbreviated
as Dr.) and the right side is known as credit (often abbreviated as Cr.). To

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 53

The summary of effects of transactions on accounting equation is in the following analysis table:

(Figures in rupees)

Transaction Cash Bank Assets Goods Furniture Plant and Total Liabilities Capital Total
No. Debtors (Stock) Machinery Assets

5,00,000 5,00,000 ....... 5,00,000 5,00,000

    1. (4,80,000) 4,80,000 ....... ....... .......
Post Trans.  20,000 4,80,000 5,00,000 5,00,000 5,00,000
 Equation
    2. ....... (60,000) 60,000 ....... ....... .......
Post Trans. 20,000 4,20,000 60,000 5,00,000 5,00,,000 5,00,000
Equation
    3. (10,000) 1,25,000 1,15,000 1,15,000 1,15,000
Post Trans. 10,000 4,20,000 60,000 1,25,000 6,15,000 1,15,000 5,00,000 6,15,000
Equation
    4. 55,000 55,000 55,000 55,000
Post Trans. 10,000 4,20,000 55,000 60,000 1,25,000 6,70,000 1,70,000 5,00,000 6,70,000
Equation
    5. 35,000 (25,000) 10,000 10,000 10,000

Final 10,000 4,20,000 35,000 30,000 60,000 1,25,000 6,80,000 1,70,000 5,10,000 6,80,000
Equation

Reprint 2025-26



54 Accountancy

enter amount on the left side of an account is to debit the account. To enter
amount on the right side is to credit the account.

Account Title

(Left Side) (Right Side)

Fig. 3.4 : Showing T-account

3.3.1 Rules of Debit and Credit

All accounts are divided into five categories for the purposes of recording the
transactions: (a) Asset (b) Liability (c) Capital (d) Expenses/Losses, and (e)
Revenues/Gains.

Two fundamental rules are followed to record the changes in these accounts:
(1) For recording changes in Assets/Expenses (Losses):

(i) “Increase in asset is debited, and decrease in asset is credited.”
(ii) “Increase in expenses/losses is debited, and decrease in expenses/

losses is credited.”
(2) For recording changes in Liabilities and Capital/Revenues (Gains):

(i) “Increase in liabilities is credited and decrease in liabilities is debited.”
(ii) “Increase in capital is credited and decrease in capital is debited.”
(iii) “Increase in revenue/gain is credited and decrease in revenue/gain

is debited.”
The rules applicable to the different kinds of accounts have been

summarised in the following chart:

Rules of Debit and Credit

Asset Liabilities

(Increase) (Decrease) (Decrease) (Increase)
+ – – +

  Debit Credit   Debit Credit
Capital

(Decrease) (Increase) Expenses/Losses
– +

  Debit Credit (Increase) (Decrease)
Revenues/Gains + –

  Debit Credit
(Decrease) (Increase)

– +
  Debit Credit

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 55

The transactions in Example 1 on page 46 will help you to learn how to
apply these debit and credit rules. Observe the analysis table given on page 48
carefully to be sure that you understand before you go on to the next one. To
illustrate different kinds of events, three more transactions have been added
(transactions 7 to 9).

1. Rohit started business with cash ` 5,00,000

Analysis of Transaction : The transaction increases cash on one hand and increases
capital on the other hand. Increases in assets are debited and increases in capital
are credited. Therefore record the transaction with debit to Cash and credit to Rohit’s
Capital.

Cash Account Capital Account

(1) 5,00,000 (1) 5,00,000

(6) 10,000

2. Opened a bank account with an amount of ` 4,80,000

Analysis of Transaction: The transaction increases the cash at bank on one hand
and decreases cash in hand on the other hand. Increases in assets are debited and
a decreases in assets are credited. Therefore, record the transactions with debit to
Bank account and credit to Cash account.

Cash Account Bank Account

(1) 5,00,000 (2) 4,80,000 (2) 4,80,000

3. Bought furniture for ` 60,000 and issued cheque for the same

Analysis of Transaction : This transaction increases furniture (assets) on one hand
and decreases bank (assets) on the other hand by ` 60,000. Increases in assets are
debited and decreases are credited. Therefore record the transactions with debit to
Furniture account and credit to Bank account.

Furniture Account Bank Account

(1) 60,000 (2) 4,80,000 (3) 60,000

4. Bought Plant and Machinery from Ramjee lal for the business for - ` 1,25,000
and an advance of ` 10,000 in cash is given.

Analysis of Transaction : This transaction increases plant and machinery (assets) by
` 1,25,000, decreases cash by ` 10,000 and increases liabilities (M/s Ramjee Lal as
creditor) by ` 1,15,000. Increases in assets are debited whereas decreases in assets
are credited. On the other hand increases in liabilities are credited. Therefore, record
the transaction with debit to furniture account and with credit to Cash and Ramjee
Lal’s account.

Reprint 2025-26



56 Accountancy

Cash Account Plant and Machinery Account

(1) 5,00,000 (2) 4,80,000 (4) 1,25,000
(4)   10,000

Ramjee Lal’s Account

(4) 1,15,000

5. Goods purchased from Sumit Traders for ` 55,000

Analysis of transaction : This transaction increases purchases (expenses) and
increases liabilities (M/s Sumit Traders as creditors) by ̀  55,000. Increases in expenses
are debited and increases in liabilities are credited. Therefore record the transaction
with debit to Purchases account and credit to Sumit Traders account.

Purchases Account Sumit Traders Account

(5) 55,000 (5) 55,000

6.  Goods costing ` 25,000 sold to Rajani Enterprises for ` 35,000

Analysis of transaction : This transaction increases sales (Revenue) and increases
assets (Rajani  Enterprises as debtors). Increases in assets are debited and increases
in revenue are credited. Therefore record the entry with credit to Sales account and
debit to Rajani Enterprises account.

Sales Account Rajani Enterprises Account

(6) 35,000 (6) 35,000

7. Paid the monthly store rent ` 2,500 in cash

Analysis of transaction : The payment of rent is an expense which decreases capital
thus, are recorded as debits. Credit cash to record decrease in assets.

Rent Account Cash Account

(7) 2,500 (7) 5,00,000 (2) 4,80,000
(4)   10,000

(7)    2,500

8. Paid ` 5,000 as salary to the office employees

Analysis of transaction : The payment of salary is an expense which decreases capital
thus, are recorded as debits. Credit Cash to record decrease in assets.

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 57

Salary Account Cash Account

(8) 5,000 (1) 5,00,000 (2) 4,80,000
(4)   10,000
(7)     2,500

(8)    5,000

9. Received cheque as full payment from Rajani Enterprises and deposited same
day into bank

Analysis of transaction : This transaction increase assets (Bank) on the one hand and
decreases assets (Rajani Enterprises as debtors) on the other hand. Increase in assets
is debited whereas decrease in assets is credited. Therefore record the entry with debit
to Bank account and credit to Rajani Enterprises account.

Rajani Enterprises Account Bank’s Account

(6) 35,000 (9) 35,000 (2) 4,80,000 (3) 60,000
(9)   35,000

Test Your Understanding - I

1. Double entry accounting requires that :
(i) All transactions that create debits to asset accounts must create credits to

liability or capital accounts;
(ii) A transaction that requires a debit to a liability account require a credit to an

asset account;

(iii) Every transaction must be recorded with equal debits equal total credits.

2. State different kinds of transactions that increase and decrease capital.
3. Does debit always mean increase and credit always mean decrease?
4. Which of the following answers properly classifies these commonly used accounts:

(1) Building (2) Wages (3) Credit sales (4) Credit purchases (5) Electricity charges
due but not yet paid (outstanding electricity bills) (6) Godown rent paid in
advance (prepaid godown rent) (7) Sales (8) Fresh capital introduced (9) Drawings
(10) Discount paid

Assets Liabilities Capital Revenue Expense

(i) 5,4, 3, 9,6 2,10 8,7
(ii) 1, 6 4, 5 8 7, 3 2,9,10
(iii) 2,10,4 4,6 8 7,5 1,3,9

Illustration 1

Analyse the effect of each transaction on assets and liabilities and show that the both
sides of Accounting Equation (A = L + C)  remains equal :

(i) Introduced ` 8,00,000 as cash and ̀  50,000 by stock.

Reprint 2025-26



58 Accountancy

(ii) Purchased plant for ` 3,00,000 by paying ` 15,000 in cash and balance at a
later date.

(iii) Deposited ` 6,00,000 into the bank.
(iv) Purchased office furniture for ` 1,00,000 and made payment by cheque.
(v) Purchased goods worth ` 80,000 for cash and for ` 35,000 in credit.

(vi) Goods amounting to ` 45,000 was sold for ` 60,000 on cash basis.
(vii) Goods costing to ` 80,000 was sold for ` 1,25,000 on credit.

(viii) Cheque issued to the supplier of goods worth ` 35,000.
(ix) Cheque received from customer amounting to ` 75,000.
(x) Withdrawn by owner for personal use ` 25,000.

Solution

Transaction (i) It affects Cash and Inventory on the assets side and Capital on the other
hand. There is increase in cash by ̀  8, 00,000 and Inventory of goods by ̀  50,000 on assets
side of the equation. Capital is increased by ` 8, 50,000.

`

Assets = Liabilities + Capital
Cash + Inventory(Stock)
8,00,000 + 50,000 = 8,50,000

Total 8,50,000 = 8,50,000

Transaction (ii) It affects Cash and Plant and Machinery on the assets side and liabilities
on the other side of the equation. There is an increase in plant and machinery by
` 3, 00,000 and decrease in cash by ` 15,000. Liability to pay to the supplier of plant and
machinery increases by ̀  2,85,000.

`

Assets = Liabilities + Capital
Cash +Inventory + Plant and Machinery
8,00,000 +  50,000 = 8,50,000
(15,000) 3,00,000 = 2,85,000
7,85,000 + 50,000 +3,00,000 = 2,85,000 + 8,50,000

Total 11,35,000 = 11,35,000

Transaction (iii)  It affects assets side only. The composition of the asset side changes.
Cash decreases by ̀  6,00,000 and by the same amount bank increases.

`

Assets = Liabilities+ Capital
Cash + Inventory + Plant and + Bank =

   Machinery
7,85,000 +  5,0000 + 3,00,000 = 2,85,000 + 8,50,000
(6,00,000) + 6,00,000
1,85,000 + 50,000 + 3,00,000 + 6,00,000 = 2,85,000 + 8,50,000

Total 11,35,000 = 11,35,000

Transaction (iv) It affects assets side only. The composition of the asset side changes.
Furniture increases by ̀  1,00,000 and by the same amount bank decreases.

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 59

`

Assets =Liabilities + Capital
Cash + Inventory + Plant and    + Bank + Furniture

   Machinery
1,85,000+  50,000 + 3,00,000 + 6,00,000 =  2,85,000 + 8,50,000

 (1,00,000) + 1,00,000
 1,85,000+ 50,000 +3,00,000 +5,00,000       +1,00,000 =  2,85,000+ 8,50,000

Total 11,35,000 = 11,35,000

Transaction (v)   It affects Cash and Inventory on the assets side and liability on the other
side. There is decrease in cash by ` 80,000 and increase of inventory of goods by
` 1,15,000 on the assts side of the equation. Liabilities increases by ` 35,000.

`

Assets = Liabilities + Capital
Cash + Inventory +Plant and + Bank +Furniture

Machinery
1,85,000 + 50,000 + 3,00,000 + 5,00,000 + 1,00,000 = 2,85,000 + 8,50,000
(80,000) + 1,15,000 = 35,000
1,05,000 + 1,65,000 +3,00,000 +5,00,000 + 1,00,000 = 3,20,000 + 8,50,000

Total 11,70,000 =11,70,000

Transaction (vi) It affects Cash and Inventory on the assets side and capital on the other
side. There is an increase in cash by ` 60,000 and decrease in inventory of goods by
` 45,000 on the assets side of the equation. Capital increases by ` 15,000.

`

Assets =Liabilities + Capital
Cash + Inventory + Plant and + Bank + Furniture

   Machinery
1,05,000 + 1,65,000 + 3,00,000 + 5,00,000 + 1,00,000 = 3,20,000 + 8,50,000
60,000 + (45,000) + 15,000
1,65,000 + 1,20,000 +3,00,000 +5,00,000 + 1,00,000 = 3,20,000 + 8,65,000

Total 11,85,000 = 11,85,000

Transaction (vii)   It affects Debtors and Inventory on the assets side and capital on the
other side. There is increase in debtors by ̀  1, 25,000 and decrease in Inventory of goods by
` 80,000 on the assets side of the equation. Capital increases by Rs.45, 000.

`

Assets =Liabilities + Capital
Cash + Inventory +Plant and + Bank +Furniture + Debtors

  Machinery
1,65,000 + 1,20,000 + 3,00,000 + 5,00,000 + 1,00,000 = 3,20,000 + 8,65,000

    (80,000) + 1,25,000 = + 45,000
1,65,000+ 40,000 +3,00,000 +5,00,000 + 1,00,000 + 1,25,000 = 3,20,000 + 9,10,000

Total 12,30,000 = 12,30,000

Transaction (viii) It affects Bank on the assets side on one side and liability on the other
side. There is decrease in bank by ̀  35,000 on the assets side and liability also decreases by
` 35,000.

Reprint 2025-26



60 Accountancy

`

Assets =Liabilities + Capital
Cash + Inventory +Plant and + Bank +Furniture + Debtors

  Machinery
1,65,000 + 40,000 + 3,00,000 + 5,00,000 + 1,00,000 + 1,25,000 = 3,20,000 + 9,10,000

(35,000) = (35,000)
1,65,000 +  40,000  + 3,00,000 +4,65,000  + 1,00,000 + 1,25,000= 2,85,000 + 9,10,000

Total 11,95,000 = 11,95,000

Transaction (ix) It affects assets side only. The composition of the assets side changes.
Bank increases by ` 75,000 and by the same amount Debtors decreases.

`

Assets =Liabilities + Capital
Cash + Inventory +Plant and + Bank +Furniture + Debtors

  Machinery
1,65,000 + 40,000 + 3,00,000 + 4,65,000 + 1,00,000 + 1,25,000 = 2,85,000 + 9,10,000

+ 75,000 (75,000)
1,65,000 + 40,000 + 3,00,000 + 5,40,000 + 1,00,000 + 50,000 = 2,85,000 + 9,10,000

Total 11,95,000 = 11,95,000

Transaction (x)  It affects Cash on the asset side and Capital on the other hand. There
is decrease in Cash by ` 25,000 on the assets side whereas capital decreases
by ̀  25,000.

`

Assets =Liabilities + Capital
Cash + Inventory +Plant and + Bank +Furniture + Debtors

  Machinery
1,65,000 + 40,000 + 3,00,000 + 5,40,000 + 1,00,000 + 50,000 = 2,85,000 + 9,10,000
(25,000) + (25,000)
1,40,000+ 40,000 +3,00,000 +5,40,000 + 1,00,000 + 50,000 = 2,85,000 + 8,85,000

Total 11,95,000 = 11,95,000

3.4 Books of Original Entry

In the preceding pages, you learnt about debits and credits and observed how
transactions affect accounts. This process of analysing transactions and recording
their effects directly in the accounts is helpful as a learning exercise. However, real
accounting systems do not record transactions directly in the accounts. The book in
which the transaction is recorded for the first time is called journal or book of original
entry. The source document, as discussed earlier, is required to record the transaction
in the journal. This practice provides a complete record of each transaction in one
place and links the debits and credits for each transaction. After the debits and
credits for each transaction are entered in the journal, they are transferred to the
individual accounts. The process of recording transactions in journal is called
journalising. Once the journalising process is completed, the journal entry provides

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 61

a complete and useful description of the event’s effect on the organisation. The process
of transferring journal entry to individual accounts is called post ing.
This sequence causes the journal to be called the Book of Original Entry and
the ledger account as the Principal Book of entry. In this context, it should be
noted that on account of the number and commonality of most transactions,
the journal is subdivided into a number of books of original entry as follows:
(a) Journal Proper

(b) Cash book

(c) Other day books:

(i) Purchases (journal) book
(ii) Sales (journal) book
(iii) Purchase Returns (journal) book
(iv) Sale Returns (journal) book
(v) Bills Receivable (journal) book
(vi) Bills Payable (journal) book

In this chapter you will learn about the process of journalising and their
posting into ledger. The cash book and other day books are dealt in detail in
chapter 4.

3.4.1 Journal

This is the basic book of original entry. In this book, transactions are recorded
in the chronological order, as and when they take place. Afterwards,
transactions from this book are posted to the respective accounts. Each
transaction is separately recorded after determining the particular account to
be debited or credited.  The format of Journal is shown is figure 3.5

Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

Fig. 3.5 : Showing the format of journal

The first column in a journal is Date on which the transaction took place. In
the Particulars column, the account title to be debited is written on the first line
beginning from the left hand corner and the word ‘Dr.’ is written at the end of the
column. The account title to be credited is written on the second line leaving
sufficient margin on the left side with a prefix ‘To’. Below the account titles, a

Reprint 2025-26



62 Accountancy

brief description of the transaction is given which is called Narration. Having
written the Narration a line is drawn in the Particulars column, which indicates
the end of recording the specific journal entry. The column relating to Ledger
Folio records the page number of the ledger book on which relevant account is
appears. This column is filled up at the time of posting and not at the time of
making journal entry.

The Debit amount column records the amount against the account to be
debited and similarly the Credit Amount column records the amount against
the account to be credited. It may be noted that, the number of transactions
is very large and these are recorded in number of  pages in the journal book.
Hence, at the end of each page of the journal book, the amount columns are
totaled and carried forward (c/f) to the next page where such amounts are
recorded as brought forward (b/f) balances.

The journal entry is the basic record of a business transaction. It may be
simple or compound. When only two accounts are involved to record a
transaction, it is called a simple journal entry.

For Example, Goods Purchased on credit for Rs.30,000 from M/s Govind Traders
on December 24, 2017, involves only two accounts: (a) Purchases A/c (Goods), (b)
Govind Traders A/c (Creditors). This transaction is recorded in the journal as
follows :

Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

2014

Dec.24 Purchases  A/c Dr. 30,000
To Govind Traders A/c 30,000

(Purchase of goods- in-trade from
Govind Traders)

It will be noticed that although the transaction results in an increase in stock
of goods, the account debited is purchases, not goods. In fact, the goods account
is divided into five accounts, viz.  purchases account, sales account, purchases
returns account, sales returns account, and stock account. When the number of
accounts to be debited or credited is more than one, entry made for recording the
transaction is called compound journal entry. That means compound journal
entry involves multiple accounts. For example, Office furniture is purchased from
Modern Furniture’s on July 4, 2017 for ` 25,000 and ` 5,000 is paid by cash
immediately and balance of ̀  20,000 is still payable. It increases furniture (assets)
by ̀  25,000, decreases cash (assets) by ̀  5,000 and increases liability by ̀  20,000.
The entry made in the journal on July 4, 2017 is :

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 63

Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

2017 Office Furniture A/c Dr. 25,000
July 4 To  Cash A/c 5,000

To Modern Furniture A/c 20,000
(Purchase of office furniture from
Modern Furnitures)

Now refer to example 1on page 46 again and observe how the transactions
listed are recorded in the journal:

Books of Rohit
 Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

Cash A/c Dr. 5,00,000
To Capital A/c 5,00,000

(Business started with cash)

 Bank A/c                                     Dr. 4,80,000
To Cash A/c   4,80,000

(Opened bank account with State
Bank of India)

Furniture A/c                                Dr. 60,000
To Bank A/c 60,000

(Purchased furniture and made
payment through bank)

Plant and Machinery A/c Dr. 1,25,000
To  Cash A/c 10,000
To Ramjee Lal 1,15,000

(Bought Plant and Machinery from
M/s Ramjee Lal, made an advance
payment by cash for ` 10,000 and
balance at the later date)

Purchases A/c Dr. 55,000
To M/s Sumit Traders A/c 55,000

(Goods bought on credit)

Rajani Enterprises  A/c Dr. 35,000
To Sales A/c 35,000

(Goods sold on profit)
Total 12,55,000 12,55,000

Reprint 2025-26



64 Accountancy

Illustration 2.

Soraj Mart furnishes the following information :

Transactions during the month of April, 2017 are as under :

Date                                                  Details

01.4.2017 Business started with cash ` 1,50,000.
01.4.2017 Goods purchased form  Manisha ` 36,000.
01.4.2017 Stationery purchased for cash ` 2,200.
02.4.2017 Open a bank account with SBI for ` 35,000.
02.4.2017 Goods sold to Priya for ` 16,000.
03.4.2017 Received a cheque of  ̀  16,000 from Priya.
05.4.2017 Sold goods to Nidhi ` 14,000.
08.4.2017 Nidhi pays ̀  14,000 cash.
10.4.2017 Purchased goods for ` 20,000 on credit from Ritu.
14.4.2017 Insurance paid by cheque ̀  6,000.
18.4.2017 Paid  rent  ` 2,000.
20.4.2017 Goods costing ` 1,500  given as charity.
24.4.2017 Purchased office furniture for ̀  11,200. 
29.4.2017 Cash withdrawn for household purposes ` 5000.
30.4.2017 Interest  received  cash ` 1,200.
30.4.2017 Cash sales  ` 2,300.
30.4.2017 Commission paid ` 3,000 by cehque.
30.4.2017 Telephone bill paid by cheque ` 2,000.
30.4.2017 Payment of salaries in cash ` 12,000.

Journalise the transactions.

Solution

Books of Saroj Mart
Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

2017
Apr.01 Cash A/c Dr. 1,50,000

To Capital A/c 1,50,000
(Business started with cash)

Apr.01 Purchases A/c Dr. 36,000
To Manisha A/c 36,000

(Goods purchase on credit)

Apr.01 Stationery A/c Dr. 2,200
To Cash A/c 2,200

(Purchase of stationery for cash)

Total c/f 1,88,200 1,88,200

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 65

Total b/f 1,88,200 1,88,200

Apr.02  Bank A/c Dr. 35,000
To  Cash A/c 35,000

(Opened a bank account with SBI)

Apr.02 Priya A/c Dr. 16,000
To Sales A/c 16,000

(Goods sold to Priya On Credit)

Apr.03   Bank A/c Dr. 16,000
To Priya   A/c 16,000

(Cheque Received from Priya)

Apr.05 Nidhi A/c Dr. 14,000
To Sales A/c 14,000

(Sale of goods to Nidhi on credit)

Apr.08 Cash A/c Dr. 14,000
To Nidhi A/c 14,000

(Cash received from Nidhi)

Apr.10 Purchases A/c Dr. 20,000
To Ritu A/c 20,000

(Purchase of goods on credit)

Apr.14 Insurance Premium A/c Dr. 6,000
To Bank A/c 6,000

(Payment of Insurance premium by
cheque)

Apr.18  Rent A/c Dr. 2,000
To  Cash  A/c 2,000

(Rent paid)  

Apr.20 Charity A/c Dr. 1,500
To Purchases A/c 1,500

(Goods given as charity)

Apr.24 Furniture A/c Dr. 11,200

To  Cash  A/c 11,200
(Purchase of office furniture)

Apr.29 Drawings A/c Dr. 5,000
To Cash A/c 5,000

(With drawl of cash from the business
for personal use of the proprietor)

Apr.30 Cash  A/c Dr. 1,200
To  Interest received A/c 1,200

(Interest received)
Apr.30 Cash A/c Dr. 2,300

To Sales A/c 2,300
(Sale of goods for cash)

Total c/f 3,32,400 3,32,400

Reprint 2025-26



66 Accountancy

Total c/f 3,32,400 3,32,400

Apr.30 Commission A/c Dr. 3,000
To Bank A/c 3,000

(Commission paid by cheque)

Apr.30 Telephone expenses A/c Dr. 2,000
To Cash A/c 2,000

(Payment of telephone bill)

Apr.30 Salaries A/c Dr. 12,000
To Cash A/c 12,000

(Payment of salary to the office persons)

Total 3,49,400 3,49,400

Illustration 3

Prove that the accounting equation is satisfied in all the following transactions of Sita
Ram house by preparing the analysis table. Also record the transactions in Journal.

(i) Business commenced with a capital of ` 6,00,000.

(ii) ` 4,50,000 deposited in a bank account.

(iii) ` 2,30,000 Plant and Machinery Purchased by paying ` 30,000 cash immediately.

(iv) Purchased goods worth ` 40,000 for cash and ` 45,000 on account.

(v) Paid a cheque of ` 2, 00,000 to the supplier for Plant and Machinery.

(vi) ` 70,000 cash sales (of goods costing ` 50,000).

(vii) Withdrawn by the proprietor ` 35,000 cash for personal use.

(viii) Insurance paid by cheque of ` 2,500.

(ix) Salary of ` 5,500 outstanding.

(x) Furniture of ` 30,000 purchased in cash.

Solution

Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

(i) Cash A/c Dr. 6,00,000
To Capital A/c 6,00,000

(Business started with cash)

(ii) Bank A/c Dr. 4,50,000
To Cash A/c 4,50,000

(Cash deposited into the bank)

Total c/f 10,50,000 10,50,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 67

Total c/f 10,50,000 10,50,000

(iii) Plant and Machinery  A/c Dr. 2.30,000
To Cash A/c 30,000
To Creditors A/c 2,00,000

(Purchase of plant and machinery by
paying ` 30,000 cash and balance
on a later date)

(iv) Purchases A/c Dr. 85,000
To  Cash A/c 40,000
To Creditors A/c 45,000

(Bought goods for cash as well as on
credit)

(v) Creditor’s  A/c Dr. 2,00,000
To Bank A/c 2,00,000

(Payment made to the supplier of plant
and machinery)

(vi) Cash A/c Dr. 70,000
 To Sales   A/c 70,000

(Sold goods on profit)

(vii) Drawings A/c Dr. 35,000
To Cash A/c 35,000

(Withdrew cash for personal use)

(viii) Insurance A/c Dr. 2,500
To Bank A/c 2,500

(Paid insurance by cheque)

(ix) Salary  A/c Dr. 5,500
To Outstanding salary A/c 5,500

(Salary outstanding)

(x) Furniture  A/c Dr. 30,000
To Cash  A/c 30,000

(Furniture purchased for cash)

Total 17,08,000 17,08,000

Test Your Understanding - II

State the title of the accounts affected, type of account and the account to be debited
and account to be credited :

`

1. Bhanu commenced business with cash 1,00,000
2. Purchased goods on credit from Ramesh 40,000
3. Sold goods for cash 30,000
4. Paid salaries 3,000
5. Furniture purchased for cash 10,000

Reprint 2025-26



68 Accountancy

Statement showing the effect of various transaction on accounting equation
(Figures in rupees)

No. Cash Bank Stock Fur- Plant and Total = Non-trade Trade Capital Total
niture Machinery Creditors Creditors

1 6,00,000 6,00,000 = 6,00,000 6,00,000
6,00,000 - - - - 6,00,000 = - - 6,00,000 6,00,000

2 (4,50,000) 4,50,000
1,50,000 4,50,000 -- -- - 6,00,000 = - - 6,00,000 6,00,000

3 (30,000) - - - 2,30,000 2,00,000 2,00,000 - - 2,00,000
1,20,000 4,50,000 - - 2,30,000 8,00,000 = 2,00,000 - 600,000 8,00,000

4 (40,000) - 85,000 - - 45,000 - 45,000 - 45,000
80,000 4,50,000 85,000 - 2,30,000 8,45,000 = 2,00,000 45,000 600,000 8,45,000

5 - (2,00,000) - - - (2,00,000) (2,00,000) - - (2,00,000)
80,000 2,50,000 85,000 - 2,30,000 6,45,000 = - 45,000 6,00,000 20,000

6 70,000 - (50,000) - - 20,000 - - 20,000 20,000
1,50,000 2,50,000 35,000 - 2,30,000 6,65,000 = - 45,000 6,20,000 6,65,000

7 (35,000) - - (35,000) (35,000) (35,000)
1,15,000 2,50,000 35,000 - 2,30,000 6,30,000 = - 45,000 5,85,000 6,30,000

8 (2,500) (2,500) (2,500) (2,500)
1,15,000 2,47,500 35,000 - 2,30,000 6,27,500 = - 45,000 5,82,500 6,27,500

9 5,500 - (5,500)
1,15,000 2,47,500 35,000 - 2,30,000 6,27,500 = 5,500 45,000 5,77,000 6,27,500

10 (30,000) - - 30,000 - - - - -

85,000 2,47,500 35,000 30,000 2,30,000 6,27,500 = 5,500 45,000 5,77,000 6,27,500

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 69

6. Borrowed from bank 50,000
7. Sold goods to Sarita 10,000
8. Cash paid to Ramesh on account 20,000
9. Rent paid 1,500

Transaction Name of Accounts Type of Accounts Affected Accounts
No. Affected (Assets, Liabilities Capital, Increase/Decrease

Revenues and Expenses)

1 2 1 2 1 2
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Accounting Entries under Goods and Services Tax

Illustration : 4

Record necessary Journal entries assuming CGST @ 5% and SGST @ 5% and all transactions
are occurred within Delhi)

i. Shobit bought goods ` 1,00,000 on credit

ii. He sold them for ` 1,35,000 in the same state on credit

iii. He paid for Railway transport ` 8,000

iv. He bought computer printer for ` 10,000

v. Paid postal charges ̀  2000

Reprint 2025-26



70 Accountancy

Solution
Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

(i) Purchases A/c Dr. 1,00,000
Input CGST A/c Dr. 5,000
Input SGST A/c Dr. 5,000

To Creditors A/c
(Being Goods bought on credit) 1,10,000

(ii) Debtors A/c Dr. 1,48,500
To Sales A/c 1,35,000
To Output CGST A/c 6,750
To Output SGST A/c 6,750

(Being Goods sold on credit)

(iii) Transport Charges A/c Dr. 8,000
Input CGST A/c Dr. 400
Input SGST A/c Dr. 400

To Bank A/c 8,800
(Being tranport charges paid)

(iv) Computer printer A/c Dr. 10,000
Input CGST A/c Dr. 500
Input SGST A/c Dr. 500

To Bank A/c 11,000
(Being Computer-Printer bought)

(v) Postal charges A/c Dr. 2,000
Input CGST A/c Dr. 100
Input SGST A/c Dr. 100

To Bank A/c 2,200
(Being Paid for Portage)

(vi) Output CGST A/c Dr. 6,7503

Output SGST A/c Dr. 6,7504

To Input CGST A/c 6,0001

To Input SGST A/c 6,0002

To Electronic Cash Ledger A/c 1,500
(Being GST set off and balance paid)

Working Notes :-
Total Input CGST = ` 5,000 + ̀  400 + `500 + ̀ 100 = ̀ 6,0001

Total Input SGST = ` 5,000 + ̀  400 + `500 + ̀ 100 = ̀ 6,0002

Total Output CGST = ` 6,7503

Total Output SGST = ` 6,7504

Net CGST Payable = ` 6,750 - ̀ 6,000 = `750
Net SGST Payable = ` 6,750 - ̀ 6,000 = ̀ 750

Illustration : 5

Record necessary Journal entries in the books of Suman of Bihar assuming CGST @ 9%
and SGST @ 9% :

a. Bought goods ` 3,50,000 from Jharkhand.
b. Sold goods for ̀  2,00,000 Uttar Pradesh.
c. Sold goods for ` 4,00,000 locally.
d. Paid Insurance premium ̀  30,000.
e. Bought furniture for office ` 50,000.

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 71

Solution

Books of Suman
Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

(i) Purchases A/c Dr. 3,50,000
Input IGST A/c Dr. 63,000

To Bank A/c 4,13,000
(Being goods bought)

(ii) Bank A/c Dr. 2,36,000
To Sales A/c 2,00,000
To Output IGST A/c 36,000

(Being goods sold outside the state)

(iii) Debtors A/c Dr. 4,72,000
To Sales A/c 4,00,000
To Output CGST A/c 36,000
To Output SGST A/c 36,000

(Being goods sold on credit locally)

(iv) Insurance Premium A/c Dr. 30,000
Input CGST A/c Dr. 2,700
Input SGST A/c Dr. 2,700

To Bank A/c 35,400
(Being insurance premium paid)

(v) Furniture A/c Dr. 50,000
Input CGST A/c Dr. 4,500
Input SGST A/c Dr. 4,500

To Bank A/c 59,000
(Being furniture bought)

(vi) Output CGST A/c Dr. 34,200
To Input CGST A/c 7,200
To Input IGST A/c 27,000

(Being set off against CGST ouput
made)

(vii) Output SGST A/c Dr. 7,200
To Input SGST A/c 7,200

(Being set off against SGST output
made)

(viii) Output IGST A/c Dr. 36,200
To Input IGST A/c 36,000

(Being set off against SGST output
made)

(ix) Output CGST A/c Dr. 1,800
Output SGST A/c 28,800

To Electronic Cash Ledger A/c 30,600
(Being final payment made)

Reprint 2025-26



72 Accountancy

Working Notes :

     Calculation Sheet

   Particulars    CGST      SGST     IGST

Output liability 36,000 36,000     36,000
Loss : Input tax Credit

CGST 7,200
SGST 7,200
IGST 27,000      36,000

Amount Payable  1,800 28,800        NIL

•    Any IGST credit will first be applied to set off IGST and then CGST. Balance,
if any, will be applied to set off SGST.

3.5 The Ledger

The ledger is the principal book of accounting system. It contains different accounts
where transactions relating to that account are recorded. A ledger is the collection of all
the accounts, debited or credited, in the journal proper and various special journal
(about which you will learn in chapter 4). A ledger may be in the form of bound register,
or cards, or separate sheets may be maintained in a loose leaf binder. In the ledger, each
account is opened preferably on separate page or card.

Utility

A ledger is very useful and is of utmost importance in the organisation. The net
result of all transactions in respect of a particular account on a given date can
be ascertained only from the ledger. For example, the management on a particular
date wants to know the amount due from a certain customer or the amount the
firm has to pay to a particular supplier, such information can be found only in
the ledger. Such information is very difficult to ascertain from the journal because
the transactions are recorded in the chronological order and defies classification.
For easy posting and location, accounts are opened in the ledger in some definite
order. For example, they may be opened in the same order as they appear in the
profit and loss account and in balance sheet. In the beginning, an index is also
provided. For easy identification, in big organisations, each account is also
allotted a code number.
Format of the account is shown in figure 3.6.

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 73

Name of the Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Fig. 3.6 : Showing format of a ledger

According to this format the columns will contain the information as given below:
An account is debited or credited according to the rules of debit and credit

already explained in respect of each category of account.
Title of the account : The Name of the item is written at the top of the format as
the title of the account. The title of the account ends with suffix ‘Account’.
Dr./Cr. : Dr. means Debit side of the account that is left side and Cr. means
Credit side of the account, i.e. right side.
Date : Year, Month and Date of transactions are posted in chronological order in
this column.
Particulars : Name of the item with reference to the original book of entry is
written on debit/credit side of the  account.
Journal Folio : It records the page number of the original book of entry on which
relevant transaction is recorded. This column is filled up at the time of posting.
Amount : This column records the amount in numerical figure, corresponding
to what has been entered in the amount column of the original book of entry.

Test Your Understanding - III

 Choose the Correct Answer :

1. The ledger folio column of journal is used to:
(a) Record the date on which amount posted to a ledger account.
(b) Record the number of ledger account to which information is posted.
(c) Record the number of amounts posted to the ledger account.
(d) Record the page number of the ledger account.

2. The journal entry to record the sale of services on credit should include:
(a) Debit to debtors and credit to capital.
(b) Debit to cash and Credit to debtors.
(c) Debit to fees income and Credit to debtors.
(d) Debit to debtors and Credit to fees income.

3. The journal entry to record purchase of equipment for ` 2,00,000 cash and a
balance of ` 8,00,000 due in 30 days include:
(a) Debit equipment for ` 2,00,000 and Credit cash ` 2,00,000.

Reprint 2025-26



74 Accountancy

(b) Debit equipment for ̀  10,00,000 and Credit cash ̀  2,00,000 and creditors ̀  8,00,000.
(c) Debit equipment ` 2,00,000 and Credit debtors ` 8,00,000.
(d) Debit equipment ` 10,00,000 and Credit cash ` 10,00,000.

4. When an entry is made in journal:
(a) Assets are listed first.
(b) Accounts to be debited listed first.
(c) Accounts to be credited listed first.
(d) Accounts may be listed in any order.

5. If a transaction is properly analysed and recorded:
(a) Only two accounts will be used to record the transaction.
(b) One account will be used to record transaction.
(c) One account balance will increase and another will decrease.
(d) Total amount debited will equals total amount credited.

6. The journal entry to record payment of monthly bill will include:
(a) Debit monthly bill and Credit capital.
(b) Debit capital and Credit cash.
(c) Debit monthly bill and Credit cash.
(d) Debit monthly bill and Credit creditors.

7. Journal entry to record salaries will include:
(a) Debit salaries Credit cash.
(b) Debit capital Credit cash.
(c) Debit cash Credit salary.
(d) Debit salary Credit creditors.

Distinction between Journal and Ledger

The Journal and the Ledger are the most important books of the double entry
mechanism of accounting and are indispensable for an accounting system.
Following points of comparison are worth noting :

1. The Journal is the book of first entry (original entry); the ledger is the
book of second entry.

2. The Journal is the book for chronological record; the ledger is the book
for analytical record.

3. The Journal, as a book of source entry, gets greater importance as
legal evidence than the ledger.

4. Transaction is the basis of classification of data within the Journal;
Account is the basis of classification of data within the ledger.

5. Process of recording in the Journal is called Journalising; the process
of recording in the ledger is known as Posting.

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 75

3.5.1 Classification of Ledger Accounts

We have seen earlier that all ledger accounts are put into five categories namely,
assets, liabilities, capital, revenues/gains and expense losses. All these accounts
may further be put into two groups, i.e. permanent accounts and temporary
accounts. All permanent accounts are balanced and carried forward to the next
accounting period. The temporary accounts are closed at the end of the
accounting period by transferring them to the trading and profit and loss account.
All permanent accounts appears in the balance sheet. Thus, all assets, liabilities
and capital accounts are permanent accounts and all revenue and expense
accounts are temporary accounts. This classification is also relevant for preparing
the financial statements.

3.6 Posting from Journal

Posting is the process of transferring the entries from the books of original entry
(journal) to the ledger. In other words, posting means grouping of all the
transactions in respect to a particular account at one place for meaningful
conclusion and to further the accounting process.  Posting from the journal is
done periodically, may be, weekly or fortnightly or monthly as per the
requirements and convenience of the business.

The complete process of posting from journal to ledger has been discussed below:

Step 1 : Locate in the ledger, the account to be debited as entered in the journal.
Step 2 : Enter the date of transaction in the date column on the debit side.
Step 3 : In the ‘Particulars’ column write the name of the account through which
it has been debited in the journal. For example, furniture sold for cash ̀  34,000.
Now, in cash account on the debit side in the particulars column ‘Furniture’ will
be entered signifying that cash is received from the sale of furniture. In Furniture
account, in the ledger on the credit side is the particulars column, the word,
cash will be recorded. The same procedure is followed in respect of all the entries
recorded in the journal.
Step 4 : Enter the page number of the journal in the folio column and in the journal
write the page number of the ledger on which a particular account appears.
Step 5 : Enter the relevant amount in the amount column on the debit side.
It may be noted that the same procedure is followed for making the entry on the
credit side of that account to be credited. An account is opened only once in the
ledger and all entries relating to a particular account is posted on the debit or
credit side, as the case may be.

We will now see how the transactions listed in example on page 46-47 are
posted to different accounts from the journal.

Reprint 2025-26



76 Accountancy

Cash Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

Capital 5,00,000 Bank 4,80,000
Plant and 10,000
Machinery

Capital Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Cash 5,00,000

Bank Account
Dr.    Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Cash 4,80,000 Furniture 60,000

Furniture Account
Dr.    Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Bank 60,000

Plant and Machinery Account

Dr.    Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Cash 10,000

Ramjee lal 1,15,000

Ramjee Lal’s Account
Dr.    Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Plant and 1,15,000
Machinery

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 77

Purchases Account
Dr.    Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Sumit 55,000
Traders

Sumit Traders Account
Dr.    Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Purchases 55,000

Rajani Enterprises Account
Dr.    Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Sales 35,000

Sales Account
Dr.    Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Rajani Enter 35,000
prises

Test Your Understanding - IV

Fill in the blanks:
1. Issued a cheque for `8,000 to pay rent. The account to be debited is ............

2. Collected ` 35,000 from debtors. The account to be credited is ............

3. Purchased office stationary for ` 18,000. The account to be credited is ...........

4. Purchased new machine for ` 1,70,000 and issued cheque for the same.
The account to be debited is ............

5. Issued cheque for ` 70,000 to pay off on of the creditors. The account to

be debited is ............

6. Returned damaged office stationary and received ` 50,000. The account
to be credited is ............

7. Provided services for ` 65,000 on credit. The account to be debited is ...........

Reprint 2025-26



78 Accountancy

Illustration 4

Journalise the following transactions of M/s Mallika Fashion House and post the entries
to the Ledger:

Date                                                  Details Amount
2017 `

June 05 Business started with cash 2,00,000
June 08 Opened a bank account with Syndicate Bank  80,000
June 12 Goods purchased on credit from M/s Gulmohar Fashion House  30,000
June 12 Purchase office machines, paid by cheque  20,000
June 18 Rent paid by cheque   5,000
June 20 Sale of goods on credit to M/s Mohit Bros  10,000
June 22 Cash sales   15,000
June 25 Cash paid to M/s Gulmohar  Fashion House  30,000
June 28 Received  a cheque from M/s Mohit Bros 10,000
June 30 Salary paid in cash  6,000

Solution

(i) Recording the transactions

Books of Mallika Fashion House
Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

2017
June 05 Cash A/c Dr. 2,00,000

To Capital A/c   2,00,000
(Business started with cash)

June 08 Bank A/c Dr. 80,000
To  Cash A/c 80,000

(Opened a current account with
 syndicate bank)

June 12 Purchases A/c Dr. 30,000
To Gulmohar Fashion House A/c 30,000

(Goods purchased on credit)

June 12 Office  Machines A/c Dr.    20,000
To Bank A/c 20,000

(Office machine purchased)

June 18 Rent A/c Dr. 5,000
To Bank A/c 5,000

(Rent paid)

June 20 Mohit  Bros A/c Dr. 10,000
To Sales A/c  10,000

(Goods sold on credit)

Total c/f 3,45,000 3,45,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 79

Total b/f 3,45,000 3,45,000

June 22 Cash A/c Dr. 15,000
To Sales A/c 15,000

(Goods sold for cash)

June 25 Gulmohar Fashion House A/c Dr. 30,000

To Cash A/c  30,000 
(Cash paid to Gulmohar
Fashion House)

June 28 Bank A/c Dr. 10,000
To Mohit Bros A/c 10,000

(Payment received in full and
final settlement)

June 30 Salary A/c Dr. 6,000
To Cash A/c 6,000

(Monthly salary paid)

Total 4,06,000  4,06,000

(ii) Posting in the Ledger Book

Cash Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017 2017
June 5 Capital 2,00,000 June 8 Bank 80,000
June 22 Sales 15,000 June 25 Gulmohar 30,000

Fashion House
June 30 Salary 6,000

Capital Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
June 5  Cash 2,00,000

Bank Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017

June 08 Cash  80,000 June 12 Office Machines 30,000
June 28 Mohit Bros. 10,000 June 18 Rent 5,000

Reprint 2025-26



80 Accountancy

Purchases Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017

June 12 Gulmohar 30,000
Fashion House

Gulmohar Fashion House Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
June 25 Cash 30,000 June 12 Purchases 30,000

Office Machines Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
June 12 Bank 20,000

Rent Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
June 18 Bank 5,000

Mohit Bros. Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
June 20 Sales 10,000 June 28 Cash 10,000

Sales Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
June 20 June 20 Mohit Bros. 10,000

June 22 Cash 15,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 81

Salary Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
June 30 Cash 6,000

Illustration 5

Journalise the following transactions of M/s Time Zone and post them to the ledger accounts :

 Date Details Amount
2017 `

Dec. 01 Business started with cash 1,20,000
Dec. 02 Opened a bank account with ICICI 4,00,00
Dec. 04 Goods purchased for cash 12,000
Dec. 10 Paid cartage   500
Dec. 12 Goods sold on credit to M/s Lara India   25,000
Dec. 14 Cash received from M/s Lara India    10,000
Dec. 16 Goods returned from Lara India 3,000
Dec. 18 Paid trade expenses 700
Dec. 19 Goods purchased on credit from  Taranum 32,000
Dec. 20 Cheque received from M/s Lara India for final settlement  11,500

and deposited sameday into bank
Dec. 22 Goods returned to Taranum    1,500
Dec. 24 Paid for stationery       1,200
Dec. 26 Cheque given to Taranum on account    20,000
Dec. 28 Paid rent by cheque    4,000
Dec. 29 Drew cash for personal use   10,000
Dec. 30 Cash sales    12,000
Dec. 31 Goods sold to M/s Rupak Traders   11,000

Solution
Books of Time Zone

Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

2017
Dec. 01 Cash A/c Dr. 1,20,000

To Capital A/c 1,20,000
( Business started with cash)

02 Bank A/c Dr. 40,000
To Cash A/c 40,000

(Opened a current account with
ICICI bank)

04 Purchases A/c Dr. 12,000
To Cash A/c 12,000

(Goods purchased for cash)

Total c/f 1,72,000 1,72,000

Reprint 2025-26



82 Accountancy

Total b/f 1,72,000 1,72,000

10 Cartage A/c Dr. 500
To Cash A/c 500

(Cartage paid)

12 Lara India A/c Dr.  25,000
To  Sales A/c 25,000

(Goods sold on credit)

14 Cash A/c Dr. 10,000
To Lara India A/c 10,000

(Cash received from Lara India)

16 Sales Return A/c Dr. 3,000
To Lara India A/c 3,000

(Goods returned from Lara India)

18 Trade Expenses A/c Dr. 700
To Cash A/c 700

(Trade expenses paid)

19 Purchases A/c Dr. 32,000
To Tranum’s A/c 32,000

(Goods purchased on credit)

20 Bank A/c Dr. 11,500
Discount A/c Dr. 500

To Lara India A/c 12,000
(Cheque received for final settlement)

22 Taranum’s A/c Dr. 1,500
To Purchase Return’s A/c 1,500

(Goods returned to Tranum)

24 Stationery A/c Dr. 1,200
To Cash A/c 1,200

(Cash paid for stationery)

26 Taranum’s A/c Dr. 20,000
To Bank A/c 20,000

(Cheque given to Tranum)

28 Rent A/c Dr. 4,000
To Bank A/c 4,000

(Rent paid by cheque)

29 Drawings A/c Dr. 10,000
To Cash A/c 10,000

(Cash withdrawn for personal use)

30 Cash A/c Dr.  12,000
To  Sales  A/c 12,000

(Goods sold for cash)

31 Rupak Trader A/c Dr. 11,000
To  Sales  A/c 11,000

(Goods sold on credit)

Total 3,14,900  3,14, 900

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 83

Posting in the Ledger Book :

Cash Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Dec. 01 Capital 1,20,000 Dec. 02 Bank 40,000
Dec. 14 Lara India 10,000 Dec. 04 Purchase 12,000
Dec. 30 Sales 12,000 Dec. 10 Cartage 500

Dec. 18 Trade 700
Expenses

Dec. 24. Stationery 1,200
Dec. 29 Drawings 1,000

Capital Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec.01  Cash 1,20,000

Bank Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Dec.02 Cash  40,000 Dec.26 Taranum’s  20,000
Dec.20 Lara India  11,500 Dec.28 Rent    4,000

Purchases Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec.04 Cash  12,000
Dec.19 Taranum  32,000

Cartage Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec.10 Cash   500

Reprint 2025-26



84 Accountancy

Lara India Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Dec.12 Sales 25,000 Dec. 14 Cash 10,000

Dec. 16 Sales return 3,000
Dec. 20 Bank 11,500

Discount 500

Sales Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec.12 Lara India  25,000
Dec.30 Cash  12,000
Dec.31 Rupak Traders  11,000

Sales Return Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec.16 Lara India   3,000

Trade Expenses Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Dec.18 Cash   700

Taranum Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017 2017
Dec.22 Purchase    1,500 Dec.19  Purchase  32,000

Return
Dec.26 Bank   20,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 85

Discount Paid Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec.20 Lara India   500

Purchases Return Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec.22  Taranum   1,500

Stationery Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec.  Cash   1,200

Rent Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec.  28  Bank   4,000

Drawings Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec. 29  Cash   10,000

Rupak Traders Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec. 31  Sales   11,000

Reprint 2025-26



86 Accountancy

Test Your Understanding - V

Select Right Answer:
1. Voucher is prepared for:

(i) Cash received and paid
(ii) Cash/Credit sales
(iii) Cash/Credit purchase
(iv) All of the above

2. Voucher is prepared from:
(i) Documentary evidence
(ii) Journal entry
(iii) Ledger account
(iv) All of the above

3. How many sides does an account have?
(i) Two
(ii) Three
(iii) one
(iv) None of These

4. A purchase of machine for cash should be debited to:
(i) Cash account
(ii) Machine account
(iii) Purchase account
(iv) None of these

5. Which of the following is correct?
(i) Liabilities = Assets + Capital
(ii) Assets = Liabilities – Capital
(iii) Capital = Assets – Liabilities
(iv) Capital = Assets + Liabilities.

6. Cash withdrawn by the Proprietor should be credited to:
(i) Drawings account
(ii) Capital account
(iii) Profit and loss account
(iv) Cash account

7. Find the correct statement:
(i) Credit a decrease in assets
(ii) Credit the increase in expenses
(iii) Debit the increase in revenue
(iv) Credit the increase in capital

8. The book in which all accounts are maintained is known as:
(i) Cash Book
(ii) Journal
(iii) Purchases Book
(iv) Ledger

9. Recording of transaction in the Journal is called:
(i) Casting
(ii) Posting
(iii) Journalising
(iv) Recording

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 87

Key Terms Introduced in the Chapter

• Source Documents • Credit
• Accounting Equation • Debit
• Books of Original Entry • Account
• Journalising and Posting • Ledger
• Double Entry Book Keeping· • Journal

Summary with Reference to Learning Objectives

1. Meaning of source documents : Various business documents such as invoice,
bills, cash memos, vouchers, which form the basis and evidence of a business
transaction recorded in the books of account, are called source documents.

2. Meaning of accounting equation : A statement of equality between debits and
credits signifying that the assets of a business are always equal to the total
liabilities and capital.

3. Rules of debit and credit : An account is divided into two sides. The left side of
an account is known as debit and the credit. The rules of debit and credit
depend on the nature of an account. Debit and Credit both represent either
increase or decrease, depending on the nature of an account. These rules are
summarised as follows :

Name of an account Debit Credit
Assets Increase Decrease
Liabilities Decrease Increase
Capital Decrease Increase
Revenues Decrease Increase
Expenses increase Decrease

4. Books of Original entry : The transactions are first recorded in these books in
a chronological order. Journal is one of the books of original entry. The process
of recording entries in the journal is called journalising.

5. Ledger : A book containing all accounts to which entries are transferred from
the books of original entry. Posting is process of transferring entries from
books of original entry to the ledger.

Questions for Practice

Short Answers

1. State the three fundamental steps in the accounting process.

2. Why is the evidence provided by source documents important to accounting?

3. Should a transaction be first recorded in a journal or ledger? Why?

4. Are debits or credits listed first in journal entries? Are debits or credits indented?

5. Why are some accounting systems called double accounting systems?

6. Give a specimen of an account.

Reprint 2025-26



88 Accountancy

7. Why are the rules of debit and credit same for both liability and capital?

8. What is the purpose of posting J.F numbers that are entered in the journal at
the time entries are posted to the accounts.

9. What entry (debit or credit) would you make to: (a) increase revenue (b) decrease
in expense, (c) record drawings (d) record the fresh capital introduced by the
owner.

10. If a transaction has the effect of decreasing an asset, is the decrease recorded
as a debit or as a credit? If the transaction has the effect of decreasing a
liability, is the decrease recorded as a debit or as a credit?

Long Answers

1. Describe the events recorded in accounting systems and the importance of
source documents in those systems?

2. Describe how debits and credits are used to analyse transactions.

3. Describe how accounts are used to record information about the effects of
transactions?

4. What is a journal? Give a specimen of journal showing at least five entries.

5. Differentiate between source documents and vouchers.

6. Accounting equation remains intact under all circumstances. Justify the
statement with the help of an example.

7. Explain the double entry mechanism with an illustrative example.

Numerical  Quest ions

Analysis of Transactions
1. Prepare accounting equation on the basis of the following :

(a) Harsha started business with cash
`2,00,000

(b) Purchased goods from Naman for cash
` 40,000

(c) Sold goods to Bhanu costing `10,000/-
` 12,000

(d) Bought furniture on credit
` 7,000

(Ans: Asset = cash ` 1,60,000 + Goods ` 30,000 + Debtors ` 12,000 +
Furniture ` 7,000 = ` 2,09,000; Liabilities = Creditors ` 7,000 + Capital
` 2,02,000 = ̀  2,09,000)

2. Prepare accounting equation from the following:

(a) Kunal started business with cash
`2,50000

(b) He purchased furniture for cash
`  35,000

(c) He paid commission
` 2,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 89

(d) He purchases goods on credit ` 40,000

(e) He sold goods (Costing `20,000) for cash ` 26,000

(Ans: Asset = Cash ` 2,39,000 + Furniture ` 35,000 + Goods ` 20,000 =
` 2,94,000; Liabilities = Creditors ̀  40,000 + Capital ̀  2,54,000= ̀  2,94,000)

3. Mohit has the following transactions, prepare accounting equation:

(a) Business started with cash ` 1,75,000

(b) Purchased goods from Rohit ` 50,000

(c) Sales goods on credit to Manish (Costing ` 17,500) ` 20,000

(d) Purchased furniture for office use ` 10,000

(e) Cash paid to Rohit in full settlement ` 48,500

(f) Cash received from Manish ` 20,000

(g) Rent paid  ̀  1,000

(h) Cash withdrew for personal use ` 3,000

(Ans: Cash ` 1,32,500 + Goods ` 32,500 + Furniture ` 10,000
= ` 1,75,000; Liabilition = Capital ` 1,75,000)

4. Rohit has the following transactions :

(a) Commenced business with cash `1,50,000

(b) Purchased machinery on credit ` 40,000

(c) Purchased goods for cash ` 20,000

(d) Purchased car for personal use ` 80,000

(e) Paid to creditors in full settlement ` 38,000

(f) Sold goods for cash costing ` 5,000 ` 4,500

(g) Paid rent ` 1,000

(h) Commission received in advance ` 2,000

Prepare the Accounting Equation to show the effect of the above transactions
on the assets, liabilities and capital.

(Ans: Assets = Cash ` 17,500 + Machine ` 40,000 + Goods ` 15,000
= ` 72,500; Liabilities = Commission ` 2,000 + Capital ` 70,500
= ` 72,500)

5. Use accounting equation to show the effect of the following transactions of
M/s Royal Traders:

(a) Started business with cash `1,20,000

(b) Purchased goods for cash ` 10,000

(c) Rent received ` 5,000

(d) Salary outstanding ` 2,000

(e) Prepaid Insurance ` 1,000

(f) Received interest ` 700

Reprint 2025-26



90 Accountancy

(g) Sold goods for cash (Costing ` 5,000) ` 7,000

(h) Goods destroyed by fire ` 500

(Ans: Assets = Cash ` 1,21,200 + Goods ` 4,500 + Prepaid insurance
` 1,000; Liabilities = Outstanding salary ` 2,000 + Capital ` 1,25,200)

6. Show the accounting equation on the basis of the following transaction:

(a) Udit started business with:

(i) Cash ` 5,00,000
(ii) Goods ` 1,00,000

(b) Purchased building for cash ` 2, 00,000
(c) Purchased goods from Himani ` 50,000
(d) Sold goods to Ashu (Cost ` 25,000) ` 36, 000
(e) Paid insurance premium ` 3,000
(f) Rent outstanding ` 5,000
(g) Depreciation on building ` 8,000
(h) Cash withdrawn for personal use ` 20,000
(i) Rent received in advance ` 5,000
(j) Cash paid to himani  on account ` 20,000
(k) Cash received from Ashu ` 30,000

(Ans : Assets = Cash ` 2,92,000 + Goods ` 1,25,000 + Building
` 1,92,000 + Debtors ` 6,000  = 6,15,000: Laibilities = Creditors
` 30,000 + Outstanding Rent ̀  5,000 +  Accounts receiavable ̀  5,000 + Capital
` 5,75,000 = ̀  6,15,000)

7. Show the effect of the following transactions on Assets, Liabilities and
Capital through accounting equation:

(a) Started business with cash ` 1,20,000

(b) Rent received ` 10,000

(c) Invested in shares ` 50,000

(d) Received dividend ` 5,000

(e) Purchase goods on credit from Ragani ` 35,000

(f) Paid cash for house hold Expenses ` 7,000

(g) Sold goods for cash (costing `10,000) ` 14,000

(h) Cash paid to Ragani ` 35,000

(i) Deposited into  bank ` 20,000

(Ans: Assets = Cash ` 37,000 + Shares ` 50,000 + Goods ` 25,000 + Bank
` 20,000 = ` 1,32,000; Liabilities = Capital ` 1,32,000)

8. Show the effect of following transaction on the accounting equation:

(a) Manoj started business with

(i) Cash ` 2,30,000

(ii) Goods ` 1,00,000

(iii) Building ` 2,00,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 91

(b) He purchased goods for cash ` 50,000

(c) He sold goods (costing `20,000) ` 35,000

(d) He purchased goods from Rahul ` 55,000

(e) He sold goods to Varun (Costing ` 52,000) ` 60,000

(f) He paid cash to Rahul in full settlement ` 53,000

(g) Salary paid by him ` 20,000

(h) Received cash from Varun in full settlement ` 59,000

(i) Rent outstanding ` 3,000

(j) Prepaid Insurance ` 2,000

(k) Commission received by him ` 13, 000

(l) Amount withdrawn by him for personal use ` 20,000

(m) Depreciation charge on building ` 10,000

(n) Fresh capital invested ` 50,000

(o) Purchased goods from Rakhi ` 10,000

(Ans: Assets = Cash ` 2,42,000 + Goods ` 1,43,000 +Building `1,90,000 +
Prepaid Insurouce ̀  2,000 = ̀  5,77,000; Liabilities = Outstanding Rent ̀  3,000
+  Creditor ` 10,000 +  Capital ̀  5,64,000 = ` 5,77,000)

9. Transactions of M/s Vipin Traders are given below.

Show the effects on Assets, Liabilities and Capital with the help of accounting
Equation.

(a) Business started with cash ` 1,25,000

(b) Purchased goods for cash ` 50,000

(c) Purchase furniture from R.K. Furniture ` 10,000

(d) Sold goods to Parul Traders (Costing ` 7,000 vide `9,000
bill no. 5674)

(e) Paid cartage ` 100

(f) Cash Paid to R.K. furniture in full settlement ` 9,700

(g) Cash sales (costing `10,000) ` 12,000

(h) Rent received ` 4,000

(i) Cash withdrew for personal use ` 3,000

(Ans: Asset = cash ̀  78,200 + Goods ̀  33,000 + Furniture ̀  10,000 Debtors
` 9,000 = ` 1,30,200; Liabilities = Capital ` 1,30,200)

10. Bobby opened a consulting firm and completed these transactions during
November, 2017:

(a) Invested ` 4,00,000 cash and office equipment with ` 1,50,000 in a
business called Bobbie Consulting.

(b) Purchased land and a small office building. The land was worth
` 1,50,000 and the building worth ̀  3, 50,000. The purchase price was

Reprint 2025-26



92 Accountancy

paid with ` 2,00,000 cash and a long term note payable for
` 3,00,000.

(c) Purchased office supplies on credit for ` 12,000.

(d) Bobbie transferred title of motor car to the business. The motor car
was worth ` 90,000.

(e) Purchased for ` 30,000 additional office equipment on credit.

(f) Paid ` 75,00 salary to the office manager.

(g) Provided services to a client and collected ` 30,000

(h) Paid ` 4,000 for the month’s utilities.

(i) Paid supplier created in transaction c.

(j) Purchase new office equipment by paying ̀  93,000 cash and trading in
old equipment with a recorded cost of ` 7,000.

(k) Completed services of a client for ` 26,000. This amount is to be paid
within 30 days.

(l) Received ` 19,000 payment from the client created in transaction k.

(m) Bobby withdrew ̀  20,000 from the business.

Analyse the above stated transactions and open the following T-accounts:

Cash, client, office supplies, motor car, building, land, long term payables,
capital, withdrawals, salary, expense and utilities expense.

Journalising

11. Journalise the following transactions in the books of Himanshu:

2017 `

Dec.01 Business started with cash 75,000

Dec.07 Purchased goods for cash 10,000

Dec.09 Sold goods to Swati 5,000

Dec.12 Purchased furniture 3,000

Dec.18 Cash received from Swati In full settlement 4,000

Dec.25 Paid rent 1,000

Dec.30 Paid salary 1,500

12. Enter the following Transactions in the Journal of Mudit :

2017 `

Jan.01 Commenced business with cash 1,75,000

Jan.01 Building 1,00,000

Jan.02 Goods purchased for cash 75,000

Jan.03 Sold goods to Ramesh 30,000

Jan.04 Paid wages 500

Jan.06 Sold goods for cash 10,000

Jan.10 Paid for trade expenses 700

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 93

Jan.12 Cash received from Ramesh 29,500

Discount allowed 500

Jan.14 Goods purchased for Sudhir 27,000

Jan.18 Cartage paid 1,000

Jan.20 Drew cash for personal use 5,000

Jan.22 Goods use for house hold 2,000

Jan.25 Cash paid to Sudhir 26,700

Discount allowed 300

13. Journalise the following transactions:

2017 `

Dec. 01 Hema started business with cash 1,00,000

Dec. 02 Open a bank account with SBI 30,000

Dec. 04 Purchased goods from Ashu 20,000

Dec.06 Sold goods to Rahul for cash 15,000

Dec.10 Bought goods from Tara for cash 40,000

Dec.13 Sold goods to Suman 20,000

Dec.16 Received cheque from Suman 19,500

Discount allowed 500

Dec.20 Cheque given to Ashu on account 10,000

Dec.22 Rent paid by cheque 2,000

Dec.23 Deposited into bank 16,000

Dec.25 Machine purchased from Parigya 10,000

Dec.26 Trade expenses 2,000

Dec.28 Cheque issued to Parigya 10,000

Dec.29 Paid telephone expenses by cheque 1,200

Dec.31 Paid salary   4,500

14. Jouranlise the following transactions in the books of Harpreet Bros.:

(a) `1,000 due from Rohit are now bad debts.

(b) Goods worth `2,000 were used by the proprietor.

(c) Charge depreciation @ 10% p.a for two month on machine costing
`30,000.

(d) Provide interest on capital of ` 1,50,000 at 6% p.a. for 9 months.

(e) Rahul become insolvent, who owed is ` 2,000 a final dividend of
60 paise in a rupee is received from his estate.

15. Prepare Journal from the transactions given below :

(a) Cash paid for installation of machine ` 500

(b) Goods given as charity ` 2,000

Reprint 2025-26



94 Accountancy

(c) Interest charge on capital @7% p.a. when total ` 70,000
capital were

(d) Received `1,200 of a bad debts written-off last year.

(e) Goods destroyed by fire ` 2,000

(f) Rent outstanding ` 1,000

(g) Interest on drawings ` 900

(h) Sudhir Kumar who owed me ` 3,000 has failed to pay the amount. He
pays me a compensation of 45 paise in a rupee.

(i) Commission received in advance ` 7,000

Posting

16. Journalise the following transactions, post to the ledger:

2017 `

Nov. 01 Business started with (i)  Cash 1,50,000

                                 (ii)  Goods 50,000

Nov. 03 Purchased goods from Harish 30,000

Nov. 05 Sold goods for cash 12,000

Nov. 08 Purchase furniture for cash    5,000

Nov. 10 Cash paid to Harish on account  15,000

Nov. 13 Paid sundry expenses 200

Nov. 15 Cash sales 15,000

Nov. 18 Deposited into bank    5,000

Nov. 20 Drew cash for personal use 1,000

Nov. 22 Cash paid to Harish in full settlement of account  14,700

Nov. 25 Good sold to Nitesh    7,000

Nov. 26 Cartage paid       200

Nov. 27 Rent paid    1,500

Nov. 29 Received cash from Nitesh    6,800

Discount allowed       200

Nov. 30 Salary paid    3,000

17. Journalise the following transactions is the journal of M/s Goel
Brothers and post them to the ledger.
2017 `

Jan. 01 Started business with cash 1,65,000

Jan. 02 Opened bank account in PNB 80,000

Jan. 04 Goods purchased from Tara 22,000

Jan. 05 Goods purchased for cash 30,000

Jan. 08 Goods sold to Naman 12,000

Jan. 10 Cash paid to Tara 22,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 95

Jan. 15 Cash received from Naman 11,700

Discount allowed      300

Jan. 16 Paid wages      200

Jan. 18 Furniture purchased for office use   5,000

Jan. 20 withdrawn from bank for personal use   4,000

Jan. 22 Issued cheque for rent   3,000

Jan. 23 goods issued for house hold purpose   2,000

Jan. 24 drawn cash from bank for office use   6,000

Jan. 26 Commission received   1,000

Jan. 27 Bank charges 200

Jan. 28 Cheque given for insurance premium   3,000

Jan. 29 Paid salary   7,000

Jan. 30 Cash sales 10,000

18 Give journal entries of M/s Mohit traders, Post them to the Ledger
from the following transactions :

August 2017 `

1. Commenced business with cash 1,10,000

2. Opened bank account with H.D.F.C. 50,000

3. Purchased furniture 20,000

7. Bought goods for cash from M/s Rupa Traders 30,000

8. Purchased good from M/s Hema Traders 42,000

10. Sold goods for cash 30,000

14. Sold goods on credit to M/s. Gupta Traders 12,000

16. Rent paid 4,000

18. Paid trade expenses 1,000

20. Received cash from Gupta Traders 12,000

22. Goods return to Hema Traders 2,000

23. Cash paid to Hema Traders 40,000

25. Bought postage stamps 100

30. Paid salary to Rishabh 4,000

19. Journalise the following transaction in the Books of the M/s Bhanu
Traders and Post them into the Ledger.

December, 2017 `

1. Started business with cash 92,000

2. Deposited into bank 60,000

4. Bought goods on credit from Himani 40,000

6. Purchased goods from cash 20,000

8. Returned goods to Himani 4,000

10. Sold goods for cash 20,000

14. Cheque given to Himani 36,000

Reprint 2025-26



96 Accountancy

17. Goods sold to M/s Goyal Traders. 3,50,000

19. Drew cash from bank for personal use 2,000

21. Goyal traders returned goods 3,500

22. Cash deposited into bank 20,000

26. Cheque received from Goyal Traders 31,500

28. Goods given as charity 2,000

29. Rent paid 3,000

30. Salary paid 7,000

31. Office machine purchased for cash 3,000

20. Journalise the following transaction in the Book of M/s Beauti
traders. Also post them in the ledger.

Dec. 2017 `

1. Started business with cash 2,00,000

2. Bought office furniture 30,000

3. Paid into bank to open an current account 1,00,000

5. Purchased a computer and paid by cheque 2,50,000

6. Bought goods on credit from Ritika 60,000

8. Cash sales 30,000

9. Sold goods to Karishna on credit 25,000

12. Cash paid to Mansi on account 30,000

14. Goods returned to Ritika 2,000

15. Stationery purchased for cash 3,000

16. Paid wages 1,000

18. Goods returned by Karishna 2,000

20. Cheque given to Ritika 28,000

22. Cash received from Karishna on account 15,000

24. Insurance premium paid by cheque 4,000

26. Cheque received from Karishna 8,000

28. Rent paid by cheque 3,000

29. Purchased goods on credit from Meena Traders 20,000

30. Cash sales 14,000

21. Journalise the following transaction in the books of Sanjana and
post them into the ledger :

January, 2017 `

1. Cash in hand 6,000

Cash at bank 55,000

Stock of goods 40,000

Due to Rohan 6,000

Due from Tarun 10,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - I 97

3. Sold goods to Karuna 15,000

4. Cash sales 10,000

6. Goods sold to Heena 5,000

8. Purchased goods from Rupali 30,000

10. Goods returned from Karuna 2,000

14. Cash received from Karuna 13,000

15. Cheque given to Rohan 6,000

16. Cash received from Heena 3,000

20. Cheque received from Tarun 10.000

22. Cheque received from to Heena 2,000

25. Cash given to Rupali 18,000

26. Paid cartage 1,000

27. Paid salary 8,000

28. Cash sale 7,000

29. Cheque given to Rupali 12,000

30. Sanjana took goods for Personal use 4,000

31. Paid General expense 500

  22.  Record journal entries for the following transactions in the books of
          Anudeep of Delhi:

(a) Bought goods ` 2,00,000 from Kanta of Delhi (CGST @ 9%, SGST @ 9%)
(b) Bought goods ` 1,00,000 for cash from Rajasthan (IGST @ 12%)
(c) Sold goods ` 1,50,000 to Sudhir of Punjab (IGST @ 18%)
(d) Paid for Railway Transport ` 10,000 (CGST @ 5%, SGST @ 5%)
(e) Sold goods ` 1,20,000 to Sidhu of Delhi (CGST @ 9%, SGST @ 9%)
(f) Bought Air-Condition for office use ` 60,000 (CGST @ 9%, SGST @ 9%)
(g) Sold goods ` 1,50,000 for cash to Sunil to Uttar Pradesh (IGST 18%)
(h) Bought Motor Cycle for business use ` 50,000 (CGST 14%, SGST @ 14%)
(i) Paid for Broadband services ` 4,000 (CGST @ 9%, SGST @ 0%)

(j) Bought goods ` 50,000 from Rajesh, Delhi (CGST @ 9%, SGST @ 9%)

Checklist to Test Your Understanding

Test Your Understanding - I

1. (iii), 2 (Capital increases by net profit and fresh capital introduced, decreases by drawings
and net loss), 3 (No), 4 (ii)

Test Your Understanding - II

1. Cash account and capital account, Assets and Liabilities, Assest increase
and capital increase.

2. Purchase account and Remesh account, Expenses and Liabilities, Expenses
and Liabilities increases.

Reprint 2025-26



98 Accountancy

3. Cash account and sales account, Assets and Revenues, Assets and Revenues
increases.

4. Salaries account and cash account, Expense and Assets, Expenses increases A s s e t s
decreases.

5. Furniture account and Cash account, Asset  increases Asset decreases.
6. Loan account and Bank, Liability and Asset, Liabilities increases Asset

decreases.
7. Sarita account and Sales account, Asset and Revenue,  Assets decreases

Revenue decreases.
8. Ramesh account and Cash, liabilities and Assets, Liabilities decreases Assets

increases.
9. Rent account and Cash account, Expense and Assets, Expenses increases Assets

decreases.

Test Your Understanding  - III

1(d), 2(d), 3(b), 4(b), 5(d), 6(c), 7(a)

Test your understanding - IV

1. Rent 2. Debtors 3. Cash
4. Machine 5. Creditors 6. Office stationary
7. Debtors

Test Your Understanding - V

1 (iv), 2 (i), 3 (i), 4 (ii), 5 (iii), 6 (iv), 7 (iv), 8 (iv), 9 (iii).

Reprint 2025-26


##4##
Recording of Transactions-II 4

In chapter 3, you learnt that all the
business transactions are first recorded in the

journal and then they are posted in the ledger
accounts. A small business may be able to record
all its transactions in one book only, i.e., the journal.
But as the business expands and the number of
transactions becomes large, it may become
cumbersome to jour-nalise each transaction. For
quick, efficient and accurate recording of business
transactions, Journal is sub-divided into special
journals. Many of the business transactions are
repetitive in nature. They can be easily recorded in

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
special journals, each meant for recording all the

After studying this transactions of a similar nature. For example, all
chapter, you will be able

cash transactions may be recorded in one book, all credit
to :

sales transactions in another book and all credit
• state the need for

purchases transactions in yet another book and so on.
special purpose books;

These special journals are also called daybooks or
• record the transactions

subsidiary books. Transactions that cannot be recorded
in cash book and post
them in the ledger; in any special journal are recorded in journal called the

• prepare the petty cash Journal Proper. Special journals prove economical and
book; make division of labour possible in accounting work. In

• record the transactions this chapter we will discuss the following special purpose
in the special purpose books:
books; • Cash Book

• post the entries in the • Purchases Book
special purpose book

• Purchases Return (Return Outwards) Book
and  to the ledger;

• Sales Book
• balance the ledger

accounts. • Sales Return (Return Inwards) Book
• Journal Proper

Reprint 2025-26



100 Accountancy

4.1 Cash Book

Cash book is a book in which all transactions relating to cash receipts and cash
payments are recorded. It starts with the cash or bank balances at the beginning
of the period.  Generally, it is made on monthly basis. This is a very popular
book and is maintained by all organisations, big or small, profit or not-for-
profit. It serves the purpose of both journal as well as the ledger (cash) account.
It is also called the book of original entry. When a cashbook is maintained,
transactions of cash are not recorded in the journal, and no separate account
for cash or bank is required in the ledger.

4.1.1 Single Column Cash Book

The single column cash book records all cash transactions of the business in a
chronological order, i.e., it is a complete record of cash receipts and cash
payments. When all receipts and payments are made in cash by a business
organisation only, the cash book contains only one amount column on each
(debit and credit) side. The format of single column cash book is shown in
figure 4.1.

Cash Book
Dr. Cr.

Date Receipts L.F. Amount Date Payments L.F. Amount
` `

Fig. 4.1 : Format of single column cash book

Recording of entries in the single column cash book and its balancing is
illustrated by an example. Consider the following transactions of M/s Roopa
Traders observe how they are recorded in a single column cash book.

Date Details Amount
`

2017
Nov. 01 Cash in hand 30,000
Nov. 04 Cash received from Gurmeet 12,000
Nov. 08 Insurance paid (Annual Instalment)  6,000
Nov. 13 Purchased furniture 13,800
Nov. 16 Sold goods for cash 28,000
Nov. 17 Purchased goods from Mudit in cash 17,400
Nov. 20 Purchase stationery 1,100
Nov. 24 Cash paid to Rukmani in full settlement of account 12,500

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 101

Nov. 27 Sold goods to Kamal for cash 18,200
Nov. 30 Paid monthly rent 2,500
Nov. 30 Paid salary 3,500
Nov. 30 Deposited in bank 8,000

Roopa Traders
Cash Book

Dr. Cr.

Date Receipts L.F. Amount Date Payments L.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Nov. 01 Balance b/d 30,000 Nov. 08 Insurance 6,000
Nov. 04 Gurmeet 12,000 Nov. 13 Furniture 13,800
Nov. 16 Sales 28,000 Nov. 17 Purchases 17,400
Nov. 27 Sales 18,200 Nov. 20 Stationery   1,100

Nov. 24 Rukmani  12,500
Nov. 30 Rent   2,500
Nov. 30 Salary   3,500
Nov. 30 Bank  8,000
Nov. 30 Balance c/d 23,400

88,200 88,200

Dec.01 Balance b/d 23,400

Posting of the Single Column Cash Book

As evident from figure 4.1, the left side of the cash book shows the receipts of
the cash whereas the right side of the cash book shows all the payments
made in cash. The accounts appearing on then debit side for the cash book
are credited in the respective ledger accounts because cash has been received
in respect of them. Thus, in our example, an entry ‘cash received from Gurmeet’
appears on the debit side of the cash book conveys that the cash has been
received from Gurmeet. Therefore, in the ledger, Gurmeet’s account will be
credited by writing ‘Cash’ in the particulars column on the credit side. Similarly,
all the account names appearing on the credit side of the cash book are debited
as cash/cheque has been paid in respect of them. Now, notice, how the
transactions in our example are posted to the related ledger accounts:

Reprint 2025-26



102 Accountancy

Books of Roopa Traders
Gurmeet’s Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Nov.04 Cash 12,000

Sales Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Nov. 16 Cash 28,000
Nov. 27 Cash 18,200

Insurance Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Nov. 08 Cash 6,000

Furniture Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Nov. 13 Cash 13,800

Purchases Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Nov. 17 Cash 17,400

Stationery Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Nov. 20 Cash 1,100

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 103

Rukmani’s Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Nov.24 Cash 12,500

 Rent Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Nov.30 Cash 2,500

Salary Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Nov. 30 Cash 3,500

Bank’s Account
Dr.                                                 Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Nov.30 Cash 8,000

4.1.2 Double Column Cash Book

In this type of cash book, there are two columns of amount on each side of the
cash book. In fact, now-a-days bank transactions are very large in number. In
many organisations, as far as possible, all receipts and payments are affected
through bank.

A businessman generally opens a current account with a bank. Bank, do
not allow any interest on the balance in current account but charge a small
amount, called incidental charges, for the services rendered.

For depositing cash/cheques in the bank account, a form has to be filled,
which is called a pay-in-slip. (refer figure 4.2) It contains a counterfoil also
which is returned to the customer (depositor) with the signature of the cashier,
as receipt.

The bank issues blank cheque forms, to the account holder for withdrawing
money. (refer figure 4.3) The depositor writes the name of the party to whom
payment is to be made after the words Pay printed on the cheque. Cheque

Reprint 2025-26



104 Accountancy

Fig. 4.2 : A pay-in-slip

Fig. 4.3 : A cheque

forms have the printed word bearer, which means payment is to be made to the
person whose name has been written after the words “pay” or the bearer of the
cheques. When the world ‘bearer’ is struck off by drawing a line, the cheque
becomes an order cheque. It means payment is to be made to the person whose
name is written on the cheque or to his order after proper identification.

Cheques are generally crossed in practice. The payment of a crossed cheque
cannot be made direct to the party on the counter. It is to be paid only through
a bank. When two parallel lines are drawn across the cheque, it is said to be
crossed. The various types of crossing providing different degrees of safety to
the payment are shown in figure 4.4.

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 105

In case of an A/c payee only crossing, the amount of the cheque can be
deposited only in the account of the person whose name appears on the cheque.
When the name of the bank is written between two parallel lines, it becomes a
special crossing and the payment can be made only to the bank whose name
has been written between the two lines.

Though this is rarely done, a cheque can be transferred by the payee (the
person in whose favour the cheque has been drawn) to another person, if it is
not crossed A/c payee only. A bearer cheque can be passed on by mere delivery.
An order cheque can be transferred by endorsement and delivery. Endorsement
means the writing of instructions to pay the cheque to a particular person
and then singing it on the back of the cheque.

Fig. 4.4 : Types of crossing

When the number of bank transactions is large; it is convenient to have a
separate amount column for bank transactions in the cash book itself instead of
recording them in the journal. This helps in getting information about the position
of the bank account from time to time. Just like cash transactions, all payments
into the bank are recorded on the left side and all withdrawals/payments through
the bank are recorded on the right side. When cash is deposited in the bank or
cash is withdrawn from the bank, both the entries are recorded in the cash
book. This is so because both aspects of the transaction appear in the cash
book itself. When cash is paid into the bank, the amount deposited is written on
the left side in the bank column and at the same time the same amount is entered
on the right side in the cash column. The reverse entries are recorded when cash
is withdrawn from the bank for use in the office. Against such entries the word
C, which stands for contra is written in the L.F. column indicating that these
entries are not to be posted to the ledger account.

Reprint 2025-26

& Co.

Not Negotiable

A/c Payee On
S lytate Bank of India, New Delhi



106 Accountancy

The bank column is balanced in the same way as the cash column. However,
in the bank column, there can be credit balance also because of overdraft taken
from the bank. Overdraft is a situation when cash withdrawn from the bank
exceeds the amount of deposit. Entries in respect of cheques received should be
made in the bank column of the cash book. When a cheque is received, it may be
deposited into the bank on the same day or it may be deposited on another day.
In case, it is deposited on the same day the amount is recorded in the bank
column of the cash book on the receipts side. If the cheque is deposited on
another day, in that case, on the date of receipt it is treated as cash received and
hence recorded in the cash column on the receipts side. On the day of deposit to
the bank, it is shown in the Bank Column on receipt (Dr.) side and in the Cash
Column on the payment (Cr.) side. This is a contra entry.

If a cheque received from a customer is dishonoured, the bank will return
the dishonoured cheque and debit the firm’s account. On receipt of such
cheque or intimation from the bank, the firm will make an entry on the credit
side of the cash book by entering the amount of the dishonoured cheque in
the bank column and the name of the customer in the particulars column.
This entry will restore the position prevailing before the receipt of the cheque
form the customer and its deposit in the bank. Dishonour of a cheque means
return of the cheque unpaid, generally due to insufficient funds in the
customer’s account with the bank.

If the bank debits the firm on account of interest, commission or other
charges for bank services, the entry will be made on the credit side in bank
column. If the bank credits the firm’s account, the entry will be made on the
debit side of the cash book in the appropriate column. The format of double
column cash book is shown in figure 4.5.

Cash Book

Dr Cr

Date Receipts L.F. Cash Bank Date Payments L.F. Cash Bank
` ` ` `

Fig. 4.5 : Format of a double column cashbook

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 107

We will now learn how the transactions are recorded in the double column
cash book.
Consider the following example:
The following transactions related to M/s Tools India :

Date Details Amount
`

2017

Sept. 01 Bank balance 42,000
Sept. 01 Cash balance 15,000
Sept. 04 Purchased goods by cheque 12,000
Sept. 08 Sales of goods for cash  6,000
Sept. 13 Purchased machinery by cheque 5,500
Sept. 16 Sold goods and received cheque (deposited same day) 4,500
Sept. 17 Purchase goods from Mriaula in cash 17,400
Sept. 20 Purchase stationery by cheque 1,100
Sept. 24 Cheque given to Rohit 1,500
Sept. 27 Cash withdrawn from bank 10,000
Sept. 30 Rent paid by cheque 2,500
Sept. 30 Paid salary 3,500

The double column cash book based upon above business transactions will
prepared as follows :

Cash Book

Dr. Cr.

Date Receipts L.F. Cash Bank Date Payments L.F. Cash Bank
` ` ` `

2017 2017
Sept. Sept.
01 Balance b/d 15,000 42,000 04 Purchases 12,000
08 Sales 6,000 13 Machine 5,500
16 Sales 4,500 17 Purchase 17,400
27 Bank C 10,000 20 Stationery 1,100

24 Rohit 1,500
27 Cash C 10,000
30 Rent 2,500
30 Salary 3,500
30 Balance c/d 10,100 13,900

31,000 46,500 31,000 46,500

Oct.
01 Balance b/d 10,100 13,900

Reprint 2025-26



108 Accountancy

When the bank column is maintained in the cash book, the bank account also
is not opened in the ledger. The bank column serves the purpose of the bank
account. Entries marked C (being contra entries as explained earlier) are ignored
while posting from the cash book to the ledger. These entries represent debit or
credit of cash account against the bank account or vice-versa. We will now see
how the transactions recorded in double column cash book are posted to the
individual accounts.

Purchases Account
Receipts Payments

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017

Sept.04 Bank 12,000
Sept. 17 Cash 17,400

Sales Account
Receipts Payments

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017

Sept. 08 Cash 6,000
Sept. 16 Bank 4,500

Machinery  Account
Receipts Payments

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017

Sept. 13 Bank   5,500

Stationery Account
Receipts Payments

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Sept.20  Bank 1,100

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 109

 Rohit’s Account
Receipts Payments

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Sept.24 Bank   1,500

Rent Account
Receipts Payments

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Sept.30 Bank   2,500

Salary Account
Receipts Payments

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Sept.30 Cash  3,500

4.1.3 Petty Cash Book

In every organisation, a large number of small payments such as conveyance,
cartage, postage, telegrams and other expenses (collectively recorded under
miscellaneous expenses) are made. These are generally repetitive in nature. If
all these payments are handled by the cashier and are recorded in the main
cash book, the procedure is found to be very cumbersome. The cashier may
be overburdened and the cash book may become very bulky. To avoid this,
large organisations normally appoint one more cashier (petty cashier) and
maintain a separate cash book to record these transactions. Such a cash
book maintained by petty cashier is called petty cash book.

The petty cashier works on the Imprest system. Under this system, a definite
sum, say ` 2,000 is given to the petty cashier at the beginning of a certain
period. This amount is called imprest amount. The petty cashier goes on making
all small payments out of this imprest amount and when he has spent the
substantial portion of the imprest amount say ̀ 1,780, he gets reimbursement
of the amount spent from the head cashier. Thus, he again has the full imprest
amount in the beginning of the next period. The reimbursement may be made
on a weekly, fortnightly or monthly basis, depending on the frequency of small
payments. (In certain cases, the petty cash system is operated through the

Reprint 2025-26



110 Accountancy

main cash book itself. In such instances, the petty cash book is not maintained
independently.)

The petty cash book generally has a number of columns for the amount on
the payment side (credit) besides the first other amount column. Each of the
amount columns is allotted for items of specific payments, which are most
common. The last amount column is designated as ‘Miscellaneous’ followed by
a ‘Remarks’ column. In the miscellaneous column those payments are recorded
for which a separate column does not exist. In the ‘Remarks’ the nature of
payment is recorded. At the end of the period, all amount columns are totaled.
The total amount column l shows the total amount spent and to be reimbursed.
On the receipt (debit) side, there is only one amount column. Columns for the
date, voucher number and particulars are common for both receipts and
payments.

Box  1

Advantages of Maintaining Petty Cash Book

1. Saving of Time and efforts of chief cashier: The chief cashier is not required to
deal with petty disbursements. He can concentrate on cash transactions involving
large amount of cash. It saves time and labour and helps chief cashier to discharge
his duties more effectively

2. Effective control over cash disbursements: Cash control becomes easy because of
division of work. The head cashier can control big payments directly and petty
payments by keeping a proper check on the petty cashier. This way the chances
of making frauds and embezzlements become very difficult.

3. Convenient recording: Recording of petty disbursements in the main cash book
makes it bulky and unmanageable. Further, the materiality principle requires
that insignificant details need not be given in the main cashbook. This way the
cash book reveals only material and useful information.
Recording of such small payments becomes easy as the totals of different types
of expenses are posted to ledger. It also saves time and effort of posting individual
items in the ledger. In nutshell it can be stated that preparation of petty cash
book is a cost reduction control measure.

For example, Mr. Mohit, the petty cahier of M/s Samaira Traders received
Rupees 2,000 on May 01, 2017 from the Head Cashier. For the month, details
of petty expenses are listed here under:

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 111

Date Details Amount
`

2017

May

02 Auto fare 55
03 Courier services 40
04 Postal stamps 105
05 Erasers/Sharpeners/Pencils/Pads 225
06 Speed post charges 98
08 Taxi fare (`105 + `90) 195
08 Refreshments 85
10 Auto fare 60
12 Registered postal charges 42
13 Telegram 34
14 Cartage 25
16 Computer stationery 165
19 Bus fare 24
19 STD call charges 87
20 Office sanitation including disinfectant (` 36 + ` 24) 60
22 Refreshment 45
23 Photo stating charges 47
28 Courier services 40
29 Unloading charges 40
30 Bus fare 15

Posting from the Petty Cash Book

The petty cash book is balanced periodically. The difference between the total
receipts and total payments is the balance with the petty cashier. The balance is
carried to the next period and the petty cashier is paid the amount actually spent.
A petty cash account is opened in the ledger. It is debited with the amount given
to petty cashier. Each expense account is individually debited with the periodic
total as per the respective column by writing “petty cash account” and the petty
cash account is credited with the total expenditure incurred during the period by
writing sundries as per petty cash book. The petty cash account is balanced. It
reflect the actual cash with the petty cashier.

Reprint 2025-26



112 Accountancy
The petty cash book for the month will be prepared as follows :

Book of Samaira Traders
Petty Cash Book

Amount Date Particulars Voucher Amount Analysis of Payments
Received No. paid

     ` 2017 ` Postage Telephone Conveyance Stationery Misc.
May & Telegram

2,000 01 Cash received
02 Auto fare 55 55
03 Courier services 40 40
04 Postal stamps 105 105
05 Erasers/Sharpeners 225 225

/Pencils
06 Speed post charges 98 98
08 Taxi fare (105 + 90) 195 195
08 Refreshments 85 85
10 Auto fare 60 60
12 Registered postal 42 42

charges
13 Telegram 34 34
14 Cartage 25 25
16 Computer stationery 165 165
19 Bus fare 24 24
19 STD call charges 87 87
20 Office sanitation 60 60

including disinfectant
(36+24)

22 Refreshment 45 45
23 Photo stating charges 47 47
28 Courier services 40 40
29 Unloading charges 40 40
30 Bus fare 15 15

1,487 325 121 349 390 302

31 Balance c/d 513
2,000 2,000

Jun.
513 01 Balance b/d

1,487 01 Cash received

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 113

Books of Samaira Traders
Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

2017
May 01 Petty cash A/c Dr. 2,000

To Cash A/c 2,000
(Cash paid to petty cashier)

May 31 Postage A/c Dr. 325
Telephone & Telegram A/c Dr. 121
Conveyance A/c Dr. 349
Stationary A/c Dr. 390
Miscellaneous expenses A/c Dr. 302

To Petty cash A/c 1,487
(Petty expenses posted to petty
cash account)
Petty cash A/c Dr. 1,487

To Cash A/c 1,487
(Cash paid to petty cashier)

Petty Cash Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017 2017
May 01 Cash 2,000 May 31 Sundries as 1,487

per petty cash
book

May 31 Balance c/d 513
2,000 2,000

Jun. 01 Balance b/d 513
Jun. 01 Cash 1,487

Books of Samaria Traders
Postage Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
May 31 Petty cash 325

Telephone and Telegram Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
May 31 Petty cash 121

Reprint 2025-26



114 Accountancy

Conveyance Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
May 31 Petty cash 349

Stationery Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
May 31 Petty cash 390

Miscellaneous Expenses Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
May 31 Petty cash 302

4.1.4 Balancing of Cash Book

On the left side, all cash transactions relating to cash receipts (debits) and on
the right side all transactions relating to cash payments (credits) are entered
date-wise. When a cash book is maintained, a separate cash book in the
ledger is not opened. The cash book is balanced in the same way as an account
in the ledger. But it may be noted that in the case of the cash book, there will
always be debit balance because cash payments can never exceed cash receipts
and cash in hand at the beginning of the period.

The source document for cash receipts is generally the duplicate copy of
the receipt issued by the cashier. For payment, any document, invoice, bill,
receipt, etc., on the basis of which payment has been made, will serve as a source
document for recording transactions in the cash book. When payment has been
made, all these documents, popularly known as vouchers, are given a serial
number and filed in a separate file for future reference and verification.

Illustration 1

From the following transactions made by M/s Kuntia Traders, prepare the single column
cashbook.

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 115

Date Details Amount
`

2017

Sept. 01 Cash in hand 40,000
Sept. 02 Deposited in bank 16,000
Sept. 04 Received from Puneet in full settlement of claim 11,700

of ̀  12,000.
Sept. 05 Cash paid to Rukmani in full settlement of claim of 6,850

`7,000
Sept. 06 Sold goods to Sudhir for cash 14,800
Sept. 06 Paid quarterly insurance premium on policy for 2,740

proprietor’s wife
Sept. 07 Purchased office furniture   8,000
Sept. 07 Purchased stationery   1,700
Sept. 07 Paid cartage     120
Sept. 10 Paid Kamal, discount allowed by him ` 200 6,800
Sept. 11 Received from Gurmeet, discount allowed to him `500 14,500
Sept. 12 Amount withdrawn for house hold use 5,000
Sept. 14 Electricity bill paid 1,160
Sept. 17 Goods sold for cash 23,000
Sept. 21 Bought goods from Kamal on cash basis 17,000
Sept. 24 Paid telephone charges 2,300
Sept. 26 Paid postal charges 520
Sept. 28 Paid monthly rent 4,200
Sept. 29 Paid monthly wages and salary 8,250
Sept. 29 Bought goods for cash 11,000
Sept. 30 Sold goods for cash 15,600

Solution
Books of Kuntia Traders

Cash Book
Dr Cr

Date Receipts L.F. Amount Date Payments L.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Sept. 01 Balance b/d 40,000 Sept. 02 Bank 16,000
Sept. 04 Puneet 11,700 Sept. 05 Rukmani  6,850
Sept. 06 Sales 14,800 Sept. 06 Drawings 2,740
Sept. 11 Gurmeet 14,500 Sept. 07 Office furniture 8,000
Sept. 17 Sales 23,000 Sept. 07 Stationery 1,700
Sept. 30 Sales 15,600 Sept. 07 Cartage   120

Sept. 10 Kamal 6,800
Sept. 12 Drawings 5000
Sept. 14 Electric charges 1,160
Sept. 21 Purchases 17,000

Reprint 2025-26



116 Accountancy

Sept. 24 Telephone 2,300
charges 

Sept. 28 Postal charges   520
Sept. 29 Rent 4,200
Sept. 29 Wages & Salary 8,250
Sept. 30 Purchases 11,000
Sept. 30 Balance c/d 27,960

1,19,600 1,19,600

Oct. 01 Balance b/d 27,960

Illustration 2

Record the following transactions in double column cash book and balance it.

Date                                Details Amount
`

2017

Aug. 01 Cash balance 15,000
Bank balance 10,000

Aug. 03 Paid insurance premium by cheque 4,200
Aug. 08 Cash sales 22,000

Cash discount 750
Aug. 09 Payment for cash purchases 21,000

Cash discount 700
Aug. 09 Cash deposited in bank 15,000
Aug. 10 Telephone bill paid by cheque   2,300
Aug. 14 Withdrawn from bank for personal use 6,000
Aug. 16 Withdrawn from bank office use 14,500
Aug. 20 Received cheque from John in full and final settlement 10,700

and deposited the same in the bank
Aug. 23 Received cash from Michael 6,850

Discount allowed 150
Aug. 24 Stationery purchased for cash 1,800
Aug. 25 Cartage paid in cash   350
Aug. 25 Cheque received from Kumar 4,500
Aug. 28 Cheque received from Kumar deposited in Bank 4,500
Aug. 31 Cheque deposited on Aug. 28 dishonoured and returned

by the bank
Aug. 31 Rent paid by cheque 4,000
Aug. 31 Paid wages to the watchman in cash 3,000
Aug. 31 Paid cash for postage 220

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 117

Solution

Cash Book
Dr. Cr.
Date Receipts L.F. Cash Bank Date Payments L.F. Cash Bank

` ` ` `

2017 2017
Aug.  Aug.
01 Balance b/d 15,000 10,000  03 Insurance 4,200
08 Sales 22,000  09 Purchases 21,000
09 Cash C 15,000  09 Bank C 15,000
16 Bank C 14,500  10 Telephone 2,300

expenses 
20 John 10,700  14 Drawings 6,000
23 Michael   6,850  16 Cash C 14,500
25 Kumar  4,500  24 Printing and 1,800

stationery
28 Cash C 4,500  25 Cartage   350
31 Balance c/d 6,000  28 Bank C 4,500

 31 Kumar 4,500
 31 Rent 4,000
 31 Wages 3,000
 31 Postage  220
 31 Balance c/d 16,980 4,700

62,850 40,200 62,850 40,200

Sept.
 01 Balance b/d 16,980 4,700

Illustration 3

Prepare bank column cash book from the following tansactions of M/s Laser Zone for the
month of January 2014 and post them to the related ledger accounts :

Date Details Amount
`

2017
Jan. 01 Cash in hand 4,000

Bank overdraft 3,200
Jan. 04 Wage paid 400
Jan. 05 Cash sales 7,000
Jan. 07 Purchased goods by cheque 2,000
Jan. 09 Purchased furniture for cash 2,200
Jan. 11 Cash paid to Rohit 2,000
Jan. 13 Cash sales 4,500
Jan. 14 Deposited into bank 7,000
Jan. 16 Bank charged interest on overdraft 200

Reprint 2025-26



118 Accountancy

Jan. 20 Paid telephone bill by cheque 600
Jan. 25 Sale of goods and received cheque 3,000

(deposited same day)
Jan. 27 Paid rent 800
Jan. 29 Drew cash for personal use 500
Jan. 30 Paid salary 1,000
Jan. 31 Interest collected by bank 1,700

Solution

Books of Laser Zone
Cash Book

Dr. Cr.
Date Receipts L.F. Cash Bank  Date Payments L.F. Cash Bank

` ` ` `

2017  2017
Jan.  Jan.
 01 Balance b/d 4,000   01 Balance b/d 3,200
 05 Sales 7,000   04 Wages      400
 13 Sales 4,500    07 Purchase  2,000
 14 Cash  C 7,000   09 Furniture     2,200  
 25 Sales 3,000   11 Rohit     2,000  
 31 Interest 1,700   14 Bank C     7,000

  16 Overdraft 200
interest

  20 Telephone    600
  27 Rent       800
  29 Drawings       500
  30 Salary     1,000
  01 Balance c/d     1,600  5,700

15,500 11,700   15,500 11,700

Oct.
 01 Balance b/d 1,600 5,700

Wages Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Jan.04 Cash 400

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 119

Sales Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Jan. 05 Cash 7,000
Jan.13 Cash 4,500
Jan.25 Bank 3,000

 Purchases   Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Jan.07 Bank   2,000

Furniture  Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Jan. 09 Cash 2,200

Rohit  Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Jan. 11 Cash   2,000

 Ovedraft Interest (Paid) Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Jan.16 Bank   200

Telephone Expenses Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Jan.20 Bank  600

Reprint 2025-26



120 Accountancy

Rent Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Jan.27 Cash  800

Drawings Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Jan.29 Cash  500

 Salary Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Jan.30 Cash  1,000

Interest (Received) Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Jan.31 Bank     1,700

Illustration 4

Prepare double column cash book of M/s Advance Technology Pvt. Ltd. for the month of
December 2014 from the following transactions :

Date Details Amount
`

2017
Dec. 01 Cash in hand 3,065

Cash at bank 6,780
Dec. 02 Cash paid to petty cashier 1,000
Dec. 03 Received cheque from Priya 3,000
Dec. 04 Cash sales 2,000
Dec. 05 Deposited into bank 1,200
Dec. 06 Priya’s cheque deposited into bank 3,000
Dec. 08 Purchased furniture by cheque 6,500
Dec. 10 Paid trade expenses    400
Dec. 12 Cash sales 9,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 121

Dec. 13 Bank charges 300
Dec. 15 Dividend collected by bank 1,200
Dec. 16 Paid electric bill by cheque 600
Dec. 17 Cash purchases 2,000
Dec. 19 Paid for advertising 1,000
Dec. 21 Goods sold and received a cheque  6,000

(deposited same day)
Dec. 22 Paid legal charges    500
Dec. 23 Drew from bank for personal use 2,000
Dec. 24 Paid establishment expenses    340
Dec. 25 Paid for printing of bill book    850
Dec. 26 Paid insurance premium by cheque 2,150
Dec. 27 Cash sales 7,200
Dec. 28 Paid salary by cheque 4,000
Dec. 29 Rent paid 3,000
Dec. 30 Commission received by cheque 2,500

(deposited same day)
Dec. 31 Paid for charity by cheque 800

Solution

Books of Advance Technology
Cash Book

Dr. Cr.

Date Receipts L.F. Cash Bank Date Payments L.F. Cash Bank
` ` ` `

2016 2016
Dec.  Dec.
01 Balance b/d   3,065  6,780 02 Petty Cashier   1,000
03 Priya   3,000 05 Bank C   1,200  
04 Sales   2,000  06 Bank C   3,000
05 Cash  C  1,200 08 Furniture   6,500
06  Cash  C  3,000 10 Trade expenses     400
12 Sales   9,000 13 Bank charges     300
15 Dividend  1,200 16 Electric charges    600
21 Sales  6,000 17 Purchases   2,000
27 Sales   7,200 19 Advertisement   1,000
30 Commission  2,500 22 Legal charges     500

23 Drawings   2,000
24 Establishment 340

expenses  
25 Printing    850
26 Insurance 2,150

premium 
28 Salary   4,000
29 Rent   3,000

Reprint 2025-26



122 Accountancy

31 Charity    800
31 Balance c/d  10,975  4,330

24,265 20,680  24,265 20,680

2017
Jan.
01 Balance b/d 10,975 4,330

(ii) Ledger Posting

Petty Cashier’s Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2016
Dec.02 Cash 1,000

Priya’s  Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 03 Cash  3,000

Sales Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec.04 Cash 2,000
Dec.12 Cash 9,000
Dec.21 Bank 6,000
Dec.27 Cash 7,200

Furniture Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec.08 Bank   6,500

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 123

Trade Expenses Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec.10 Cash   400

Bank Charges  Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec.13  Bank 300

Dividend  Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec.15 Bank   1,200

Electric Charges Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec.16 Bank   600

Purchases Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 17 Cash  2,000

Advertisement Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 19 Cash  1,000

Reprint 2025-26



124 Accountancy

Legal Charges Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 22 Cash  500

Drawings  Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 23 Bank  2,000

Establishment Expenses Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 24 Cash  340

 Printing Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 25 Cash  850

Insurance Premium  Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 26 Bank  2,150

Salary  Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 28 Bank  4,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 125

Rent Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 29 Cash 3,000

Commission Received Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 30 Bank  2,500

Charity Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016
Dec. 31 Bank  800

4.2 Purchases (Journal) Book

All credit purchases of goods are recorded in the purchases journal whereas
cash purchases are recorded in the cash book. Other purchases such as
purchases of office equipment, furniture, building, are recoded in the journal
proper if purchased on credit or in the cash book if purchased for cash. The
source documents for recording entries in the book are invoices or bills received
by the firm from the supplies of the goods. Entries are made with the net
amount of the invoice. Trade discount and other details of the invoice need
not be recorded in this book. The format of the purchases journal is shown in
figure 4.6.

Purchases (Journal) Book

Date Invoice Name of Supplier L.F. Amount
No. (Account to be credited) `

Fig. 4.6 : Format of purchases (journal) book

The monthly total of the purchases book is posted to the debit of purchases
account in the ledger. Individual suppliers accounts may be posted daily.
Consider the following details obtained from M/s Kanika Traders and observe
how the entries are recorded in the purchase journal.

Reprint 2025-26



126 Accountancy

Date Details
2017
Aug. 04 Purchased from M/s Neema Electronics (invoice no. 3250): 20 Mini-size T.V.

@ ̀ 2,000 per piece, 15 Tape recorders @ ̀  12,500 per piece. Trade discount
on all items @ 20%.

Aug. 10 Bought from M/s Pawan Electronics (invoice no. 8260): 10 Video cassettes @
` 150 per piece, 20 Tape recorders @ ̀  1,650 per piece. Trade discout
@ 10% on purchases.

Aug. 18 Purchased from M/s. Northern Electronics (invoice no. 4256): 15 Northern
stereos @ ` 4,000 per piece, 20 Northern colour T.V. @ ` 14,500 per piece.
Trade discount @ 12.5%.

Aug. 26 Purchased from M/s Neema Electronics (Invoice No. 3294): 10 Mini-size T.V. @
` 1,000 per piece, 5 Colour T.V. @ ` 12,500 per piece. Trade discount
@ 20%.

Aug. 29 Bought from M/s Pawan Electronics: (Invoice No. 8281)   20 Video cassettes @
150 per piece 25 Tape recorders @ ̀  1,600 per piece. Trade discount @ 10%
on purchases.

Books of Kanika Traders
Purchases (Journal) Book

Date Invoice Name of Supplier L.F. Amount
No.  (Account to be credited) `

2017
Aug.04 3250 Neema Electronics  1,82,000
Aug.10 8260 Pawan Electronics 31,050
Aug.18 4256 Northern Electronics 3,06,250
Aug.26 3294 Neema Electronics 54,000
Aug.29 8281 Pawan Electronics 38,700
Aug.31 6,12,000

Posting from the purchases journal is done daily to their respective accounts
with the relevant amounts on the credit side. The total of the purchases journal
is periodically posted to the debit of the purchases account normally on the
monthly basis. However, if the number of transactions is very large, this total
may be done and posted at some other convenient time interval such as daily,
weekly or fortnightly. The posting from the purchases journal to the ledger
from is illustrated as follows:

Books of Kanika Electronics
 Neema Electronics

Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Aug.04 Purchases 1,82,000
Aug. 26 Purchases   54,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 127

 Pawan Electronics
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Aug. 10 Purchases 31,050
Aug. 29 Purchases 38,700

Northern Electronics
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Aug.18  Purchases 3,06,250

Purchases Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Aug. 31 Sundries as 6,12,000

per Purchases
Journal

4.3 Purchases Return (Journal) Book

In this book, purchases return of goods are recorded. Sometimes goods
purchased are returned to the supplier for various reasons such as the goods
are not of the required quality, or are defective, etc. For every return, a debit
note (in duplicate) is prepared and the original one is sent to the supplier for
making necessary entries in his book. The supplier may also prepare a note,
which is called the credit note. The source document for recording entries in
the purchases return journal is generally a debit note. A debit note will contain
the name of the party (to whom the goods have been returned) details of the
goods returned and the reason for returning the goods. Each debit note is
serially numbered and dated. The format of the purchases return journal is
shown in figure 4.7(a).

Purchases Return (Journal) Book

Date Debit Name of the Supplier L.F. Amount
Note No. (Account to be debited) `

Fig 4.7(a) : Format of  Purchases return (journal) book

Reprint 2025-26



128 Accountancy

Box  2

Debit and Credit Notes

A Debit note is a document evidencing a debit to be raised against a party for reasons
other than sale on credit. On finding that goods supplied are not as per the terms of
the order placed, the defective goods are returned to the supplier of the goods and a
note is prepared to debit the supplier; or when an additional sum is recoverable
from a customer such a note is prepared to debit the customer with the additional
dues. In these two situations the note is called a debit note (refer figure 4.7(b)).

A Credit note is prepared, when a party is to be given a credit for reasons other
than credit purchase. It is a common practice to make it in red ink. When goods are
received back from a customer, a credit note should be sent to him. The suggested
proforma of credit note is shown in figure 4.7(c).

Name of the Firm Issuing the Note

Address of the Firm
No. Date of Issue .........

DEBIT NOTE
Against : Supplier’s Name
Goods returned as per delivery Amount (`)
Challan No.
(Details of goods returned)
(Rupees ...........only)

Signature of the Manager with date

Fig. 4.7(b) : Showing a specimen of debit note

Name of the Firm Issuing the Note

Address of the Firm
No. Date of Issue .........

CREDIT NOTE
Against : Customer’s Name
Goods returned by the customer Amount (`)
Challan No.
(Details of goods returned)
(Rupees ...........only)

Signature of the Manager with date

Fig. 4.7(c) : Showing a specimen credit note

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 129

Refer to the purchases (journal) book of Kanika Traders you will notice that
20 mini size T.V.’s and 15 tape- recorders were bought from Neema Electronics
for ̀  1,82,000 However, on delivery  2 mini T.V.’s and  tape recorders were found
defective and were returned back vide debit note no. 03/2017. In this case, the
purchases return books will be prepared as follows :

Purchases Return (Journal) Book

Date Debit Name of the Supplier L.F. Amount
Note (Account to be debited) `

No.

03/2017   Neema Electronics 13,200
13,200

Posting from the purchases returns journal requires that the supplier’s
individual accounts are debited with the amount of returns and the purchases
returns account is credited with the periodical total.

Neema Electronics Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Purchases 13,200
Return

Purchases Return Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Sundries as 13,200
per purchase
returns book

4.4 Sales (Journal) Book

All credit sales of merchandise are recorded in the sales journal. Cash sales are
recorded in the cash book. The format of the sales journal is similar to that of
the purchases journal explained earlier. The source document for recording
entries in the sales journal are sales invoice or bill issued by the firm to the
customers. The date of sale, invoice number, name of the customer and amount
of the invoice are recorded in the sales journal. Other details about the sales
transaction including terms of payment are available in the invoice. In fact, two
or more than two copies of a sales invoice are prepared for each sale. The book

Reprint 2025-26



130 Accountancy

keeper makes entries in the sales journal from one copy of the sales invoice. The
format of the sales joournal is shown in figure 4.8. In the sales journal, one
additional column may be added to record sales tax recovered from the customer
and to be paid to the government within the stipulated time. Periodically, at the
end of each month the amount column is total led and posted to the credit of
sales account in the ledger. Posting to the debit side of individual customer’s
accounts may be made daily.

Sales (Journal) Book

Date Invoice Name of the Customer L.F. Amount
No. (Account to be debited) `

Fig. 4.8 : Format of sales (journal) cash book

For example M/s Koina Supplies sold on credit:
(i) Two water purifiers @ ̀  2,100 each and five buckets @ ̀  130 each to M/s

Raman Traders (Invoice no. 178 dated April 06, 2017).
(ii) Five road side containers  @ ̀  4,200 each to M/s Nutan enterprises (Invoice

no 180 dated April 09, 2017) .
(iii) 100 big buckets @ ` 850 each to M/s Raman traders (Invoice no. 209,

dated April 28, 2017).
The above stated transactions will be entered in a sales journal as follows:

Books of Koina Suppliers
Sales (Journal) Book

Date Invoice Name of the customer L.F. Amount
No. (Account to be debited) `

2017
April 06 178 Raman Traders   4,850
April 09 180 Nutan Enterprises 21,000
April 28 209 Raman Traders 85,000

April 30 1,10,850

Posting from the sales journal are done to the debit of customer’s accounts
kept in the ledger. Like the purchases journal, individual customer’s accounts
are generally posted daily, with the amount involved. The sales journal is also
totaled periodically (generally monthly), and this total is credited to sales
account in the ledger. The sales (journal) book illustrated above will be posted
in the related ledger account in the following manner:

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 131

Raman Traders Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Apr. 06 Sales   4,850
Apr. 28 Sales 85,000

Nutan Enterprises Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Apr.01 Sales 21,000

Sales Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Apr. 30 Sundries as 1,10,850

per sales book

4.5 Sales Return (Journal) Book

This journal is used to record return of goods by customers to them on credit.
On receipt of goods from the customer, a credit note is prepared, like the debit
note referred to earlier. The difference between the credit not and the debit
note is that the former is prepared by the seller and the latter is prepared by
the buyer. Like the debit note, the credit note is also prepared in duplicate
and contains detail relating to the name of the customer, details of the
merchandise received back and the amount. Each credit note is serially
numbered and dated. The source document for recording entries in the sales
return book is generally the credit note. The format of the sales return book is
shown in figure 4.9

Sales Return (Journal) Book

Date Credit Name of the customer L.F. Amount
No. (Account to be credited) `

Fig. 4.9 : Format of sales return (journal) book

Reprint 2025-26



132 Accountancy

Refer to the sales (journal) book of Koina Supplier of  you will find that two
water purifiers were sold to Raman Traders for `  2,100 each, out of which one
purifier was returned back due to the manufacturing defect (credit  note no.
10/2017). In this case, the sales return (Journal) book will be prepared
as follows :

Sales Return (Journal) Book

Date Credit Name of the customer L.F. Amount
No. (Account to be credited) `

10/2017 Raman Traders 2,100
2,100

Posting to the sales return journal requires that the customer’s account be
credited with the amount of returns and the sales return account be debited
with the periodical total in the same way as is done in case of posting from the
purchases journal.

Raman Traders Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Sales Return 2,100

Sales Return Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Sundries 2,100
as per sales
return book

Illustration 5

Enter the following transactions of M/s Hi-Life Fashions in purchases and purchases
return book and post them to the ledger accounts for the month of September 2014:

Date Details

2017 Purchase of following goods on credit from M/s Ratna Traders,
Sept. 01 as per Invoice No.714:

25 Shirts @ `300 per shirt
20 Pants @ `700 per pant
Less 10% trade discount

Sept. 08 Purchase of following goods on credit from M/s Bombay Fashion House,
as per Invoice No.327 ;

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 133

10 Fancy Trousers @ `500 per trouser
20 Fancy Hat @ ` 100 per hat
Less 5% trade discount

Sept. 10 Goods returned to M/s Ratana Traders, as per debit note No.102 :
3 shirts @  `300 per shirt
1 Pant @ `700 per pant
Less 10% trade discount

Sept. 15 Purchase of following goods on credit from M/s Zolta Fashions,
as per Invoice No.6781 :
10 Jackets @ ̀ 1000 per jacket
5 Plain shirts  `200 per shirts
Less 15% trade discount.

Sept. 20 Purchase of following goods on credit from M/s Bride Palace,
as per Invoice No.1076 :
10 Fancy Lengha @ ̀ 2,000 per lengha
Less 5% trade discount.

Sept. 24 Goods returned to M/s Bombay Fashion House as per debit note No.103 :
2 Fancy Trousers @ ̀ 500 per trouser
4 Fancy Hat @ `100 per hat
Less 5% trade discount.

Sept. 28 Goods returned to M/s Bride Palace as per debit note No.105 :
1 Fancy Lengha @ ̀ 2,000 per lengha
Less 5% trade discount.

Solution

Books of Hi-life Fashions
Purchases (Journal) Book

Date Invoice Name of the Supplier L.F.    Amount
No. (Account to be credited) `

2017
Sept.01 714 Ratana Traders 19,350
Sept.08 327 Bombay Fashion House   6,650
Sept.15 6781 Zolta Fashions   9,350
Sept.20 1076 Bride Palace   19,000
Sept.30   54,350

Purchases Return (Journal) Book

Date Invoice Name of the Supplier L.F.    Amount
No. (Account to be debited) `

2017
Sept. 10 102 Ratana Traders    1,440
Sept. 24 103 Bombay Fashion House   1,330
Sept. 28 106 Bride Palace   1,900
Sept. 30 4,670

Reprint 2025-26



134 Accountancy

(ii) Ledger Posting

Books of M/s Hi-Life Fashions
Ratana Traders Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Sept. 10 Purchases   1,440 Sept.01 Purchases 19,350

return

Bombay Fashion House Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Sept. 24 Purchases  1,330 Sept. 08  Purchases 6,650

return

Zolta Fashions Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Sept. 15  Purchases 9,350

Bride Palace Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Sept. 28 Purchases  1,900 Sept. 20  Purchases 19,000

return

Purchases Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Sept. 30 Sundries as 54,350

per purchases
 journal

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 135

Purchases Return Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Sept. 30 Sundries as 4,670

per purchases
return book

Illustration 6

Enter the following transactions in the Sales and  Sales Return book of M/s Vineet Stores:

Date Details

2017 Sold goods on credit to M/s Rohit Stores as per invoice no.325 :
Dec.01. 30 Kids Books @ ` 60 each.

20 Animal Books @ ` 50 each
Dec. 05 Sold goods on credit to M/s Mera Stores as per invoice no.328 :

100 Greeting Cards @ `12 each.
50  Musical Cards  @ ` 50 each
Less 5% trade discount.

Dec. 10 Sold Goods on credit to M/s Mega Stationers as per invoice no.329 :
50 Writing Pads @ ` 20 each.
50 Colour Books @ ` 30 each
20 Ink Pads @ 16 each

Dec. 15 Goods Returned from M/s Rohit Stores as per credit note no.201:
2 Kids Books @ ` 60 each
1 Animal Book @ ` 50 each

Dec. 19 Sold goods on credit to M/s Abha Traders as per invoice no.355 :
100 Cards Books @ ` 10 each.
50 Note  Books @ ` 35 each
Less 5% trade discount.

Dec. 22 Goods returned from M/s Mega Stationers as per credit note no.204:
2 Colour Books @ ` 30 each

Dec. 26 Sold goods on credit to M/s Bharti Stores as per invoice no.325 :
100 Greeting Cards @ ` 20 each.
100 Fancy Envelopes @ ` 5 each

Dec. 30 Goods returned from M/s Abha Traders as per credit note no.207 :
20 Cards Books  @ ` 10 each
5 Note  Book@ ` 35 each
Less 5% trade discount

Reprint 2025-26



136 Accountancy

Solution

Books of Veneet Stores
Sales (Journal) Book

Date Invoice Name of the Customer J.F. Amount
No. (Account to be debited) `

2017
Dec.01 325 Rohit Stores   2,800
Dec.05 328 Mera Stores    3,515
Dec.10 329 Mega Stationers    2,820
Dec.19 335 Abha Traders    2,375
Dec.26 340 Bharti Stores    2,500
Dec. 31  14,010

Sales Return (Journal) Book

Date Credit Name of the Customer L.F. Amount
Note No. (Account to be credited) `

2017
Dec. 15 201 Rohit Stores     170
Dec. 22 204 Mega Stationers    150
Dec. 30 206 Abha Traders    333
Dec. 31 653

(ii) Ledger Posting

Rohit Stores Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017 2017
Dec. 01 Sales   2800 Dec.15 Sales return  170

Mera Stores Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec. 05 Sales 3,515

Mega Stationers Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Dec.10 Sales 2,820 Dec.22 Sales return   150

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 137

Abha Traders Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec.19 Sales 2,375 Dec.30 Sales return  333

Bharti Stores Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec.26 Sales 2,500

Sales Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Dec. 31 Sundries as 14,010

per sales book

Sales Return Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 Sundries as 653
Dec.31 per sales

return book

Illustration: 7

Prepare Purchases book and Purchases Return Book firm the following transactions:

2017
Aug. 05 Purchased from M/s Ramakant, Delhi (Invoice No. 6780) 20 Television @

`15,000 each, 05 DVD Players @ ` 10,000 each, trade discount @ 10%.
Aug. 07 02 Television returned to M/s Ramakant, Delhi (found defective) Debit Note

No. 211
Aug. 20 Bought from M/s Samay Electronics, Haryana (Invoice No. 1011) 10 Washing

Machines @ 5,000 each and 5 Television @ 25,000 each trade discount @ 5%
Rate of GST applicable on above  purchase are:
CGST @ 9%
SGST @ 9%

IGST @ 18%

Reprint 2025-26



138 Accountancy

Purchases Book (Analytical)

Date  Invoice           Name of Supplier   L.F. Detail       Total      Pur-      CGST    SGST    IGST
(`)        chases

2017   6780    M/s Ramakant, Delhi
Aug. 20 T.V. @ ` 15,000     3,00,000
05 each

05 DVD Players @ 10,000  50,000
each      3,50,500

Less : Trade Discount        35,000
@ 10%       3,15,000
Add :   CGST @ 9%  28,350
          SGST @ 9%   28,350   3,71,700 3,15,000  28,350  28,350   ——

Aug.   1011    M/s Samay Electronics,
20 Haryana

10 Washing Machines
@ 5,000  each        50,000
5 T.V. @ ` 25,000 each      1,25,000

     1,75,000
Less : Trade Discount          8,750
@ 5%     1,66,250
Add :   IGST @ 18%  29,925   1,96,175 1,66,250  ——      ——    29,925

Aug. 31                                 Total     5,67,875  4,81,250 28,350  28,350  29,925

Purchases Return Book

Date    Debit         Name of Supplier L.F.  Detail     Total     Pur-   CGST  SGST  IGST
         Note No.       (`)      chases

           Return

2017   311      M/s Ramakant, Delhi
Aug. 02 T.V. @ ` 15,000 each        30,000
05

Less : Trade Discount @10%      3,000
   27,000

Add : CGST @ 9%   2,430

        SGST @ 9%   2,430  31,860  27,000  2,430 2,430     —

Aug. 31                                         Total 31,860   27,000  2,430  2,430      –

Illustration : 8
Prepare Sales book and Sales Return Book of M/s Akash of Rajasthan from the following
transactions :

2017

Aug. 07  Sold to M/s Rahul Bros., Delhi (Invoice No. 3620)
       25 shirts @ 300 per shirt
       20 pants @ ` 700 per pant
      Trade Discount @ 8%

Aug. 10  Returned 05 Shirts to M/s Rahul Bros., Delhi (Credit Note No. 612)
Aug. 18  Sold to M/s Kishan Traders, Jaipur (Invoice No.-3621

      10 jackets @ ` 900 per
      05 plain shirts @ ` 400 per shirt
      Trade Discount @ 8%
      GST Rates applicable on Readymade Clothes
      CGST @ 2.5%
      SGST @ 2.5% Reprint 2025-26
      IGST @ 5%



Recording of Transactions - II 139

Sales Book (Analytical)

Date  Invoice           Name of Customer L.F. Detail Total    Sales    CGST   SGST  IGST
      ( `)

2017   3620    M/s Rahul Bros., Delhi
Aug. 25 Shirt @ ` 300 Per Shirts     7,500
07 20 Pants @ ` 700 Per Pant        14,000

  21,500
Less : Trade Discount @ 8%     1,720

  19,780

Add :   IGST @ 5%     989  10,626 10,120   253   253    ——

Aug.   3621    M/s Kishan Traders, Jaipur
18 10 Jackets @ ` 900 Per          9,000

5 Plain Shirt @ ` 700 Per Pant     2,000
  11,000

Less : Trade Discount @ 8%        880
  10,120

Add :   CGST @ 2.5%     253  20,769 19,780  ——   ——    987

       CGST @ 2.5%    253
Aug. 31 Total     31,395  29,900  253    253    989

Sales Return Book

Date  Credit           Name of Supplier L.F. Detail Total    Sales    CGST   SGST   IGST
Note No.       (`)    Return

2017   612      M/s Rahul Bros., Delhi
Aug. 05 Shirt @ ` 300 each          1,500
10

Less : Trade Discount @ 8%        120
    1,380

Add :   CGST @ 9%     69     1,449   1,380   ——    ——    69

Aug. 31 Total       1,449   1,380   ——    ——     69

4.6 Journal Proper
A book maintained to record transactions, which do not find place in special
journals, is known as Journal Proper or Journal Residual.

Following transactions are recorded in this journal:

1. Opening Entry: In order to open new set of books in the beginning of new
accounting year and record therein opening balances of assets, liabilities
and capital, the opening entry is made in the journal.

2. Adjustment Entries: In order to update ledger account on accrual basis,
such entries are made at the end of the accounting period. Such as  Rent
outstanding, Prepaid  insurance, Depreciation and Commission received
in advance.

Reprint 2025-26



140 Accountancy

3. Rectification entries:  To rectify errors in recording transactions in the books
of original entry and their posting to ledger accounts this journal is used.

4. Transfer entries: Drawing account is transferred to capital account at the
end of the accounting year. Expenses accounts and revenue accounts
which are not balanced at the time of balancing are opened to record specific
transactions. Accounts relating to operation of business such as Sales,
Purchases, Opening Stock, Income, Gains and Expenses, etc., and drawing
are closed at the end of the year and their Total/balances are transferred
to Trading and Profit and Loss account by recording the journal entries.
These are also called closing entries.

5. Other entries: In addition to the above mentioned entries in the points
number 1 to 4, recording of the following transaction is done in the
journal proper :

(i) At the time of a dishonour of a cheque the entry for cancellation for
discount received or discount allowed earlier.

(ii) Purchase/sale of items on credit other than goods.
(iii) Goods withdrawn by the owner for personal use.
(iv) Goods distributed as samples for sales promotion.
(v) Endorsement and dishonour of bills of exchange.
(vi) Transaction in respect of consignment and joint venture, etc.
(vii) Loss of goods by fire/theft/spoilage.

Test Your Understanding - I

Select the Correct Answer
(a) When a firm maintains a cash book, it need not maintain ;

(i) Journal Proper
(ii) Purchases (journal) book

(iii) Sales (journal) book
(iv) Bank and cash account in the ledger

(b) Double column cash book records:
(i) All transactions

(ii) Cash and bank transactions
(iii) Only cash transactions
(iv) Only credit transactions

(c) Goods purchased on cash are recorded in the :
(i) Purchases (journal) book

(ii) Sales (journal) book
(iii) Cash book
(iv) Purchases return (journal) book

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 141

(d) Cash book does not record transaction of :

(i) Cash nature
(ii) Credit nature
(iii) Cash and credit nature
(iv) None of these

(e) Total of these transactions is posted in purchase account :
(i) Purchase of furniture

(ii) Cash and credit purchase
(iii) Purchases return
(iv) Purchase of stationery

(f) The periodic total of sales return journal is posted to :
(i) Sales account
(ii) Goods account

(iii) Purchases return account
(iv) Sales return account

(g) Credit balance of bank account  in cash book shows :
(i) Overdraft

(ii) Cash deposited in our bank
(iii) Cash withdrawn from bank
(iv) None of these

(h) The periodic total of purchases return journal is posted to :
(i) Purchase account

(ii) Profit and loss account
(iii) Purchase returns account
(iv) Furniture account

(i) Balancing of account means :
(i) Total of debit side

(ii) Total of credit side
(iii) Difference in total of debit & credit
(iv) None of these

4.7 Balancing the Accounts

Accounts in the ledger are periodically balanced, generally at the end of the accounting
period, with the object of ascertaining the net position of each amount. Balancing of
an account means that the two sides are totaled and the difference between them is
shown on the side, which is shorter in order to make their totals equal. The words
‘balance c/d’ are written against the amount of the difference between the two sides.
The amount of balance is brought (b/d) down in the next accounting period indicating
that it is a continuing account, till finally settled or closed.

In case the debit side exceeds the credit side, the difference is written on the
credit side, if the credit side exceeds the debit side, the difference between the two
appears on the debit side and is called debit and credit balance respectively. The

Reprint 2025-26



142 Accountancy

accounts of expenses losses and gains/revenues are not balanced but are closed
by transferring to trading and profit and loss account. The balancing of the an
account is illustrated below with the help of an example explaining the complete
process of recording the transactions, posting to ledger and balancing there of.

Date Details

2017
Apr. 01 Commenced business with cash ` 1,00,000.
Apr.02 Deposited in bank ` 40,000.
Apr. 02 Purchased for cash furniture ` 6,000;

Land ̀  42,000.
Apr.l 03 Paid cheque to M/s Malika & Brothers for purchase of electric wires and

plugs ̀  17,000.
Apr. 04 Bought of M/s Handa Co. vide invoice no. 544:

(i) 28 Immersion Heaters 1,000 Watt of Smg. Ltd. @ ` 50, and
(ii) 40 Tube lights @ `35. trade discount @ 12.5%.

Apr.l 04 Purchased stationery for cash ` 2,300.
Apr. 05 Loan from M/s Dayal Traders. @ 6% ` 25,000 and deposited money in the

bank on the next day.
Apr. 05 Paid cartage ` 80 and other charges ` 20.
Apr. 06 Bought of M/s Burari. Ltd. on account vide Invoice No. 125:

(i) 50 Table lamps (Universal) @ ` 80 :
(ii) 20 Electric kettles (General) @ ` 125.
(iii) 5 Electric iron@ ` 300. trade discount 20%.

Apr. 07 Sales to M/s Ramneek on account vide invoice no. 871:
(i) 10 Immersion heaters1000 watt @ ` 60.
(ii) 5 Table lamps @ ` 100:
(iii) 2 Electric irons @ 320.

Apr. 08 Sales to M/s Kapadia on credit vide invoice no. 880
(i) 15 Immersion heaters @ 60:
(ii) 15 Tube lights @ ` 38.

Apr. 10 Return inwards from Ramneek :
(i) 2 Immersion heaters,
(ii) 1 Electric iron.

Apr. 11 Paid rent by cheque ` 4,000.
Apr. 11 Purchased from M/s Rungta for cash:

(i) 5 Immersion heaters 1000 watt @ ` 45.
Apr. 12 Returned goods to Burari Ltd. :

(i) 3 Table lamps (Universal)
(ii) 2 Electric kettles
(iii) 1 Electric iron.

Apr. 15 Purchased on account furniture from quality Furniture Ltd. ` 8,000.
Apr. 16 Paid for advertisement ` 1,200.

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 143

Apr. 18 Sales to M/s Daman on account vide invoice no. 902:
(i) 10 Electric kettles (General) @ ` 130.

Apr. 19 Purchased from M/s Kochhar  Co. on credit vide invoice no.205:
(i) 25 Electric Mixers @ ` 600.
(ii) 40 Electric irons (Special) @ ` 540. trade discount 20%.

Apr. 20 Sales to M/s Ramneek on account vide bill no.925: 4 Electric Mixers
@ ̀  600.

Apr. 21 Received cheque of `3,700 from M/s Ramneek for full and final settlement
of claim. The cheque deposited in bank after two days.

Apr. 21 Purchased from M/s Burari Ltd. on credit vide invoice no.157:
(i) 10 Electric kettles @ ` 125
(ii) 20 Electric lamps @ ` 80 trade discount @ 20%.

Apr. 23 Sales to M/s Nutan on account vide invoice no.958:
(i) 2 Electric Mixers @ ` 600.

Apr. 23 Cash sales of Electric wires and plugs ` 14,500, cash discount allowed
` 200.

Apr. 24 Cash purchases from M/s Hitesh:
(i) 5 Electric fans @ ` 740. 

Apr. 25 Paid electricity bill ` 1,320.
Apr. 25 Made full and final payment to M/s Burari Ltd. by cheque discount allowed

by them ̀  320.
Apr. 26 Purchased stationery on account from M/s Mohit Mart ` 3,200.
Apr. 27 Sales to M/s Daman on account vide Invoice No. 981:

(i) 15 Table lamps @ ` 100
(ii) 10 Immersion heaters 1000 watt @ ` 80.

Apr. 28 Deposited in bank ` 5,000.
Apr. 30 Withdrew ` 8,000 for personal use.
Apr. 30 Paid telephone bill ` 2700 by cheque.
Apr. 30 Paid insurance ̀  1,600 by cheque.
Apr. 30 Paid to M/s Handa Co. ̀ 2,450 by cheque; and ̀  28,000 to M/s Kochhar and

co. by cheque who allowed ` 1,280 as discount.

Purchases (Journal) Book

Date  Invoice Name of the Supplier L.F. Amount
No. (Account to be credited) `

2017
Apr. 04 544  Handa Co. 2,450
Apr. 06 125  Burari Ltd. 6,400
Apr. 19 205  Kochhar  Co. 29,280
Apr. 21 157  Burari  Ltd. 2,280

Apr. 30 40,410

Reprint 2025-26



144 Accountancy

Sales (Journal) Book

Date  Invoice Name of the Customer L.F. Amount
No. (Account to be debited) `

2017
Apr. 07 871  Ramneek 1,740
Apr. 08 880  Kapadia 1,470
Apr. 18 902  Daman 1,300
Apr. 20 925  Ramneek 2,400
Apr. 23 958  Nutan 1,200
Apr. 27 981  Daman 2,300

Apr. 30 10,410

Purchases Return (Journal) Book

Date Debit Name of the Supplier L.F. Amount
(Account to be debited)                                                                 `

2017
Apr. 12  Burari Ltd. 632
Apr. 30 632

Sales Return (Journal) Book

Date Credit Name of the customer L.F. Amount
(Account to be credited) `

2017
Apr. 10 Ramneek 440
Apr. 30 440

Journal Proper

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

2017
Apr. 15 Furniture A/c Dr. 8,000

To Quality Furniture A/c 8,000
(Purchase of furniture on credit)

Apr. 25 Burari Ltd. A/c Dr. 320
To Discount A/c 320

(Discount received)
Apr. 26 Stationery A/c Dr. 3,200

To Mohit Mart A/c 3,200
(Purchase of Stationery items on credit)

Apr. 30 Kochhar A/c 1,280
To Discount A/c 1,280

(Discount received)
Total 12,800 12,800

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 145

Cash Book

Date Particulars L.F. Cash Bank Date Particulars L.F. Cash Bank
` ` ` `

2017 2017
Apr. April
01 Capital 1,00,000 02 Bank C 40,000
02 Cash C 40,000 02 Furniture 6,000
05 6% Loan   25,000 02 Land 42,000
06 Cash C 25,000 03 Purchases 17,000
21 Ramneek 3,700 04 Stationery   2,300
23 Cash C 3,700 05 Miscellaneous 100

expenses
23 Sales 14,500 06 Bank C 25,000
28 Cash C 5,000 11 Rent  4,000

11 Purchases   225
16 Advertisement 1,200
23 Bank C 3,700
24 Purchases 3,700
25 Electric 1,320

charges
25 Burari Ltd. 7,728
28 Bank C 5,000
30 Drawings 8,000
30 Telephone 2,700

charges
30 Insurance 1,600
30 Handa Co. 2,450
30 Kochhar & Co. 28,000
30 Balance c/d 4,655 10,222

1,43,200 73,700 1,43,200 73,700

May
01 Balance b/d 4,655 10,222

The recorded transactions will be posted in the ledger.

Capital Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2014
Apr. 30 Balance c/d 1,00,000 Apr. 01  Cash 1,00,000

1,00,000 1,00,000

Reprint 2025-26



146 Accountancy

6% Loan Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Apr. 30  Balance c/d 25,000 April 05  Cash 25,000

25,000 25,000

Ramneek’s Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Apr. 07  Sales 1,740 April 10  Sales return   440
Apr. 20  Sales 2,400 April 21  Cash 3,700

4,140 4,140

Sales Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Apr. 23  Cash 14,500
Apr. 30  Sundries 10,410

24,910

Furniture Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Apr. 02 Cash 6,000 Apr. 30  Balance c/d 14,000
Apr. 15 Quality 8,000

Furniture
14,000 14,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 147

Land Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Apr. 02  Cash 42,000 Apr.30  Balance c/d 42,000

42,000 42,000

Purchases Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Apr. 03  Bank 17,000
Apr. 11  Bank    225
Apr. 24  Cash  3,700
Apr. 30  Sundries 40,410

61,335

Stationery Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Apr. 04 Cash 2,300
Apr. 26 Mohit mart 3,200

5,500

Miscellaneous Expenses Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Apr. 05  Cash 100

100

Reprint 2025-26



148 Accountancy

Rent Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Apr. 04  Bank 4,000

4,000

Advertisement Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Apr.16  Cash 1,200

1,200

 Electric Charges Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Apr. 25   Cash 1,320

1,320

Drawings Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Apr. 30  Cash 8,000

8,000

Telephone Charges Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Apr. 30  Bank 2,700

2,700

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 149

 Insurance Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Apr. 30  Bank 1,600

1,600

Quality Furniture Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Apr. 30  Balance c/d 8,000 Apr. 15  Furniture 8,000

8,000 8,000

Mohit Mart Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Apr. 30  Balance c/d 3,200 Apr. 26  Stationery 3,200

3,200 3,200

Purchases Return Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
 Apr. 30  Sundries 632

632

Handa Company Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017 2017
Apr. 30  Bank 2,450 Apr. 04  Purchases 2,450

2,450 2,450

Reprint 2025-26



150 Accountancy

Burari Ltd. Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017 2017
Apr. 12 Purchases 632 Apr. 06  Purchases 6,400

return 
Apr. 25 Bank 7,728 Apr. 21 Purchases 2,280

Discount 320
8,680 8,680

Kochhar Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017 2017
Apr. 30 Bank 28,000 Apr. 19  Purchases 29,280

Discount 1,280
29,280 29,280

Sales Return Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2017
Apr. 30  Sundries 440

. 440

Kapadia Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Apr. 08  Sales 1,470 Apr. 30  Balance c/d 1,470

1,470 1,470

Daman Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Apr. 18  Sales 1,300 Apr. 30  Balance c/d 3,600
Apr. 27  Sales 2,300

3,600 3,600

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 151

Nutan Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Apr. 23  Sales 1,200 Apr. 30  Balance c/d 1,200

1,200 1,200

Discount Received Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017
Apr. 25  Burari Ltd     320
Apr. 30 Kochhar   1,280

1,600

Test Your Understanding - II

1. Fill in the Correct Words :
(a) Cash book is a  .........  journal.
(b) In Journal proper, only.........discount is recorded.
(c) Return of goods purchased on credit to the suppliers will be entered in ......

Journal.
(d) Assets sold on credit are entered in .........
(e) Double column cash book records transaction relating to .........and .........
(f) Total of the debit side of cash book is .........than the credit side.
(g) Cash book does not record the .........transactions.
(h) In double column cash book .........transactions are also recorded.
(i) Credit balance shown by a bank column in cash book is .........
(j) The amount paid to the petty cashier at the beginning of a period is known as

.........amount.
(k) In purchase book goods purchased on .........are  recorded.

2. State whether the following statements are True or False :
(a) Journal is a book of secondary entry.
(b) One debit account and more than one credit account in a entry is called

compound entry.
(c) Assets sold on credit are entered in sales journal.
(d) Cash and credit purchases are entered in purchase journal.
(e) Cash sales are entered in sales journal.
(f) Cash book records transactions relating to receipts and  payments.
(g) Ledger is a subsidiary book.
(h) Petty cash book is a book having record of big payments.

Reprint 2025-26



152 Accountancy

(i) Cash received is entered on the debit side of cash book.
(j) Transaction recorded both on debit and credit side of cash book is known as

contra entry.
(k) Balancing of account means total of debit and credit side.
(l) Credit purchase of machine is entered in purchase journal.

Key Terms Introduced in the Chapter

• Posting • Sales (Journal) Book
• Day books • Balancing of Accounts
• Cash book • Purchase (Journal) book
• Petty Cash book • Purchases return (Journal) Book
• Sales return (Journal) Book

Summary with Reference to Learning Objectives

1. Journal : Basic book of original entry.
2. Cash book : A book used to record all cash receipts and payments.
3. Petty cash book : A book used to record small cash payments.
4. Purchase journal : A special journal in which only credit purchases are recorded
5. Sales journal : A special journal in which only credit sales are recorded
6. Purchases Return Book : A book in which return of merchandise purchased is

recorded.
7. Sales Return Book : A special book in which returns of merchandise sold on

credit are recorded.

Questions For Practice

Short Answers

1. Briefly state how the cash book is both journal and a ledger.
2. What is the purpose of contra entry?
3. What are special purpose books?
4. What is petty cash book? How it is prepared?
5. Explain the meaning of posting of journal entries?
6. Define the purpose of maintaining subsidiary journal.
7. Write the difference between return Inwards and return ouwards.
8. What do you understand by ledger folio?
9. What is difference between trade discount and cash discount?

10. Write the process of preparing ledger from a journal.
11. What do you understand by Imprest amount in petty cash book?

Long Answers

1. Explain the need for drawing up the special purpose books.
2. What is cash book?  Explain the types of cash book.
3. What is contra entry? How can you deal this entry while preparing  double

column cash book?

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 153

4. What is petty cash book? Write the advantages of petty cash book?
5. Describe the advantages of sub-dividing the Journal.
6. What do you understand by balancing of account?

Numerical Questions

Simple Cash Book

1. Enter the following transactions in a simple cash book for December 2016:
`

01 Cash in hand 12,000
05 Cash received from Bhanu   4,000
07 Rent Paid 2,000
10 Purchased goods Murari for cash   6,000
15 Sold goods for cash   9,000
18 Purchase stationery 300
22 Cash paid to Rahul on account   2,000
28 Paid salary   1,000
30 Paid rent      500

(Ans. Cash in hand ` 13,200)

2. Record the following transaction in simple cash book for November 2016:
`

01 Cash in hand 12,500
04 Cash paid to Hari   600
07 Purchased goods 800
12 Cash received from Amit  1,960
16 Sold goods for cash 800
20 Paid to Manish  590
25 Paid cartage 100
31 Paid salary  1,000

(Ans. Cash in hand ` 12,170)

3. Enter the following transaction in Simple cash book for December  2017:
`

01 Cash in hand                      7,750
06 Paid to Sonu      45
08 Purchased goods    600
15 Received cash from Parkash    960
20 Cash sales    500
25 Paid to S.Kumar 1,200
30 Paid rent    600
(Ans. Cash in hand ` 6,765)

Bank Column Cash Book
4. Record the following transactions in a bank column cash book for December

2016:
`

01 Started business with cash 80,000
04 Deposited in bank 50,000

Reprint 2025-26



154 Accountancy

10 Received cash from Rahul   1,000
15 Bought goods for cash   8,000
22 Bought goods by cheque 10,000
25 Paid to Shyam by cash 20,000
30 Drew from Bank for office use   2,000
31 Rent paid by cheque   1,000
(Ans. Cash in hand ` 5,000: cash at bank ` 37,000)

5. Prepare a double column cash book with the help of following information
for December  2016:

`

01 Started business with cash 1,20,000
03 Cash paid into bank    50,000
05 Purchased goods from Sushmita    20,000
06 Sold goods to Dinker and received a cheque 20,000
10 Paid to Sushmita cash    20,000
14 Cheque received on December 06, 2016 deposited into bank
18 Sold goods to Rani   12,000
20 Cartage paid in cash 500
22 Received cash from Rani   12,000
27 Commission received 5,000
30 Drew cash for personal use 2,000

         (Ans. Cash in hand ` 64,500 : Cash at bank ` 70,000)

6. Enter the following transactions in double column cash book of M/s Ambica
Traders for July 2017:

`

01 Commenced business with cash 50,000
03 Opened bank account with ICICI 30,000
05 Purchased goods for cash 10,000
10 Purchased office machine for cash   5,000
15 Sales goods on credit from Rohan and received chaeque   7,000
18 Cash sales   8,000
20 Rohan’s cheque deposited into bank
22 Paid cartage by cheque 500
25 Cash withdrawn for personal use   2,000
30 Paid rent by cheque   1,000
(Ans. Cash in hand ` 11,000, Cash at bank ` 35,500)

7. Prepare double column cash book from the following information for
July 2017:

`

01 Cash In hand 7,500
Bank overdraft 3,500

03 Paid wages  200
05 Cash sales 7,000
10 Cash deposited into bank 4,000
15 Goods purchased  and paid by cheque 2,000
20 Paid rent    500

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 155

25 Drew from bank for personal use 400
30 Salary paid 1,000
(Ans. Cash in hand ` 8,800, Bank overdraft ` 1,900)

8. Enter the following transaction in a double column cash book of M/s.Mohit
Traders for January 2017:

`

01 Cash in hand  3,500
Bank overdraft 2,300

03 Goods purchased for cash 1,200
05 Paid wages 200
10 Cash sales 8,000
15 Deposited into bank 6,000
22 Sold goods for cheque which was deposited into 2,000

bank same day
25 Paid rent by cheque 1,200
28 Drew from bank for personal use 1,000
31 Bought goods by cheque 1,000
(Ans. Cash in hand ` 4,100 Cash at bank ` 2,500)

9. Prepare double column cash book from the following transactions for the
year August  2017:

`

01     Cash in hand 17,500
Cash at bank   5,000

03 Purchased goods for cash   3,000
05 Received cheque from  Jasmeet 10,000
08 Sold goods for cash 7,000
10 Jasmeet’s cheque deposited into bank
12 Purchased goods and paid by cheque 20,000
15 Paid establishment expenses through bank 1,000
18 Cash sales 7,000
20 Deposited into bank 10,000
24 Paid trade expenses 500
27 Received commission by cheque 6,000
29 Paid Rent   2,000
30 Withdrew cash for personal use   1,200
31 Salary paid   6,000
(Ans. Cash in hand ` 8,800 cash at bank ` 10,000)

10. M/s Ruchi trader started their cash book with the following balances on
July 2017: cash in hand ̀ 1,354 and balance in bank current account  ̀ 7,560.
He had the following transaction in the month of July 2017:

`

03 Cash sales 2,300
05 Purchased goods, paid by cheque 6,000
08 Cash sales 10,000
12 Paid trade expenses  700
15 Sales goods, received cheque (deposited same day) 20,000
18 Purchased motor car paid by cheque 15,000

Reprint 2025-26



156 Accountancy

20 Cheque received from Manisha (deposited same day) 10,000
22 Cash Sales  7,000
25 Manisha’s cheque returned dishonoured
28 Paid Rent   2,000
29 Paid telephone expenses by cheque  500
31 Cash withdrawn for personal use  2,000

Prepare bank column cash book
(Ans. Cash in hand ` 15,954 cash at bank ` 6,060)

Petty Cash Book

11. Prepare petty cash book from the following transactions. The imprest  amount
is ̀ 2,000.
2017 `

January
01 Paid cartage 50
02 STD charges 40
02 Bus fare 20
03 Postage 30
04 Refreshment for employees 80
06 Courier charges 30
08 Refreshment of customer 50
10 Cartage 35
15 Taxi fare to manager 70
18 Stationery 65
20 Bus fare 10
22 Fax charges 30
25 Telegrams charges 35
27 Postage stamps  200
29 Repair on furniture  105
30 Laundry expenses  115
31 Miscellaneous expenses  100
(Ans. Cash  balance ` 935)

12. Record the following transactions during the week ending  Dec.30, 2014
with a weekly imprest ` 500.

2017 `

January
24 Stationery                               100
25 Bus fare  12
25 Cartage  40
26 Taxi fare  80
27 Wages to casual labour  90
29 Postage  80
(Ans. Cash balance ` 98)

Other Subsidiary Books

13. Enter the following transactions in the Purchase Journal (Book) of
M/s Gupta Traders of July 2017:

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 157

01 Bought from Rahul Traders as per invoice no.20041
40 Registers @ `60 each
80 Gel Pens @ `15 each
50 note books @ `20 each
Trade discount 10%.

15 Bought from Global Stationers as per invoice no.1132
40 Ink Pads @ `8 each
50 Files @ `10 each
20 Color Books @ ` 20 each
Trade Discount 5%

23 Purchased from Lamba Furniture as per invoice no. 3201
2 Chairs @ 600 per chair
1 Table @ 1000 per table

25 Bought from Mumbai Traders as per invoice no.1111
10 Paper Rim @ `100 per rim
400 drawing Sheets @ `3 each
20 Packets waters colour @ `40 per packet

(Ans: Total of purchases book ` 8,299)

14. Enter the following transactions in sales (journal) book of M/s.Bansal
electronics:
2014
September
01 Sold to Amit Traders as per bill no.4321

20 Pocket Radio @ 70 per Radio
2, T.V. set, B&W.(6”) @ 800 Per T.V.
10. Sold to Arun Electronics as per bill no.4351
5 T.V. sets (20”) B&W @ `3,000 per T.V.
2  T.V. sets (21”) Colour @ ` 4,800 per T.V.

22 Sold to Handa Electronics as per bill no.4,399
10 Tape recorders @ ` 600 each
5 Walkman @ ` 300 each

28 Sold to Harish Trader as per bill no.4430
10 Mixer Juicer Grinder @ ` 800 each.

(Ans. Total of sales book ` 43,100)

15. Prepare a purchases return (journal) book from the following transactions
for April 2017.

2017 `

April
05 Returned goods to M/s Kartik Traders 1,200
10 Goods returned to  Sahil Pvt. Ltd. 2,500
17 Goods returned to M/s Kohinoor Traders.

for list price `2,000 less 10% trade discount.
28 Return outwards to  M/s Handa Traders 550
(Ans. Total of purchases return book ` 6,150)

Reprint 2025-26



158 Accountancy

16. Prepare Return Inward Journal (Book) from the following transactions of
M/s Bansal Electronics for July 2017:

2017 `

July
04 M/s Gupta Traders returned the goods 1,500
10 Goods returned from M/s Harish Traders 800
18 M/s Rahul Traders returned the goods not as per 1,200

specifications
28 Goods returned from Sushil Traders 1,000
(Ans : Total of sales return ` 4,500)

Recording, Posting and Balancing

17. Prepare proper  subsidiary books and post them to the ledger from the following
transactions for the month of February 2017:

2017 `

February
01 Goods sold to  Sachin 5,000
04 Purchase from Kushal Traders 2,480
06 Sold goods to Manish Traders 2,100
07 Sachin returned goods 600
08 Returns to Kushal Traders 280
10 Sold to Mukesh 3,300
14 Purchased from  Kunal Traders 5,200
15 Furniture purchased from Tarun 3,200
17 Bought of  Naresh 4,060
20 Return to Kunal Traders 200
22 Return inwards from Mukesh 250
24 Purchased goods from Kirit & Co. for list price of 5,700

less 10% trade discount
25 Sold to Shri Chand goods 6600

less 5% trade discount
26 Sold to Ramesh Brothers 4,000
28 Return outwards to Kirit and Co. 1,000

less 10% trade discount
28 Ramesh Brothers returned goods ̀  500.
Ans : (Total of sales book `20,670, purchases book `16,870,

Purchases return book `1,380, sales return book ̀ 1,350).

18. The following balances of ledger of M/s Marble Traders on April 01, 2017
2017 `

April
Cash in hand 6,000
Cash at bank 12,000
Bills receivable 7,000
Ramesh (Cr.) 3,000

Reprint 2025-26



Recording of Transactions - II 159

Stock (Goods) 5,400
Bills payable 2,000
Rahul (Dr.) 9,700
Himanshu (Dr.) 10,000

Transactions during the month were:
April `

01 Goods sold  to Manish 3,000
02 Purchased goods from Ramesh 8,000
03 Received cash from Rahul in full settlement 9,200
05 Cash received from Himanshu on account 4,000
06 paid to Remesh by cheque 6,000.
08 Rent paid by cheque 1,200
10 Cash received from manish 3,000
12 Cash sales 6,000
14 Goods returned to Ramesh 1,000
15 Cash paid to Ramesh in full settlement 3,700

Discount received 300
18 Goods sold to Kushal 10,000
20 Paid trade expenses 200
21 Drew for personal use 1,000
22 Goods return from Kushal 1,200
24 Cash received from Kushal 6,000
26 Paid for stationery 100
27 Postage charges 60
28 Salary Paid 2,500
29 Goods purchased from Sheetal Traders 7,000
30 Sold goods to Kirit 6000

Goods purchased from Handa Traders 5,000
Journlise the above transactions and post them to the ledger.

Checklist to Test Your Understanding

Test Your Understanding - I

a. (iv) b. (ii) c. (iii) d. (ii) e. (ii) f. (iv) g .(ii) h. (iii) i. (iii)

Test Your Understanding - II

1. (a) subsidiary (b) cash (c) purchases return (d) journal proper
(e) cash, bank (f) more (g) credit (h) bank
(i) overdraft (j) imprest (k) credit

2. (a) False (b) True (c) False (d) False
(e) False (f) True (g) True (h) False
(i) True (j) True (k) False (l) False

Reprint 2025-26



160 Accountancy

##5##
Bank Reconciliation Statement 5

In chapter 4, you have learnt that
the business organisations keep a record of their

cash and bank transactions in a cash book. The
cash book also serves the purpose of both the cash
account and the bank account and shows the
balance of both at the end of the period.

Once the cash book has been balanced, it is
usual to check its details with the records of the
firm’s bank transactions as recorded by the bank.
To enable this check, the cashier needs to ensure
that the cash book is completely up to date and a
recent bank statement (or a bank passbook) has
been obtained from the bank. A bank statement
or a bank passbook is a copy of a bank account as

LEARNING OBJECTIVES shown by the bank records. This enable the bank
After studying this customers to check their funds in the bank
chapter, you will be able regularly and update their own records of
to : transactions that have occurred. An illustrative
• state the meaning and bank passbook of a current account is shown in

need for the preparation figure 5.1.
of bank reconciliation
statement; The amount of balance shown in the passbook

• identify causes of or the bank statement must tally with the balance
difference between as shown in the cash book. But in practice, these
bank balance as per are usually found to be different. Hence, we have
cash book and pass to ascertain the causes for such difference. It will
book; be observed that a bank statement/passbook

• prepare the bank
shows all deposits in the credit column and

reconciliation statement;
• ascertain the correct withdrawals in the debit column. Thus, if deposits

bank balance as per exceed withdrawals it shows a credit balance and
cash book; if withdrawals exceed deposits it will show a debit

balance (overdraft).

Reprint 2025-26



Bank Reconciliation Statement 161

5.1 Need for Reconciliation

It is generally experienced that when a comparison is made between the bank
balance as shown in the firm’s cash book, the two balances do not tally.
Hence, we have to first ascertain the causes of difference thereof and then
reflect them in a statement called  Bank Reconciliation Statement to reconcile
(tally) the two balances.

In order to prepare a bank reconciliation statement we need to have a
bank balance as per the cash book and a bank statement as on a particular
day along with details of both the books. If the two balances differ, the entries
in both the books are compared and the items on account of which the
difference has arisen are ascertained with the respective amounts involved so
that the bank reconciliation statement may be prepared. Its format shown in
figure 5.5.

Particulars Amount
`

Balance as per cash book .......
Add: Cheques issued but not presented .......

Interest credited by the bank .......
.......

Less: Cheques deposited but not credited by the bank .......
Bank charges not recorded in the cash book .......

Balance as per the passbook xxxx

Fig. 5.2 : Proforma of bank reconciliation statement

It can also be prepared with two amount columns one showing additions (+
column) and another showing deductions (-column). For convenience, we usually
adopt this treatment.

Particulars Amount Amount
` `

(+) (–)

Balance as per cash book ......
Cheques issued but not presented ` ......
Interest credited by the bank ......
Cheque deposited but not credited by the bank ......
Bank charges not recorded in the cash book ......

Balance as per the passbook. xxxx

Fig. 5.3 : Proforma of bank reconcitiation statement (table form)

Reprint 2025-26



162 AccountancyDHERENDRA NATIONAL BANK MULTI-MODULE PACKAGE DATE : 30/09/2016
CONNAUGHT PLACE STATEMENT OF ACCOUNT OP.ID : GK

FROM 01/08/2016 TO 30/09/2016 PAGE NO. : 1
ACCOUNT NO. 03355
NAME : DEV PANDIT
KHADWAI, RUNAKUTA, DELHI-34

DATE PARTICULARS CHEQUE DEBIT CREDIT BALANCE + REMARKS
No. ` P. ` P. ` P.

Opening 50,782.30 +
Balance :

04/08/2016 DELHI PLA 356376 35,000.00 15,782.30 +
07/08/2016 TO SELF 356377 10,000.00 5,782.30 +
13/08/2016 BY CLG 10,673,00 16,455,30 +
13/08/2016 BY CLG 9,143.00 25,598.30 +
17/08/2016 TO SELF 356378 20,000.00 5,598.30 +
21/08/2016 BY CLG 25,808.00 31,406.30 +
26/08/2016 BY CLG 32,949.00 64,355,30 +
02/09/2016 To SELF 356381 30,000.00 34,355.30 +
04/09/2016 DELHI PLASTIC 356382 10,000.00 24,355.30 +
08/09/2016 ICICI 657755 6,074.00 18,281.30 +
09/09/2016 BY CLG 3,146.00 21,427.30 +
13/09/2016 TO SELF 356380 9,500,00 11,927.30 +
15/09/2016 BY CLG 5,320.00 17,247.30 +
15/09/2016 BY CLG 18,564.00 35,811.30 +
16/09/2016 TO SERVICE CHARGES 120.00 35,691.30 +
21/09/2016 TO SELF 356383 20,000.00 15,691.30 +
25/09/2016 TO SELF 356385 10,000.00 5,691.30 +
27/09/2016 BY CLG 16,198.00 21,889.30 +

FOR DHERENDRA NATIONAL BANK
ACCOUNTANT/MANAGER

Fig. 5.1 : Specimen of bank statement (current account)

Reprint 2025-26



Bank Reconciliation Statement 163

Reconciliation of the cash book and the bank passbook balances amounts
to an explanation of differences between them. The differences between the
cash book and the bank passbook is caused by:

• timing differences on recording of the transactions.
• errors made by the business or by the bank.

5.1.1 Timing Differences

When a business compares the balance of its cash book with the balance
shown by the bank passbook, there is often a difference, which is caused
by the time gap in recording the transactions relating either to payments
or receipts. The factors affecting time gap includes :

5.1.1(a) Cheques issued by the bank but not yet presented for payment

When cheques are issued by the firm to suppliers or creditors of the firm,
these are immediately entered on the credit side of the cash book. However,
the receiving party may not present the cheque to the bank for payment
immediately. The bank will debit the firm’s account only when these cheques
are actually paid by the bank. Hence,  there is a time lag between the issue of
a cheque and its presentation to the bank which may cause the difference
between the two balances.

5.1.1(b) Cheques paid into the bank but not yet collected

When firm receives cheques from its customers (debtors), they are
immediately recorded in the debit side of the cash book. This increases
the bank balance as per the cash book. However, the bank credits the
customer account only when the amount of cheques are actually realised.
The clearing of cheques generally takes few days especially in case of
outstation cheques or when the cheques are paid-in at a bank branch
other than the one at which the account of the firm is maintained. This
leads to a cause of difference between the bank balance shown by the
cash book and the balance shown by the bank passbook.

5.1.1(c) Direct debits made by the bank on behalf of the customer

Sometimes, the bank deducts amount for various services from the account
without the firm’s knowledge. The firm comes to know about it only when
the bank statement arrives. Examples of such deductions include: cheque
collection charges, incidental charges, interest on overdraft, unpaid cheques
deducted by the bank – i.e., stopped or bounced, etc. As a result, the balance
as per passbook will be less than the balance as per cash book.

Reprint 2025-26



164 Accountancy

5.1.1(d) Amounts directly deposited in the bank account

There are instances when debtors (customers) directly deposits money into firm’s
bank account. But, the firm does not receive the intimation from any source till
it receives the bank statement. In this case, the bank records the receipts in the
firm’s account at the bank but the same is not recorded in the firm’s cash book.
As a result, the balance shown in the bank passbook will be more than the
balance shown in the firm’s cash book.

5.1.1(e) Interest and dividends collected by the bank

When the bank collects interest and dividend on behalf of the customer, then these
are immediately credited to the customers account. But the firm will know about
these transactions and record the same in the cash book only when it receives a
bank statement. Till then the balances as per the cash book and passbook will
differ.

5.1.1(f) Direct payments made by the bank on behalf of the customers

Sometimes the customers give standing instructions to the bank to make some
payment regularly on stated days to the third parties. For example, telephone
bills, insurance premium, rent, taxes, etc. are directly paid by the bank on behalf
of the customer and debited to the account. As a result, the balance as per the
bank passbook would be less than the one shown in the cash book.

5.1.1(g) Cheques deposited/bills discounted dishonoured

If a cheque deposited by the firm is dishonoured or a bill of exchange drawn by
the business firm is discounted with the bank is dishonoured on the date of
maturity, the same is debited to customer’s account by the bank. As this
information is not available to the firm immediately, there will be no entry in
the firm’s cash book regarding the above items. This will be known to the firm
when it receives a statement  from the bank. As a result, the balance as per
the passbook would be less than the cash book balance.

5.1.2 Differences Caused by Errors

Sometimes the difference between the two balances may be accounted for by
an error on the part of the bank or an error in the cash book of the business.
This causes difference between the bank balance shown by the cash book
and the balance shown by the bank statement.

Reprint 2025-26



Bank Reconciliation Statement 165

5.1.2(a) Errors committed in recording transaction by the firm

Omission or wrong recording of transactions relating to cheques issued, cheques
deposited and wrong totalling, etc., committed by the firm while recording entries
in the cash book cause difference between cash book and passbook balance.

5.1.2(b) Errors committed in recording transactions by the bank

Omission or wrong recording of transactions relating to cheques deposited
and wrong totalling, etc., committed by the bank while posting entries in the
passbook also cause differences between passbook and cash book balance.

Test Your Understanding - I

I. Read the following transactions and identify the cause of difference on the basis of
time gap or errors made by business firm/bank. Put a sign (ü ) for the correct
cause.

S.No. Transactions Time Gap Errors
made by
business/
bank

1. Cheques issued to customers but not
presented for payment.

2. Cheque amounting to ` 5,000 issued
to M/s. XYZ but recorded as ` 500
in the cash book.

3. Interest credited by the bank but yet
not recorded in the cash book.

4. Cheque deposited into the bank but
not yet collected by the bank.

5. Bank charges debited to firm’s current
account by the bank.

II. Fill in the blanks :

(i) Passbook is a copy of.............as it appears in the ledger of the bank.

(ii) When money is with drawn from the bank, the bank ............. the account of
the customer.

(iii) Normally, the cash book shows a debit balance, passbook shows
.............balance.

(iv) Favourable balance as per the cash book means .............balance in the bank
column of the cash book.

Reprint 2025-26



166 Accountancy

(v) If the cash book balance is taken as starting point the items which make the
cash book balance smaller than the passbook must be .............for the purpose
of reconciliation.

(vi) If the passbook shows a favourable balance and if it is taken as the starting
point for the purpose of bank reconciliation statement then cheques issued
but not presented for payment should be .............to find out cash balance.

(vii) When the cheques are not presented for payment, favourable balance as per
the cash book is .............than that of the passbook.

(viii) When a banker collects the bills and credits the account passbook overdraft
shows .............balance.

(ix) If the overdraft as per the passbook is taken as the starting point, the cheques
issued but not presented are to be .............in the bank reconciliation
statement.

(x) When the passbook balance is taken as the starting point items which makes
the passbook balance .............than the balance in the cash book must be
deducted for the purpose of reconciliation.

5.2 Preparation of Bank Reconciliation Statement

After identifying the causes of difference, the reconciliation may be done in
the following two ways:

(a) Preparation of bank reconciliation statement without adjusting cash book
balance.

(b) Preparation of bank reconciliation statement after adjusting cash book
balance.

It may be noted that in practice, the bank reconciliation statement is
prepared after adjusting the cash book balance, about which you will study
later in the chapter.

5.2.1 Preparation of Bank Reconciliation Statement without adjusting Cash
Book Balance

To prepare bank reconciliation statement, under this approach, the balance
as per cash book or as per passbook is the starting item. The debit balance as
per the cash book means the balance of deposits held at the bank. Such a
balance will be a credit balance as per the passbook. Such a balance exists
when the deposits made by the firm are more than its withdrawals. It indicates
the favourable balance as per cash book or favourable balance as per the
passbook. On the other hand, the credit balance as per the cash book indicates
bank overdraft. In other words, the excess amount withdrawn over the amount
deposited in the bank. It is also known as unfavourable balance as per cash
book or unfavourable balance as per passbook.

Reprint 2025-26



Bank Reconciliation Statement 167

We may have four different situations while preparing the bank reconciliation
statement. These are :

1. When debit balance (favourable balance) as per cash book is given and
the balance as per passbook is to be ascertained.

2. When credit balance (favourable balance) as per passbook is given and
the balance as per cash book is to be ascertained.

3. When credit balance as per cash book (unfavourable balance/overdraft
balance) is given and the balance as per passbook is to ascertained.

4. When debit balance as per passbook (unfavourable balance/overdraft
balance) is given and the cash book balance as per is to ascertained.

5.2.1(a) Dealing with favourable balances

The following steps may be initiated to prepare the bank reconciliation
statement:

(i) The date on which the statement is prepared is written at the top, as
part of the heading.

(ii) The first item in the statement is generally the balance as shown by the
cash book. Alternatively, the starting point can also be the balance as
per passbook.

(iii) The cheques deposited but not yet collected are deducted.

(iv) All the cheques issued but not yet presented for payment, amounts
directly deposited in the bank account are added.

(v) All the items of charges such as interest on overdraft, payment by bank
on standing instructions and debited by the bank in the passbook but
not entered in cash book, bills and cheques dishonoured etc. are
deducted.

(vi) All the credits given by the bank such as interest on dividends collected,
etc. and direct deposits in the bank are added.

(vii) Adjustment for errors are made according to the principles of rectification
of errors. (The rectification of errors has been discussed in  detail in
chapter 6.)

(viii) Now the net balance shown by the statement should be same as shown
by the passbook.

It may be noted that treatment of all items shall be the reverse of the above
if we adjust passbook balance as the starting point. (see illustration 3)

The following solved illustrations will help you understand dealing with
favourable balance as per cash book and passbook.

Reprint 2025-26



168 Accountancy

Illustration 1

From the following particulars of Mr. Vinod, prepare bank reconciliation statement as on
March 31, 2017.

1. Bank balance as per cash book ` 50,000.
2. Cheques issued but not presented for payment ` 6,000.
3. The bank had directly collected dividend of ` 8,000 and credited to bank account

but was not entered in the cash book.
4. Bank charges of ` 400 were not entered in the cash book.
5. A cheques for ` 6,000 was deposited but not collected by the bank.

So lu t i on

Bank Reconciliation Statement of Mr. Vinod as on March 31, 2017

Particulars + –
` `

1. Balance as per cash book 50,000
2. Cheques issued but not presented for payment 6,000
3. Dividends collected by the bank 8,000
4. Cheque deposited but not credited by the bank 6,000
5. Bank charges debited by the bank 400
6. Balance as per passbook. 57,600

64,000 64,000

Illustration 2

From the following particulars of Anil & Co. prepare a bank reconciliation statement as
on August 31, 2017.

1. Balance as per the cash book ` 54,000.
2. ` 100 bank incidental charges debited to Anil & Co. account, which is not recorded

in cash book.
3. Cheques for ` 5,400 is deposited in the bank but not yet collected by the bank.
4. A cheque for ` 20,000 is issued by Anil & Co. not presented for payment.

Solution

Bank Reconciliation Statement of Anil & Co. as on August 31, 2017

Particulars (+) (–)
Amount Amount

` `

1. Balance as per cash book 54,000 -
2. Cheqeus issued but not presented for payment 20,000 -
3. Cheques deposited but not credited by the bank - 5,400
4. Bank incidental charges debited by the bank - 100
5. Balance as per passbook - 68,500

74,000 74,000

Reprint 2025-26



Bank Reconciliation Statement 169

Illustration 3

The bank passbook of M/s. Boss & Co. showed a balance of ` 45,000 on May 31, 2017.
1. Cheques issued before May 31, 2017, amounting to ̀  25,940 had not been presented

for encashment.
2. Two cheques of ̀  3,900 and ̀  2,350 were deposited into the bank on May 31 but the

bank gave credit for the same in June, 2017.
3. There was also a debit in the passbook of ̀  2,500 in respect of a cheque dishonoured

on 31.5.2017. Prepare a bank reconciliation statement as on
May 31, 2017.

Solution

Bank Reconciliation Statement of Bose & Co as on May 31, 2017

Particulars (+) (–)
Amount Amount

` `

1. Balance as per passbook 45,000
2. Cheques deposited but not collected by the bank 6,250

(` 3,900+ ` 2,350)
3. Cheque dishonoured recorded only in passbook 2,500
4. Cheques issued but not presented for payment 25,940

5. Balance as per cash book 27,810

53,750 53,750

5.2.1(b) Dealing with overdrafts

So far we have dealt with bank reconciliation statement where bank balances
has been positive – i.e., there has been money in the bank account. However,
businesses sometimes have overdrafts at the bank. Overdrafts are where the
bank account becomes negative and the businesses in effect have borrowed
from the bank. This is shown in the cash book as a credit balance. In the
bank statement, where the balance is followed by Dr. (or sometimes OD) means
that there is an overdraft and called debit balance as per passbook.

An overdraft is treated as negative figure on a bank reconciliation statement.
The following solved illustration will help you understand the preparation of
bank reconciliation statement when there is an overdraft.

Illustration 4

On March 31, 2017, Rakesh had on overdraft of ` 8,000 as shown by his cash book.
Cheques amounting to ̀  2,000 had been paid in by him but were not collected by the bank.
He issued cheques of ` 800 which were not presented to the bank for payment. There was
a debit in his passbook of ` 60 for interest and ` 100 for bank charges. Prepare bank
reconciliation statement.

Reprint 2025-26



170 Accountancy

Solution

Bank Reconciliation Statement of Rakesh as on April 01, 2017

Particulars (+) (–)
Amount Amount

` `

1. Overdraft as per cash book 8,000
2. Cheques deposited but not yet collectedcharged by the bank 2,000
3. Bank charges 60
4. Cheques issued but not presented for payment 800 100
5. Balance as per bank passbook (overdraft) 9,360

10,160 10,160

Illustration 5

On March 31, 2017 the bank column of the cash book of Agrawal Traders showed a credit
balance of ̀  1,18,100 (Overdraft). On examining of the cash book and the bank statement,
it was found that :

1. Cheques received and recorded in the cash book but not sent to the bank of collection
` 12,400.

2. Payment received from a customer directly by the bank ` 27,300 but no entry was
made in the cash book.

3. Cheques issued for ̀  1,75,200 not presented for payment.
Interest of ` 8,800 charged by the bank was not entered in the cash book. Prepare
bank reconciliation statement.

Solution

Bank Reconciliation Statement of Agarwal Traders as on March 31, 2017

Particulars (+) (–)
Amount Amount

` `

1. Overdraft as per cash book 1,18,100
2. Cheques received and recorded in the cash book but not 12,400

sent to the bank for collection
3. Interest on bank overdraft debited by the bank but not 8,800

entered in the cash book
4. Payment received from the customer directly 27,300
5. Credited in the bank a/c but not entered in the cash book 1,75,200
6. Cheques issued but not presented for payment

7. Balance as per the passbook (favourable balance) 63,200

2,02,500 2,02,500

Reprint 2025-26



Bank Reconciliation Statement 171

Illustration 6

From the following particulars of Asha & Co. prepare a bank reconciliation statement on
December 31, 2017.

`

Overdraft as per passbook 20,000
Interest on overdraft 2,000
Insurance Premium paid by the bank 200
Cheque issued but not presented for payment 6,500
Cheque deposited but not yet cleared 6,000
Wrongly debited by the bank 500

Solution

Bank Reconciliation Statement of Asha & Co as on December 31, 2017

Particulars (+) (–)
Amount Amount

` `

1. Overdraft as per passbook 20,000
2. Interest on overdraft 2,000
3. Insurance premium paid by the bank 200
4. Cheque issued but not presented for payment 6,500
5. Cheques deposited but not yet cleared 6,000
6. Wrongly debited by the bank 500
7. Balance as per the cash book (overdraft) 17,800

26,500 26,500

Illustration 7

From the following particulars, prepare a bank reconciliation statement as on
March 31, 2017.

(a) Debit balance as per cash book is ` 10,000.

(b) A cheque for ` 1,000 deposited but not recorded in the cash book.

(c) A cash deposit of ` 200 was recorded in the cash book as if there is not bank,
column therein.

(d) A cheque issued for ` 250 was recorded as ` 205 in the cash column.

(e) The debit balance of ̀  1,500 as on the previous day was brought forward as a credit
balance.

(f) The payment side of the cash book was under cast by ` 100.

(g) A cash discount allowed of ` 112 was recorded as ` 121 in the bank column.

(h) A cheque of ` 500 received from a debtor was recorded in the cash book but not
deposited in the bank for collection.

(i) One outgoing cheque of ` 300 was recorded twice in the cash book.

Reprint 2025-26



172 Accountancy

Solution

Bank Reconciliation statement as on September 30, 2017

Particulars (+) (–)
Amount Amount

` `

1. Debit balance as per cash book 10,000
2. Error in carrying forward 3,000
3. Cheque recorded twice in cash book 300
4. Cheque deposit not record in bank column 200
5. Cheque deposit but not recorded 1,000
6, Under casting of payment side 100
7. Cheque issued but not entered 250
8. A cash discount wrongly recorded in bank column 121
9. Cheque recorded but not deposited 500

10. Credit balance as per passbook 13,529

14,500 14,500

Illustration 8

From the following particulars, prepare the bank reconciliation statement of Shri Krishan
as on March 31, 2017.

(a) Balance as per passbook is ` 10,000.
(b) Bank collected a cheque of ` 500 on behalf of Shri Krishan but wrongly credited it

to Shri Kishan’s account.
(c) Bank recorded a cash book deposit of ` 1,589 as ` 1,598.
(d) Withdrawal column of the passbook under cast by ` 100.
(e) The credit balance of ̀  1,500 as on the pass-book was recorded in the debit balance.
(f) The payment of a cheque of ` 350 was recorded twice in the passbook.
(g) The pass-book showed a credit balance for a cheque of ` 1,000 deposited by Shri

Kishan.

Solution

Bank Reconciliation Statement as on March 31, 2017

Particulars (+) (–)
Amount Amount

` `

1. Credit balance as per passbook 10,000
2. Cheque wrongly credited to another customer account 500
3. Error in carrying forward 3,000
4. Cheque recorded twice 350
5. Excess credit for cash deposit 9
6. Under casting of withdrawal column 100
7. Wrong credit 1,000
8. Debit balance as per cash book 12,741

13,850 13,850

Reprint 2025-26



Bank Reconciliation Statement 173

Test Your Understanding - II

Select the Correct Answer:

1. A bank reconciliation statement is prepared by:
(a) Creditors (b) Bank
(c) Account holder in a bank (d) Debtors

2. A bank reconciliation statement is prepared with the balance:
(a) Passbook (b) Cash book
(c) Both passbook and cash book (d) None of these

3. Passbook is a copy of:
(a) Copy of customer Account (b) Bank column of cash book
(c) Cash column of cash book (d) Copy of receipts and payments

4. Unfavourable bank balance means:
(a) Credit balance in passbook (b) Credit balance in cash book
(c) Debit balance in cash book (d) None of these

5. Favourable bank balance means:
(a) Credit balance in the cash book (b) Credit balance in passbook
(c) Debit balance in the cash book (d) Both (b) and (c)

6. A bank reconciliation statement is mainly prepared for:
(a) Reconcile the cash balance of the cash book.
(b) Reconcile the difference between the bank balance shown

by the cash book and bank passbook
(c) Both (a) and (b)
(d) None of these

Test your Understanding - III

State whether each of the following statements is True or False

1. Passbook is the statement of account of the customer maintained by the bank.
2. A business firm periodically prepares a bank reconciliation statement to reconcile

the bank balance as per the cash book with the passbook as these two show
different balances for various reasons.

3. Cheques issued but not presented for payment will reduce the balance as per
the passbook.

4. Cheques deposited but not collected will result in increasing the balance of the
cash book when compared to passbook.

5. Overdraft as per the passbook is less than the overdraft as per cash book when
there are cheques deposited but not collected by the banker.

6. The debit balance of the bank account as per the cash book should be equal to
the credit balance of the account of the business in the books of the bank.

7. Favourable bank balance as per the cash book will be less than the bank passbook
balance when there are unpresented cheques for payment.

8. Direct collections received by the bank on behalf of the customers would increase
the balance as per the bank passbook when compared to the balance as per the
cash book.

9. When payments made by the bank as per the standing instructions of the customer,
the balance in the passbook will be more when compared to the cash book.

Reprint 2025-26



174 Accountancy

Key Terms Introduced in the Chapter

1. Bank Reconciliation Statement
2. Cash book and Passbook

Summary with Reference to Learning Objectives

1. Bank Reconciliation Statement: A statement prepared to reconcile the bank balance
as per cash book with the balance as per passbook or bank statement, by showing the
items of difference between the two accounts.

2. Causes of difference:
– timing of recoding the transaction.
– error made by business or by the bank.

3. Correct cash balance: It may happen that some of the receipts or payments are missing
from either of the books and errors, if any, need to be rectified. This arise the need to
look at the entries/errors recorded in both statements and other information available
and compute the correct cash balance before reconciling the statements.

Questions for Practice

Short Answers

1. State the need for the preparation of bank reconciliation statement?
2. What is a bank overdraft?
3. Briefly explain the statement ‘wrongly debited by the bank’ with the help of an example.
4. State the causes of difference occurred due to time lag.
5. Briefly explain the term ‘favourable balance as per cash book’.
6. Enumerate the steps to ascertain the correct cash book balance.

Long Answers

1. What is a bank reconciliation statement. Why is it prepared?
2. Explain the reasons where the balance shown by the bank passbook does not agree

with the balance as shown by the bank column of the cash book.
3. Explain the process of preparing bank reconciliation statement with amended

cash balance.

Numerical Questions

Favourable balance of cash book and passbook –

1. From the following particulars, prepare a bank reconciliation statement as at March
31, 2017.
(i) Balance as per cash book ` 3,200

(ii) Cheque issued but not presented for payment ` 1,800
(iii) Cheque deposited but not collected upto March 31, 2014 ` 2,000
(iv) Bank charges debited by bank ̀  150
(Ans: Balance as per passbook ` 2,850)

Reprint 2025-26



Bank Reconciliation Statement 175

2. On March 31, 2017 the cash book showed a balance of ` 3,700 as cash at
bank, but the bank passbook made up to same date showed that cheques
for ̀  700, ̀  300 and ̀  180 respectively had not presented for payment, Also,
a cheque amounting to ` 1,200 deposited into the account had not been
credited. Prepare a bank reconciliation statement.
(Ans : Balance as per passbook ` 3,680)

3. The cash book shows a bank balance of ` 7,800. On comparing the cash
book with passbook the following discrepancies were noted:

(a) Cheque deposited in bank but not credited ` 3,000
(b) Cheque issued but not yet present for payment ` 1,500

(c) Insurance premium paid by the bank ` 2,000
(d) Bank interest credit by the bank ` 400

(e) Bank charges ̀  100
(d) Directly deposited by a customer ̀  4,000

(Ans: Balance as per passbook ` 8,600)

4. Bank balance of ̀  40,000 showed by the cash book of Atul on December 31,
2016. It was found that three cheques of ` 2,000, ` 5,000 and
` 8,000 deposited during the month of December were not credited in the
passbook till January 02, 2017. Two cheques of ` 7,000 and ̀  8,000 issued
on December 28, were not presented for payment till January 03, 2017. In
addition to it bank had credited Atul for ` 325 as interest and had debited
him with ̀  50 as bank charges for which there were no corresponding entries
in the cash book.
Prepare a bank reconciliation statement as on December 31, 2016.
(Ans: Balance as per passbook ` 40,275)

5. On comparing the cash book with passbook of Naman it is found that on
March 31, 2014, bank balance of ` 40,960 showed by the cash book differs
from the bank balance with regard to the following:

(a) Bank charges ̀  100 on March 31, 2017, are not entered in the cash book.
(b) On March 21, 2017, a debtor paid ` 2,000 into the company’s bank in

settlement of his account, but no entry was made in the cash book of
the company in respect of this.

(c) Cheques totaling ̀  12,980 were issued by the company and duly recorded
in the cash book before March 31, 2017, but had not been presented at
the bank for payment until after that date.

(d) A bill for ` 6,900 discounted with the bank is entered in the cash book
without recording the discount charge of ` 800.

(e) ` 3,520 is entered in the cash book as paid into bank on March 31st,
2017, but not credited  by the bank until the following day.

(f) No entry has been made in the cash book to record the dishon or on
March 15, 2017 of a cheque for ` 650 received from Bhanu.
Prepare a reconciliation statement as on March 31, 201.

(Ans: Balance as per passbook ` 50,870)

Reprint 2025-26



176 Accountancy

6. Prepare bank reconciliation statement as on December 31, 2017.  This day
the passbook of Mr. Himanshu showed a balance of ` 7,000.

(a) Cheques of ` 1,000 directly deposited by a customer.

(b) The bank has credited Mr. Himanshu for ` 700 as interest.

(c) Cheques for ` 3000 were issued during the month of December but of
these cheques for ` 1,000 were not presented during the month of
December.

(Ans: Balance as per cash book ` 3,300).
7. From the following particulars prepare a bank reconciliation statement

showing the balance as per cash book on December 31, 2016.
(a) Two cheques of `  2,000 and ` 5,000 were paid into bank in October,

2016 but were not credited by the bank in the month of December.
(b) A cheque of ` 800 which was received from a customer was entered in

the bank column of the cash book in December 2016 but was omitted
to be banked in December, 2016.

(c) Cheques for ` 10,000 were issued into bank in November 2016 but not
credited by the bank on December 31, 2016.

(d) Interest on investment ` 1,000 collected by bank appeared in the
passbook.
Balance as per Passbook was ̀  50,000

(Ans: Balance as per cash book ` 47,800)
8. Balance as per passbook of Mr. Kumar is 3,000.

(a) Cheque paid into bank but not yet cleared
Ram Kumar ` 1,000
Kishore Kumar ` 500

(b) Bank Charges ̀  300
(c) Cheque issued but not presented

Hameed ̀  2,000
Kapoor ` 500

(d) Interest entered in the passbook but not entered in the cash book ` 100
Prepare a bank reconciliation statement.

(Ans: Balance as per cash book ` 2,200).
9. The passbook of Mr. Mohit current account showed a credit Balance of

` 20,000 on dated December 31, 2016. Prepare a Bank Reconciliation
Statement with the following information.
(i) A cheque of ` 400 drawn on his saving account has been shown on

current account.
(ii) He issued two cheques of ̀  300 and ̀  500 on of December 25, but  only

the Ist cheque was presented for payment.
(iii) One cheque issued by Mr. Mohit of ` 500 on December 25, but it was

not presented for payment whereas it was recorded twice in the cash
book.

(Ans: Balance as per cash book ` 18,900).

Reprint 2025-26



Bank Reconciliation Statement 177

Unfavourable balance of cash book

10. On Ist January 2017, Rakesh had an overdraft of ` 8,000 as showed by his
cash book. Cheques amounting to ̀  2,000 had been paid in by him but were
not collected by the bank by January  01, 2017. He issued cheques of ̀  800
which were not presented to the bank for payment up to that day. There
was a debit in his passbook of ` 60 for interest and ` 100 for bank charges.
Prepare bank reconciliation statement for comparing both the balance.
(Ans: Overdraft as per passbook ` 9,360)

11. Prepare bank reconciliation statement.
(i) Overdraft shown as per cash book on December 31, 2017 ̀  10,000.

(ii) Bank charges for the above period also debited in the passbook
` 100.

(iii) Interest on overdraft for six months ending December 31, 2017
` 380 debited in the passbook.

(iv) Cheques issued but not incashed prior to December 31, 2017
amounted to ` 2,150.

(v) Interest on Investment collected by the bank and credited in the
passbook ̀  600.

(vi) Cheques paid into bank but not cleared before December, 31, 2017
were ̀  1,100.

(Ans: overdraft as per passbook ` 8,830).
12. Kumar find that the bank balance shown by his cash book on December

31, 2017 is ̀  90,600 (Credit) but the passbook shows a difference due to
the following reason:
A cheque (post dated) for ̀  1,000 has been debited in the bank column of
the cash book but not presented for payment. Also, a cheque for
` 8,000 drawn in favour of Manohar has not yet been presented for
payment. Cheques totaling ` 1,500 deposited in the bank have not yet
been collected and cheque for ` 5,000 has been dishonoured.
(Ans: overdraft as per passbook ` 90,100).

13. On December 31, 2017, the cash book of Mittal Bros. Showed an overdraft
of ` 6,920. From the following particulars prepare a Bank Reconciliation
Statement and ascertain the balance as per passbook.
(1) Debited by bank for ` 200 on account of Interest on overdraft and

` 50 on account of charges for collecting bills.
(2) Cheques drawn but not encashed before December, 31, 2017 for

` 4,000.
(3) The bank has collected interest and has credited ` 600 in passbook.
(4) A bill receivable for ` 700 previously discounted with the bank had

been dishonoured and debited in the passbook.
(5) Cheques paid into bank but not collected and credited before

December 31, 2017 amounted ` 6,000.
(Ans: Overdraft as per passbook ` 9,170).

Reprint 2025-26



178 Accountancy

Unfavourable balance of the passbook

14. Prepare bank reconciliation statement of Shri Bhandari as on March
31, 2017
(i) The Payment of a cheque for ̀  550 was recorded twice in the passbook.

(ii) Withdrawal column of the passbook under cast by ` 200
(iii) A Cheque  of ` 200 has been debited in the bank column of the Cash

Book but it was not sent to bank at all.
(iv) A Cheque of ` 300 debited to Bank column of the cash book was not

sent to the bank.
(v) ` 500 in respect of dishonoured cheque were entered in the passbook

but not in the cash book.
Overdraft as per passbook is ` 20,000.

(Ans: Overdraft as per cash book ` 21,350).
15. Overdraft shown by the passbook of Mr. Murli is ` 20,000. Prepare bank

reconciliation statement on dated March 31, 2017.
(i ) Bank charges debited as per passbook ̀  500.

(ii) Cheques recorded in the cash book but not sent to the bank for
collection ` 2,500.

(iii) Received a payment directly from customer ` 4,600.
(iv) Cheque issued but not presented for payment ` 6,980.
(v) Interest credited by the bank ` 100.

(vi) LIC paid by bank ` 2,500.
(vii) Cheques deposited with the bank but not collected ` 3,500.
(Ans: Overdraft as per cash book ` 22,680).

16. Raghav & Co. have two bank accounts. Account No. I and Account No. II.
From the following particulars relating to Account No. I, find out the balance
on that account of March 31, 2017 according to the cash book of
the firm.
(i) Cheques paid into bank prior to March 31, 2017, but not credited for

` 10,000.
(ii) Transfer of funds from account No. II to account no. I recorded by

the bank on March  31, 2017 but entered in the cash book after that
date for ` 8,000.

(iii) Cheques issued prior to March 31, 2017 but not presented until after
that date for ` 7,429.

(iv) Bank charges debited by bank not entered in the cash book for
` 200.

(v) Interest Debited by the bank not entered in the cash book ` 580.
(vi) Overdraft as per Passbook ̀  18,990.
(Ans: Overdraft as per cash book ` 23,639).

17. Prepare a bank reconciliation statement from the following particulars
and show the balance as per cash book.

Reprint 2025-26



Bank Reconciliation Statement 179

(i) Balance as per passbook on March 31, 2017 overdrawn
` 20,000.

(ii) Interest on bank overdraft not entered in the cash book ` 2,000.

(iii) ` 200 insurance premium paid by bank has not been entered in the
cash book.

(iv) Cheques drawn in the last week of March 2017, but not cleared till
date for ` 3,000 and ` 3,500.

(v) Cheques deposited into bank on February 2017, but yet to be credited
on dated March 31, 2017 ̀  6,000.

(vii) Wrongly debited by bank ̀  500.
(Ans: Overdraft as per cash book ` 17,800).

18. The passbook of Mr. Randhir showed an overdraft of ̀   40,950 on March 31,
2017.

Prepare bank reconciliation statement on March 31, 2017.

(i ) Out of cheques amounting to ̀  8,000 drawn by Mr. Randhir on March
27 a cheque for ` 3,000 was encashed on  April 2017.

(ii) Credited by bank with ` 3,800 for interest collected by them, but the
amount is not entered in the cash book.

(iii) ` 10,900 paid in by Mr. Randhir in cash and by cheques on March,
31 cheques amounting to ` 3,800  were collected on April, 07.

(iv) A Cheque of ` 780 credited in the passbook on March 28 being
dishonoured is debited again in the passbook on April 01, 2017. There
was no entry in the cash book about the dishonour of the cheque until
April 15.

(Ans: Overdraft as per cash book ` 43,170)

Checklist to Test Your Understanding

Test Your Understanding - I

(I) 1. Time gap 2. Error 3. Time gap
4. Time gap 5. Time gap

(II)   (i) Customer account    (ii) Debit (iii) Credit
 (iv) Debit    (v) Added  (vi)  Deducted
(vii) loss (viii) Loss (ix)  Added
  (x) Higher

Test Your Understanding - II

1. (b)        2. (c) 3. (a) 4. (a) 5. (c) 6. (b)

Test Your Understanding - III

1. (T)        2. (T) 3. (F) 4. (T) 5. (F) 6. (T) 7. (T) 8. (T) 9. (F)

Reprint 2025-26



180 Accountancy

##6##
Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 6

In the earlier chapters, you have learnt about the
basic principles of accounting that for every debit

there will be an equal credit. It implies that if the
sum of all debits equals the sum of all credits, it is

LEARNING OBJECTIVES presumed that the posting to the ledger in terms

After studying this chapter, of debit and credit amounts is accurate. The trial
you will be able to : balance is a tool for verifying the correctness of
• state the meaning of debit and credit amounts. It is an arithmetical

trial balance; check under the double entry system which verifies
• enumerate the objectives that both aspects of every transaction have been

of preparing trial
recorded accurately.  This chapter explains the

balance ;
meaning and process of preparation of trial balance

• prepare trial balance;
and the types of errors and their rectification.

• explain the types of
errors; 6.1 Meaning of Trial Balance

• state various process
of locating errors ; A trial balance is a statement showing the

• identify the errors which balances, or total of debits and credits, of all the
affect the agreement of accounts in the ledger with a view to verify the
trial balance and those

arithmatical accuracy of posting into the ledger
which do not affect the
agreement of trial accounts. Trial balance is an important statement
balance; in the accounting process as it shows the final

• recti fy the errors position of all accounts and helps in preparing the
without preparing final statements. The task of preparing the
suspense account; statements is simplified because the accountant
and

can take the balances of all accounts from the trial
• rectify the errors with balance instead of going through the whole ledger.

suspense account.
It may be noted that the trial balance is usually
prepared with the balances of accounts.

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 181

Trial Balance of ......as on March 31, 2014

Account Title L.F. Debit Credit
Balance Balance

 

Total

Fig. 6.1: Showing format of a trial balance

It is normally prepared at the end of an accounting year. However, an
organisation may prepare a trial balance at the end of any chosen period,
which may be monthly, quarterly, half yearly or annually depending upon its
requirements.
In order to prepare a trial balance following steps are taken:
• Ascertain the balances of each account in the ledger.
• List each account and place its balance in the debit or credit column, as

the case may be. (If an account has a zero balance, it may be included in
the trial balance with zero in the column for its normal balance).

• Compute the total of debit balances column.
• Compute the total of the credit balances column.
• Verify that the sum of the debit balances equal the sum of credit balances.

If they do not tally, it indicate that there are some errors. So one must check
the correctness of the balances of all accounts. It may be noted that all
assets expenses and receivables account shall have debit balances whereas
all liabilities, revenues and payables accounts shall have credit balances
(refer figure 6.2).

6.2 Objectives of Preparing the Trial Balance

The trial balance is prepared to fulfill the following objectives :
1. To ascertain the arithmetical accuracy of the ledger accounts.
2. To help in locating errors.
3. To help in the preparation of the financial statements. (Profit & Loss account

and Balance Sheet).

Reprint 2025-26



182 Accountancy

Account Title L.F. Debit Credit
Balance Balance

 

• Capital 
• Land and Buildings 
• Plant and Machinery 
• Equipment 
• Furniture and Fixtures 
• Cash in Hand 
• Cash at Bank 
• Debtors 
• Bills Receivable 
• Stock of Raw Materials 
• Stock of Finished Goods 
• Purchases 
• Carriage Inwards 
• Carriage Outwards 
• Sales 
• Sales Return 
• Purchases Return 
• Interest Paid 
• Commission/Discount Received 
• Salaries 
• Long Term Loan 
• Bills Payable 
• Creditors 
• Advances from Customers 
• Drawings 

Total xxx    xxx

Fig. 6.2 : Illustrative trial balance

6.2.1 To Ascertain the Arithmetical Accuracy of Ledger Accounts

As stated earlier, the purpose of preparing a trial balance is to asceitain whether
all debits and credit are properly recorded in the ledger or not and that all
accounts have been correctly balanced. As a summary of the ledger, it is a list
of the accounts and their balances. When the totals of all the debit balances

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 183

and credit balances in the trial balance are equal, it is assumed that the posting
and balancing of accounts is arithmetically correct. However, the tallying of the
trial balance is not a conclusive proof of the accuracy of the accounts. It only
ensures that all debits and the corresponding credits have been properly recorded
in the ledger.

6.2.2 To Help in Locating Errors

When a trial balance does not tally (that is, the totals of debit and credit columns
are not equal), we know that at least one error has occured. The error (or errors)
may have occured at one of those stages in the accounting process: (1) totalling
of subsidiary books, (2) posting of journal entries in the ledger, (3) calculating
account balances, (4) carrying account balances to the trial balance, and (5)
totalling the trial balance columns.

It may be noted that the accounting accuracy is not ensured even if the
totals of debit and credit balances are equal because some errors do not affect
equality of debits and credits. For example, the book-keeper may debit a correct
amount in the wrong account while making the journal entry or in posting a
journal entry to the ledger. This error would cause two accounts to have
incorrect balances but the trial balance would tally. Another error is to record
an equal debit and credit of an incorrect amount. This error would give the
two accounts incorrect balances but would not create unequal debits and
credits. As a result, the fact that the trial balance has tallied does not imply
that all entries in the books of original record (journal, cash book, etc.) have
been recorded and posted correctly. However, equal totals do suggest that
several types of errors probably have not occured.

6.2.3 To Help in the Preparation of the Financial Statements

Trial balance is considered as the connecting link between accounting records
and the preparation of financial statements. For preparing a financial
statement, one need not refer to the ledger. In fact, the availability of a tallied
trial balance is the first step in the preparation of financial statements. All
revenue and expense accounts appearing in the trial balance are transferred
to the trading and profit and loss account and all liabilities, capital  and assets
accounts are transferred to the balance sheet.
(Preparation of the financial statements is explained in chapters, 9 and 10).

Reprint 2025-26



184 Accountancy

6.3 Preparation of Trial Balance

Theoritically spreading, a trial balance can be prepared in the following three
ways:

(i) Totals Method
(ii) Balances Method

(iii) Totals-cum-balances Method

6.3.1 Totals method

Under this method, total of each side in the ledger (debit and credit) is ascertained
separately and shown in the trial balance in the respective columns. The total of
debit column of trial balance should agree with the total of credit column in the
trial balance because the accounts are based on double entry system. However,
this method is not widely used in practice, as it does not help in assuming accuracy
of balances of various accounts and and preparation of the fianancial statements.

6.3.2 Balances Method

This is the most widely used method in practice. Under this method trial balance
is prepared by showing the balances of all ledger accounts and then totalling up
the debit and credit columns of the trial balance to assure their correctness. The
account balances are used because the balance summarises the net effect of all
transactions relating to an account and helps in preparing the financial
statements. It may be noted that in trial balance, normally in place of balances
in individual accounts of the debtors, a figure of sundry debtors is shown, and
in place of individual accounts of creditors, a figure of sundry creditors is shown.

6.3.3 Totals-cum-balances Method

This method is a combination of totals method and balances method. Under
this method four columns for amount are prepared. Two columns for writing
the debit and credit totals of various accounts and two columns for writing
the debit and credit balances of these accounts. However, this method is also
not used in practice because it is time consuming and hardly serves any
additional or special purpose.

Let us now learn how will the trial balance be prepared using each of
these methods with the help of the following example:

Mr. Rawat’s ledger shows the following accounts for his business. Help him
in preparing the trial balance using: (i) Totals method,
(ii) Balances method, (iii) Totals-cum-Balances method.

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 185

Rawat’s Capital Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

2014 2014
Dec. 31 Balance c/d 60,000 Jan. 01 Balance b/d 40,000

Cash 20,000
60,000 2015 60,000

Jan. 01 Balance b/d 60,000

Rohan’s Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

2014 2014

Cash 40,000 Jan. 01 Balance b/d 10,000
Dec. 31 Balance c/d 20,000 Purchases 50,000

60,000 2015 60,000

Jan. 1 Balance b/d 20,000

Machinery Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

 
2014 2014
Dec. 31 Balance b/d     20,000 Depreciation 3,000

Dec. 31 Balance c/d 17,000
20,000 20,000

2015
Jan. 01 Balance b/d 17,000

Rahul’s Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

2014 2014
Jan. 01 Balance b/d 15,000 Cash 55,000

Sales 60,000 Dec. 31 Balance c/d 20,000
2015 75,000 75,000

Jan. 01 Balance b/d 20,000

Reprint 2025-26



186 Accountancy

Sales Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

2014
Rahul 60,000
Cash    10,000

70,000

Cash Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

2014 2014
Jan. 01 Balanc e b/d 15,000 Rohan 40,000

Capital 20,000 Wages 5,000
Rahul 55,000 Purchases 12,000
Sales 10,000 Dec. 31 Balance c/d  43,000

1,00,000  1,00,000

2015
Jan. 01 Balance b/d 43,000

Wages Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

2014

Cash 5,000

5,000

Depreciation Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

2014
Machinery 3,000

3,000

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 187

Purchases Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

2014

Rohan 50,000
Cash 12,000

62,000

The trial balance under the three methods is illustrated below:

(i) Trial Balance as at March 31, 2014
(Using Totals Method)

Account L.F. Debit Credit
Title Total Total

 
Rawat 60,000
Rohan 40,000 60,000
Machinery 20,000 3,000
Rahul 75,000 55,000
Sales 70,000
Cash 1,00,000 57,000
Wages 5,000
Depreciation 3,000
Purchases 62,000

3,05,000              3,05,000

(ii) Trial Balance as at March 31, 2014
          (Using Balances Method)

Account Title L.F. Debit Credit
Balance Balance

 
Rawat’s Capital 60,000
Rohan’s Capital 20,000
Machinery 17,000
Rahul 20,000
Sales 70,000
Cash 43,000
Wages 5,000
Depreciation 3,000
Purchases 62,000

Total 1,50,000 1,50,000

Reprint 2025-26



188 Accountancy

(iii) Trial Balance as at March 31, 2014
        (Using Totals-cum-Balances Method)

Account Title L.F. Debit Credit Debit Credit
Total Total Balance Balance

   
Rawat’s Capital 60,000 60,000
Rohan 40,000 60,000 20,000
Machinery 20,000 3,000 17,000
Rahul 75,000 55,000 20,000
Sales 70,000 70,000
Cash 1,00,000 57,000 43,000
Wages 5,000 5,000
Depreciation 3,000 3,000
Purchases 62,000 62,000

Total 3,05,000 3,05,000 1,50,000 1,50,000

Test Your Understanding - I

Indicate against each amount wheather it is a debit or a credit balance, and prepare
a trial balance as at March 31, 2014 based on the following balances:

Accounts Title Amount


Capital 1,00,000
Drawings 16,000
Machinery 20,000
Sales 2,00,000
Purchases 2,10,000
Sales return 20,000
Purchases return 30,000
Wages 40,000
Goodwill 60,000
Interest received 15,000
Discount allowed 6,000
Bank overdraft 22,000
Bank loan 90,000
Debtors :

Nathu 55,000
Roopa 20,000

Creditors :
Reena 35,000
Ganesh 25,000

Cash 54,000
Stock on April 01, 2013 16,000

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 189

6.4. Significance of Agreement of Trial Balance

It is important for an accountant that the trial balance should tally. Normally a tallied
trial balance means that both the debit and the credit entries have been made correctly
for each transaction. However, as stated earlier, the agreement of trial balance is not
an absolute proof of accuracy of accounting records. A tallied trial balance only proves,
to a certain extent, that the posting to the ledger is arithmetically correct. But it does
not guarantee that the entry itself is correct. There can be errors, which affect the
equality of debits and credits, and there can be errors, which do not affect the equality
of debits and credits. Some common errors include the following:
• Error in totalling of the debit and credit balances in the trial balance.
• Error in totalling of subsidiary books.
• Error in posting of the total of subsidiary books.
• Error in showing account balances in wrong column of the tiral balance, or

in the wrong amount.
• Omission in showing an account balance in the trial balance.
• Error in the calculation of a ledger account balance.
• Error while posting a journal entry: a journal entry may not have been posted

properly to the ledger, i.e., posting made either with wrong amount or on the
wrong side of the account or in the wrong account.

• Error in recording a transaction in the journal: making a reverse entry, i.e.,
account to be debited is credited and amount to be credited is debited, or an
entry with wrong amount.

• Error in recording a transaction in subsidiary book with wrong name or wrong
amount.

6.4.1 Classification of Errors

Keeping in view the nature of errors, all the errors can be classified into the
following four categories:
• Errors of Commission
• Errors of Omission
• Errors of Principle
• Compensating Errors

6.4.2 Errors of Commission

These are the errors which are committed due to wrong posting of transactions,
wrong totalling or wrong balancing of the accounts, wrong casting of the
subsidiary books, or wrong recording of amount in the books of original entry,
etc. For example: Raj Hans Traders paid  25,000 to Preetpal Traders (a supplier
of goods). This transaction was correctly recorded in the cashbook.

Reprint 2025-26



190 Accountancy

But while posting to the ledger, Preetpal’s account was debited with  2,500
only. This constitutes an error of commission. Such an error by definition is of
clerical nature and most of the errors of commission affect in the trial balance.

6.4.3 Errors of Omission

The errors of omission may be committed at the time of recording the transaction
in the books of original entry or while posting to the ledger. These can be of two
types:

(i) error of complete omission
(ii) error of partial omission

When a transaction is completely omitted from recording in the books of
original record, it is an error of complete omission. For example, credit sales
to Mohan  10,000, not entered in the sales book. When the recording of
transaction is partly omitted from the books, it is an error of partial omission.
If in the above example, credit sales had been duly recorded in the sales book
but the posting from sales book to Mohan’s account has not been made, it
would be an error of partial omission.

6.4.4 Errors of Principle

Accounting entries are recorded as per the generally accepted accounting
principles. If any of these principles are violated or ignored, errors resulting
from such violation are known as errors of principle. An error of principle may
occur due to incorrect classification of expenditure or receipt between capital
and revenue. This is very important because it will have an impact on financial
statements. It may lead to under/over stating of income or assets or liabilities,
etc. For example, amount spent on additions to the buildings should be treated
as capital expenditure and must be debited to the asset account. Instead, if
this amount is debited to maintenance and repairs account, it has been treated
as a revenue expense. This is an error of principle. Similarly, if a credit purchase
of machinery is recorded in purchases book instead of journal proper or rent
paid to the landlord is recorded in the cash book as payment to landlord,
these errors of principle. These errors do not affect the trial balance.

6.4.5 Compensating Errors

When two or more errors are committed in such a way that the net effect of these
errors on the debits and credits of accounts is nil, such errors are called
compensating errors. Such errors do not affect the tallying of the trial balance.
For example, if purchases book has been overcast by  10,000 resulting in
excess debit of  10,000 in purchases account and sales returns book is
undercast by  10,000 resulting in short debit to sales returns account is a

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 191

case of two errors compensating each other’s effect. One plus is set off by the
other minus, the net effect of these two errors is nil and so they do not affect the
agreement of trial balance.

6.5 Searching of Errors

If the trial balance does not tally, it is a clear indication that at least one error
has occured. The error (or errors) needs to be located and corrected before
preparing the financial statements.

If the trial balance does not tally, the accountant should take the following
steps to detect and locate the errors :
• Recast the totals of debit and credit columns of the trial balance.
• Compare the account head/title and amount appearing in the trial balance,

with that of the ledger to detect any difference in amount or omission of an
account.

• Compare the trial balance of current year with that of the previous year to
check additions and deletions of any accounts and also verify whether
there is a large difference in amount, which is neither expected nor
explained.

• Re-do and check the correctness of balances of individual accounts in
the ledger.

• Re-check the correctness of the posting in accounts from the books of
original entry.

• If the difference between the debit and credit columns is divisible by 2,
there is a possibility that an amount equal to one-half of the difference
may have been posted to the wrong side of another ledger account. For
example, if the total of the debit column of the trial balance exceeds by
 1,500, it is quite possible that a credit item of 750 may have been wrongly
posted in the ledger as a debit item. To locate such errors, the accountant
should scan all the debit entries of an amount of  750.

• The difference may also indicate a complete omission of a posting. For
example, the difference of  1,500 given above may be due to omissions of a
posting of that amount on the credit side. Thus, the accountant should verify
all the credit items with an amount of  1,500.

• If the difference is a multiple of 9 or divisible by 9, the mistake could be due
to transposition of figures. For example, if a debit amount of  459 is posted
as  954, the debit total in the trial balance will exceed the credit side by
 495 (i.e. 954 – 459 = 495). This difference is divisible by 9. A mistake due
to wrong placement of the decimal point may also be checked by this method.
Thus, a difference in trial balance divisible by 9 helps in checking the errors
for a transposed mistake.

Reprint 2025-26



192 Accountancy

6.6 Rectification of Errors

From the point of view of rectification, the errors may be classified into the
following two categories:

(a) errors which do not affect the trial balance.
(b) errors which affect the trial balance.

This distinction is relevant because the errors which do not affect the trial
balance usually take place in two accounts in such a manner that it can be
easily rectified through a journal entry whereas the errors which affect the
trial balance usually affect one account and a journal entry is not possible for
rectification unless a suspense account has been opened. Such errors are rectified
by passing a nullifying entry in the respective account as explained before under
6.6.2.

6.6.1 Rectification of Errors which do not Affect the Trial Balance

These errors are committed in two or more accounts. Such errors are also known
as two sided errors. They can be rectified by recording a journal entry giving the
correct debit and credit to the concerned accounts.

Examples of such errors are – complete omission to record an entry in the
books of original entry; wrong recording of transactions in the book of accounts;
complete omission of posting to the wrong account on the correct side, and
errors of principle.
The rectification process essentially involves:
• Cancelling the effect of wrong debit or credit by reversing it; and
• Restoring the effect of correct debit or credit.

For this purpose, we need to analyse the error in terms of its effect on the
accounts involved which may be:

(i) Short debit or credit in an account; and/or
(ii) Excess debit or credit in an account.

Therefore, rectification entry can be done by:

(i) debiting the account with short debit or with excess credit,
(ii) crediting the account with excess debit or with short credit.

The procedure for rectification for such errors is explained with the help of
following examples:

(a) Credit sales to Mohan  10,000 were not recorded in the sales book. This is an error
of complete omission. Its affect is that Mohan’s account has not been debited and
Sales account has not been credited. Accordingly, recording usual entry for credit
sales will rectify the error.

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 193

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 10,000
To Sales A/c 10,000

 (b) Credit sales to Mohan  10,000 were recorded as  1,000 in the sales book.
This is an error of commission. The effect of wrong recording is shown below:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 1,000

To Sales A/c 1,000

Correct effect should have been:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 10,000

To Sales A/c 10,000

Now that Mohan’s account has to be given an additional debit of  9,000
and sales account has to be credited with additional amount of  9,000,
rectification entry will be:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 9,000

To Sales A/c 9,000

(c) Credit sales to Mohan  10,000 were recorded as  12,000. This is an error of
commission. The effect of wrong entry made has been:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 12,000

To Sales A/c 12,000

Correct effect should have been:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 10,000

To Sales A/c 10,000

You can see that there is an excess debit of  2,000 in Mohan’s account and
excess credit of  2,000 in sales account.

The, rectification entry will be recorded as follows:

Sales A/c Dr. 2,000

        To Mohan‘s A/c 2,000

Reprint 2025-26



194 Accountancy

(d) Credit sales to Mohan  10,000 was correctly recorded in the sales book but was
posted to Ram’s account. This is an error of commission. The effect of wrong posting
has been:

Ram’s A/c Dr. 10,000

To Sales A/c 10,000

Correct effect should have been :

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 10,000

To Sales A/c 10,000

Notice that there is no error in sales account. But Ram’s account has been
debited with  10,000 instead of Mohan’s account.

Hence rectification entry will be:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 10,000

To Ram’s A/c 10,000

(e) Rent paid  2,000 was wrongly shown as payment to landlord in the cash
book:
The effect of wrong posting has been:

Landlord’s A/c Dr. 2,000

To Cash A/c 2,000

Correct effect should have been:

Rent A/c Dr. 2,000

To Cash A/c 2,000

Landlord’s account has been wrongly debited instead of Rent account.

Hence, rectification entry will be:

Rent A/c Dr. 2,000

To Landlord’s A/c 2,000

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 195

Test Your Understanding - II

Record the rectification entry for the following transactions:
1. Credit sales to Rajni  5,000 recorded in Purchases book:

This is an error of ..........................................
State the wrong entry recorded in the book of accounts

Correct effect should have been:

The rectification entry will be:

2. Furniture purchased from  M/s Rao Furnishigs for  8,000 was entered into the
purchases book.
This is the error of ........................................
State the wrong entry recorded in the book of accounts

Correct effect should have been:

The rectification entry will be:

3. Cash sales to Radhika  15,000 was shown as receipt of commission in the
cash book.
This is the error of ..............................................
State the wrong entry recorded in the book of accounts

Reprint 2025-26



196 Accountancy

Correct effect should have been:

The rectification entry will be:

4. Cash received from Karim  6,000 posted to Nadeem.
This is the error of ........................................
State the wrong entry recorded in the book of accounts:

Correct effect should have been:

The rectification entry will be:

6.6.2 Rectification of Errors Affecting Trial Balance

The errors which affect only one account can be rectified by giving an exaplanatory
note in the account affected or by recording a journal entry with the help of the
Suspense Account. Suspense Account is explained later in this chapter. Examples
of such errors are error of casting; error of carrying forward; error of balancing;
error of posting to correct account but with wrong amount; error of posting to the
correct account but on the wrong side; posting to the wrong side with the wrong
amount; omitting to show an account in the trial balance.

An error in the books of original entry, if discovered before it is posted to the
ledger, may be corrected by crossing out the wrong amount by a single line and
writing the correct amount above the crossed amount and initialling it. An error
in an amount posted to the correct ledger account may also be corrected in a

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 197

similar way, or by making an additional posting for the difference in amount
and giving an explanatory note in the particulars column. But errors should
never be corrected by erasing or overwriting reduces the authenticity of
accounting records and give an impression that something is being concealed.
A better way therefore is by noting the correction on the appropriate side for
neutralising the effect of the error. Take for example a case where Shyam’s
account was credited short by  190. This will be rectified by an additional
entry for  190 on the credit side of his account as follows.

Shyam’s Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Difference in 190
amount posted
short on.....

Take another example, purchases book was undercast by  1,000. The effect of
this entry is on purchases account (debit side) where the total of purchases
book is posted

Purchases Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Undercasting 1,000
purchases
book for the
month of....

Suspense Account

Even if the trial balance does not tally due to the existence of one sided errors,
accountant has to carry forward his accounting process prepare financial
statements. The accountant tallies his trial balance by putting the difference
on shorter side as ‘suspense account’.
The process of opening of suspense account can be understood with the help
of the following example:

Consider the sales book of an organisation.

Reprint 2025-26



198 Accountancy

Sales Book (Journal)

Date Invoice Name of customers L.F. Amount
No. (Accounts to be debited) 

Ashok traders 20,000
Bimal service centre 10,000
Chopra enterprises 5,000
Diwakar and sons 15,000

50,000

If sales to Diwakar and sons were not posted to his account, ledger will show
the following position:

Ashok Traders Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Sales 20,000 Balance c/d 20,000
20,000 20,000

Bimal Service Centre’s Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Sales 10,000 Balance c/d 10,000

10,000 10,000

Chopra Enterprises Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Sales 5,000 Balance c/d 5,000
5,000 5,000

Sales Account
Cr. Dr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Sundries 50,000

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 199

The trial balance when prepared on the basis of above balances will not
tally. Its credit column total will amount to  50,000 and debit column total to
 35,000. The trial balance would differ with  15,000. This difference will be
temporarily put to suspense account and trial balance will be made to agree in
the ledger.

In the above case, difference in trial balance has arisen due to one sided
error (omission of posting to Diwakar and sons’s account). In a real situation,
there can be many other such one-sided errors which cause a difference in
trial balance and thus result in opening of the suspense account. Till the all
errors affecting agreement of trial balance are not located it is not possible to
rectify them and tally the trial balance in such a situation, is shown in the
Suspense account, make the total of debit and credit columns and proceed
further with the accounting process.

When the errors are located and the specific accounts and amounts involved
are identified, the amounts are transferred from suspense account to the
relevant accounts thereby closing the suspense account. Thus, suspense
account is not placed in any particular category of accounts and is just a
temporary phenomenon.
While rectifying one-sided errors using suspense account, the following steps
are taken:

(i) Identify the account affected due to error.
(ii) Ascertain the amount of excess debit/credit or short debit/credit in the

affected account.
(iii) If the error has resulted in excess debit or short credit in the affected

account, credit the account with the amount of excess debit or short
credit.

(iv) If the error has resulted in excess credit or short debit in the affected
account, debit the account with the amount of excess credit or short
debit.

(v) Complete the journal entry by debiting or crediting the suspense account
as another account affected otherwise.

We will now discuss the process of rectification using suspense account:
(a) Credit sales to Mohan  10,000 were not posted to his account. This is an

error of partial omission comitted while posting entries of the sales book.
Wrong effect has been:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. Nil
       To Sales A/c 10,000

Reprint 2025-26



200 Accountancy

Correct effect should have been:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 10,000
To Sales A/c 10,000

The  rectification entry will be :

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 10,000
To Suspense A/c  10,000

(b) Credit sales to Mohan  10,000 were posted to his account as  7000. This is an
error of commission. Mohan’s account has been debited with  7,000 instead of
 10,000 resulting in short debit of  3,000.
The wrong effect has been:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 7,000
To Sales A/c 10,000

Correct effect should have been:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 10,000
To Sales A/c 10,000

Hence, rectification entry will be:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 3,000
To Suspens A/c 3,000

(c) Credit sales to Mohan  10,000 were posted to his account as  12,000.
This is an error of commission. The wrong effect has been:

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 12,000
To Sales A/c 10,000

Correct effect should have been

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 10,000
To Sales A/c 10,000

The rectification entry will be:

Suspense A/c Dr. 2,000
To Mohan’s A/c 2,000

(d) Purchases book overcast by  1,000. Errors in casting of subsidiary books
affect only those accounts where totals of the subsidiary books involved are

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 201

posted. The accounts of individual parties are not affected. Consider the
following example.

Purchases (Journal) Book

Date Invoice Name of suppliers L.F. Amount
No. (Accounts to be credited) 

Dheru 8,000
Chandraprakash 7,000
Sachin 6,000

21,000

Wrong total 22,000
due to overcasting 

Dheru’s Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Purchases 8,000

Chandraprakash’s Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Purchases 7,000

Sachin’s Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

 
Purchases 6,000

Purchases Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Sundries 22,000

As you can notice that there is no error in accounts of Dheeru, Chanderprakash and
Sachin. Only purchases account has been debited with  1,000 extra. Hence, rectification
entry will be:

Reprint 2025-26



202 Accountancy

Suspense A/c Dr. 1,000

To Purchases A/c 1,000

6.6.3 Rectification of Errors in the Next Accounting Year

If some errors committed during an accounting year are not located and
rectified before the finalisation of financial statements, suspense account
cannot be closed and its balance will be carried forward to the next accounting
period. When the errors committed in one accounting year are located and
rectified in the next accounting year, profit and loss adjustment account is
debited or credited in place of accounts of expenses/losses and incomes/
gains in order to avoid impact on the income statement of next accounting
period. You will learn about this aspect at an advanced stage of your studies
in accounting.

Box 1

Guiding Principles of Rectification of Errors

1. If error is committed in books of original entry then assume all postings are
done accordingly.

2. If error is at the posting stage then assume that recording in the subsidiary
books has been correctly done.

3. If error is in posting to a wrong account (without mentioning side and amount of
posting) then assume that posting has been done on the right side and with the
right amount.

4. If posting is done to a correct account but with wrong amount (without mentioning
side of posting) then assume that posting has been done on the correct side.

5. If error is posting to a wrong account on the wrong side (without mentioning
amount of posting) then assume that posting has been done with the amount as
per the original recording of the transaction.

6. If error is of posting to a wrong account with wrong amount (without mentioning
the side of posting) then assume that posting has been done on the right side.

7. If posting is done to a correct account on the wrong side (without mentioning
amount of posting) then assume that posting has been done with correct amount
as per original recording.

8. Any error in posting of individual transactions in subsidiaries books relates to
individual account only, the sales account, purchase account, sales return
account or purchases return account are not involved.

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 203

9. If a transaction is recorded in cash book, then the error in posting relates to the
other affected account, not to cash account/bank account

10. If a transaction is recorded through journal proper, then the phrase ‘transaction
was not posted’ indicates error in both the accounts involved, unless stated
otherwise.

11. Error in casting of subsidiary books will affect only that account where total of
the particular book is posted leaving the individual personal accounts unaffected.

Test Your Understanding - III

Show the effect through Journal entries:
1. Credit sales to Mohan  10,000 were posted to his account as  12,000

This is an error of ..................................
The wrong effect has been:

The correct effect should have been:

The rectification entry will be.

2. Cash paid to Neha  2,000 was not posted to her account. This is an error of
..................................
The wrong effect has been:

The correct effect should have been:

The rectification entry will be:

Reprint 2025-26



204 Accountancy

3. Sales returns from Megha  1,600 were posted to her account as  1,000.
This is an error of ..................................
The wrong effect has been:

The correct effect should have been:

The rectification entry will be:

4. Depreciation written off on furniture  1,500 was not posted to depreciation
account. This is an error of ................
The wrong effect has been:

The correct effect should have been:

The rectification entry:

Illustration 1

Rectify the following errors:

Credit purchases from Raghu  20,000
(i) were not recorded.

(ii) were recorded as  10,000.
(iii) were recorded as  25,000.
(iv) were not posted to his account.
(v) were posted to his account as  2,000.

(vi) were posted to Reghav’s account.
(vii) were posted to the debit of Raghu’s account.

(viii) were posted to the debit of Raghav.
(ix) were recorded through sales book.

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 205

Solution

(i)

Purchases A/c Dr. 20,000
To Raghu’s A/c 20,000

(Credit purchases from Raghu omitted to be recorded, now corrected)

(ii)

Purchases A/c Dr. 10,000
To Raghu’s A/c 10,000

(Credit purchases from Raghu recorded as  10,000 instead of  20,000,
now corrected)

(iii)

Raghu’s A/c Dr. 5,000
To Purchases A/c 5,000

(Credit purchases from Raghu recorded as  25,000 instead of
 20,000).

(iv)

Suspense A/c Dr. 20,000
To Raghu’s A/c 20,000

(Credit purchases from Raghu not posted to his account now corrected).

(v)

Suspense A/c Dr. 18,000
To Raghu’s A/c 18,000

(Credit purchases from Raghu  20,000 posted to his account as
 2,000

(vi)

Raghav’s A/c Dr. 20,000
To Raghu’s A/c 20,000

(Credit purchases from Raghu wrongly credited to Raghav, now corrected)

(vii)

Suspense A/c Dr. 40,000
To Raghu’s A/c 40,000

(Credit purchases from Raghu  20,000 wrongly posted to the debit of his
account, now corrected).

Reprint 2025-26



206 Accountancy

(viii)

Suspense A/c Dr. 40,000
To  Raghav’s A/c 20,000
To Raghu’s A/c 20,000

(Credited purchases from Raghu  20,000 wrongly debited to Raghav, now
corrected).

(ix)

Sales A/c Dr. 20,000
Purchases A/c Dr. 20,000

To Raghu’s A/c 40,000

(Credit purchases from Raghu wrongly recorded through sales book, now
corrected).

Illustration 2

Rectify the following errors :
Cash sales  16,000

(i) were not posted to sales account.
(ii) were posted as  6,000 in sales account.
(iii) were posted to commission account.

Solution

(i)

Suspense A/c Dr. 16,000
To Sales A/c 16,000

(Cash sales not posted to sales account now rectified)

(ii)

Suspense A/c Dr. 10,000
To Sales A/c 10,000

(Cash sales  16,000 were posted to sales account as  6,000, now  rectified)

(iii)

Commission A/c Dr. 16,000
To Sales A/c 16,000

(Cash sales posted to commission account instead of sales account,
now corrected)

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 207

Illustration 3

Depreciation written-off as the machinery  2,000
(i) was not posted at all

(ii) was not posted to machinery account
(iii) was not posted to depreciation account

Solution

(i) It was recorded through journal proper. From journal proper posting to all the
accounts are made individually. Hence, no posting was made to depreciation account
and machinery account. Therefore, rectification entry will be :

Depreciation A/c Dr. 2,000
To Machinery A/c 2,000

(Depreciation on machinery not posted, now corrected)

(ii) In this case posting was not made to machinery account. It is to be assumed that
depreciation account should have been correctly debited. Therefore, rectification
entry shall be :

Suspense A/c Dr. 2,000
To Machinery A/c 2,000

(Depreciation on machinery not posted to Machinery account, now
corrected).

(iii) In this case depreciation account was not been debited. However, machinery account
must have been correctly credited. Therefore, rectification entry shall be :

Depreciation A/c Dr. 2,000
To Suspense A/c 2,000

(Depreciation on machinery not posted to Depreciation account, now
corrected).

Illustration 4

Trial balance of Anurag did not agree. It showed an excess credit  10,000. Anurag put the
difference to suspense account. He located the following errors :

(i) Sales return book over cast by  1,000.
(ii) Purchases book was undercast by  600.

(iii) In the sales book total of page no. 4 was carried forward to page 5 as  1,000 instead
of  1,200 and total of page 8 was carried forward to page 9 as
 5,600 instead of  5,000.

(iv) Goods returned to Ram  1,000 were recorded through sales book.
(v) Credit purchases from M & Co.  8,000 were recorded through sales book.

(vi) Credit purchases from S & Co.  5,000 were recorded through sales book.
However, S & Co. were correctly credited.

(vii) Salary paid  2,000 was debited to employee’s personal account.

Reprint 2025-26



208 Accountancy

Solution

(i)

Suspense A/c Dr. 1,000
To Sales Return A/c 1,000

(Sales returns book overcast by  1,000, now corrected).

(ii)

Purchases A/c Dr. 600
To Suspense A/c 600

(Purchases book undercast by  600, now corrected)

(iii)

Sales A/c Dr. 400
To Suspense A/c 400

(Error in carry forward of sales book, now corrected).

Note : Errors in carry forward the total of one page to another during
a period finally affects the total of that book resulting in error of under/overcasting.
In this case, carry forward from page 4 to 5 resulted in undercasting of  200 and
carry forward from page 8 to page 9 resulted in overcasting of  600. Overall
overcasting being  600–200 =  400.

(iv)

Sales A/c Dr. 1,000
To Return Outwards A/c 1,000

(Return Outwards wrongly recorded through sales book, now rectified).

(v)

Purchases A/c Dr. 8,000
Sales A/c Dr. 8,000

To M & Co.’s A/c 16,000
(Credit purchases wrongly recorded through sales book, now rectified).

(vi)

Purchases A/c Dr. 5,000
Sales A/c Dr. 5,000

To Suspense A/c 10,000
(Credit purchases wrongly recorded through sales book, however suppliers
account correctly credited, now rectified).

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 209

(vii)

Salary A/c Dr. 2,000
To Employee’s personal A/c 2,000

(Salary paid wrongly debited to employee’s personal account, now
corrected)

Suspense Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Difference as per 10,000
trial balance Purchases 600
Sales return 1,000 Sales 400

Purchases 5,000
Sales 5,000

11,000 11,000

Illustration 5

Trial balance of Rahul did not agree. Rahul put the difference to suspense account.
Subsequently, he located the following errors :

(i) Wages paid for installation of Machinery  600 was posted to wages account.
(ii) Repairs to Machinery  400 debited to Machinery account.

(iii) Repairs paid for the overhauling of second hand machinery purchased  1,000 was
debited to Repairs account.

(iv) Own business material  8,000 and wages  2,000 were used for construction of
building. No adjustment was made in the books.

(v) Furniture purchased for  5,000 was posted to purchase account as  500.
(vi) Old machinery sold to Karim at its book value of  2,000 was recorded through sales

book.
(vii) Total of sales returns book  3,000 was not posted to the ledger.

Rectify the above errors and prepare suspense account to ascertain the original
difference in trial balance.

(i)

Machinery A/c Dr. 600
To Wages A/c 600

(Wages paid for installation of machinery wrongly debited to wages account,
now rectified)

(ii)

Repairs A/c Dr. 400
To Machinery A/c 400

(Repairs paid wrongly debited to machinery account now rectified)

Reprint 2025-26



210 Accountancy

(iii)

Machinery A/c Dr. 1,000
To Repairs A/c 1,000

(Repairs for overhauling of second hand machinery purchased, wrongly
debited to repairs account, now rectified).

(iv)

Building A/c Dr. 10,000
To Purchases A/c 8,000
To Wages A/c 2,000

(Material and wages used for construction of Building, not debited to
building account).

(v)

Furniture A/c Dr. 5,000
To Purchases A/c 500
To Suspense A/c 4,500

(Furniture purchased for  5,000 wrongly debited to purchases account as
 500, now rectified).

(vi)

Sales A/c Dr. 2,000
To Machinery 2,000
(Sale of machinery wrongly recorded in sales book, now rectified).

(vii)

Sales Return A/c Dr. 3,000
To Suspense A/c 3,000

(Total of sales returns book not posted to ledger, now rectified).

Suspense Account

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Difference as per 7,500 Furniture 4,500
trial balance Sales return 3.000

7,500 7,500

Hence, original difference in Trial Balance was  7,500 excess on the Credit side.

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 211

Illustration 6

Trial balance of Anant Ram did not agree. It showed an excess credit of  16,000. He put
the difference to suspense account. Subsequently the following errors were located:

(i) Cash received from Mohit  4,000 was posted to Mahesh as  1,000.

(ii) Cheque for  5,800 received from Arnav  in full settlement of his account of  6,000,
was dishonoured. No entry was passed in the books on dishonour of the cheque.

(iii)  800 received from Khanna, whose account had previously been written off as bad,
was credited to his account.

(iv) Credit sales to Manav for  5,000 was recorded through the purchases book as
 2,000.

(v) Purchases book undercast by  1,000.

(vi) Repairs on machinery  1,600 wrongly debited to Machinery account as  1,000.

(vii) Goods returned by Nathu  3,000 were taken into stock. No entry was recorded in
the books.

Solution

(i)

Mahesh’s A/c Dr. 1,000
Suspense A/c Dr. 3,000

To Mohit’s A/c 4,000
(Cash  received  from Mohit  4,000 wrongly  posted to Mahesh as 1,000,
now rectified)

(ii)

Arnav’s A/c Dr. 6,000
To Bank A/c 5,800
To Discount Allowed A/c 200

(Cheque received from Arnav for  5,800 in full settlement of his account
of  6,000, dishonoured but no entry made in books, now rectified)

(iii)

Khanna’s A/c Dr. 800
To Bad debts recovered A/c 800

(Bad debts recovered wrongly credited to Khanna’s account, now rectified)

Reprint 2025-26



212 Accountancy

(iv)

Manav’s A/c Dr. 7,000
To Purchases A/c 2,000
To Sales A/c 5,000

(Credit sales to Manav  5,000 wrongly recorded through purchases book
as  2,000, now rectified)

(v)

Purchases A/c Dr. 1,000
To Suspense A/c 1,000

(Purchases book undercast by  1,000)

(vi)

Repairs A/c Dr. 1,600
To Machinery A/c 1,000
To Suspense A/c 600

(Repairs on machinery  1,600 wrongly debited to machinery account as
 1,000, now rectified)

(vii)

Sales Return A/c Dr. 3,000
To Nathu’s A/c 3,000

(Sales return from Nathu not recorded)

Suspense Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Difference as per Purchases 1,000
trial balance 16,000 Repairs 600
Mohit 3,000 Balance c/d 17,400

19,000 19,000

Note: Even after rectification of errors suspense account is showing a debit balance
of  17,400. This is due to non-detection of errors affecting trial balance.
Balance of suspense account will be carried forward to the next year and will
be eliminated as and when all the remaining errors affecting trial balance are
located.

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 213

Illustration 7

Trial balance of Kailash did not agree. He put the difference to suspense account. The
following errors were discovered :

(i) Goods withdrawn by Kailash for personal use  500 were not recorded in the books.
(ii) Discount allowed to Ramesh 60 on receiving  2,040 from him was not recorded in

the books.
(iii) Discount received from Rohan  50 on paying  3,250 to him was not posted at all.
(iv)  700 received from Khalil, a debtor, whose account had earlier been written-off as

bad, were credited to his personal account.
(v) Cash received from Govil, a debtor,  5,000 was posted to his account as  500.

(vi) Goods returned to Mahesh  700 were posted to his account as  70.
(vii) Bill receivable from Narayan  1,000 was dishonoured and wrongly debited to

allowances account as  10,000.
Give journal entries to rectify the above errors and prepare suspense account to ascertain
the amount of difference in trial balance.

Solution

(i)

Drawings A/c Dr. 500
To Purchases A/c 500

(Goods withdrawn by proprietor for personal use not recorded, now
rectified).

(ii)

Discount allowed A/c Dr. 60
To Ramesh’s A/c 60

(Discount allowed to Ramesh not recorded, now rectified)

(iii)

Rohan’s A/c Dr. 50
To Discount received A/c 50

(Discount received from Rohan not posted , now corrected)

(iv)

Khalil’s A/c Dr. 700
To Bad debts recovered A/c 700

(Bad debts recovered wrongly credited to debtor’s personal account, now
corrected)

Reprint 2025-26



214 Accountancy

(v)

Suspense A/c Dr. 4,500
To Govil’s A/c 4,500

(Cash received from Govil  5,000 wrongly posted to his account as
 500)

(vi)

Mahesh’s A/c Dr. 630
To Suspense A/c 630

(Goods returned to Mahesh  700 wrongly posted to his account as
 70, now corrected)

(vii)

Narayan’s A/c Dr. 1,000
Suspense A/c Dr. 9,000

To Allowances A/c 10,000
(Bill receivables from Narayan  1,000 wrongly debited to allowances
account as  10,000).

Suspense Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
 

Govil 4,500 Mahesh 630
Allowances 9,000 Difference as per 12,870

trial balance
13,500 13,500

Test Your Understanding - IV

Tick the Correct Answer

(1) Agreement of trial balance is affected by:
(a) One sided errors only.
(b) Two sided errors only.
(c) Both (a) and (b).
(d) None of the above.

(2) Which of the following is not an error of principle:
(a) Purchase of furniture debited to purchases account.
(b) Repairs on the overhauling of second hand machinery purchased debited to

repairs account.

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 215

(c) Cash received from Manoj posted to Saroj.
(d) Sale of old car credited to sales account.

(3) Which of the following is not an error of commission:
(a) Overcasting of sales book.
(b) Credit sales to Ramesh  5,000 credited to his account.
(c) Wrong balancing of machinery account.
(d) Cash sales not recorded in cash book.

(4) Which of following errors will be rectified through suspense account:
(a) Sales return book undercast by  1,000.
(b) Sales return by Madhu  1,000 not recorded.
(c) Sales return by Madhu Rs 1,000. recorded as  100.
(d) Sales return by Madhu  1,000 recorded through purchases returns book

(5) If the trial balance agrees, it implies that:
(a) There is  no error in the books.
(b) There may be two sided errors in the book.
(c) There may be one sided error in the books.
(d) There may be both two sided and one sided errors in the books.

(6) If suspense account does not balance off even after rectification of errors it implies
that:
(a) There are some one sided errors only in the books yet to be located.
(b) There are no more errors yet to be located.
(c) There are some two sided errors only yet to be located.
(d) There may be both one sided errors and two sided errors yet to be located.

(7) If wages paid for installation of new machinery is debited to wages Account, it is:
(a) An error of commission.
(b) An error of principle.
(c) A compensating error.
(d) An error of omission.

(8) Trial balance is:
(a) An account.
(b) A statement.
(c) A subsidiary book.
(d) A principal book.

(9) A Trial balance is prepared:
(a) After preparation financial statement.
(b) After recording transactions in subsidiary books.
(c) After posting to ledger is complete.
(d) After posting to ledger is complete and accounts have been balanced,

Key Terms Introduced in the Chapter

• Trial Balance • Compensating Error
• Error of Commission • Error of Principle
• Error Omission • Suspense Account

Reprint 2025-26



216 Accountancy

Summary with Reference to Learning Objectives

1. Meaning of trial balance: A statement showing the abstract of the balance
(debit/credit) of various accounts in the ledger.

2. Objectives of trial balance: The main objectives of preparing the trial balance
are : (i) to ascertain the arithmetical accuracy of the ledger accounts; (ii) to
help in locating errors; and (iii) to help in the preparatioon of the final accounts.

3. Preparation of trial balance by the balance method: In this method, the trial
balance has three columns. The first column is for the head of the account,
the second column for writing the debit balance and the third for the credit
balance of each account in the ledger.

4. Various types of errors:
(i) Errors of commission: Errors caused due to wrong recording of a

transaction, wrong totalling, wrong casting, wrong balancing, etc.
(ii) Errors of Omission: Errors caused due to omission of recording a

transaction entirely or party in the books of account.
(iii) Errors of Principle: Errors arising due to wrong classificatrion of receipts

and payments between revenue and capital receipts and revenue and
capital expenditure.

(iv) Compensating errors: Two or more errors committed in such a way that
they nullify the effect of each other on the debits and credits.

5. Rectification of errors: Errors affecting only one account can be rectified by
giving an explanatory note or by passing a journal entry. Errors which affect
two or more accounts are rectified by passing a journal entry.

6. Meaning and utility of suspense account: An account in which the difference
in the trial balance is put till such time that errors are located and rectified.
It facilitates the preparation of financial statements even when the trial balance
does not tally.

7. Disposal of suspense account: When all the errors are located and rectified
the suspense account stands disposed off.

Questions for Practice

Short Answers

1. State the meaning of a trial balance?
2. Give two examples of errors of principle?
3. Give two examples of errors of commission?
4. What are the methods of preparing trial balance?
5. What are the steps taken by an accountant to locate the errors in the trial

balance?
6. What is a suspense account? Is it necessary that is suspense account will

balance off after rectification of the errors detected by the accountant? If
not, then what happens to the balance still remaining in suspense account?

7. What kinds of errors would cause difference in the trial balance. Also list
examples that would not be revealed by a trial balance?

8. State the limitations of trial balance?

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 217

Long Answers

1. Describe the purpose for the preparation of trial balance.
2. Explain errors of principle and give two examples with measures to rectify

them.
3. Explain the errors of commission and give two examples with measures to

rectify them.
4. What are the different types of errors that are usually committed in recording

business transaction.
5. As an accountant of a company, you are disappointed to learn that the

totals in your new trial balance are not equal. After going through a careful
analysis, you have discovered only one error. Specifically, the balance of
the Office Equipment account has a debit balance of  15,600 on the trial
balance. However, you have figured out that a correctly recorded credit
purchase of pendrive for  3,500 was posted from the journal to the ledger
with a  3,500 debit to Office Equipment and another  3,500 debit to
creditors accounts. Answer each of the following questions and present the
amount of any misstatement :
(a) Is the balance of the office equipment account overstated, understated,

or correctly stated in the trial balance?
(b) Is the balance of the creditors account overstated, understated, or

correctly stated in the trial balance?
(c) Is the debit column total of the trial balance overstated, understated,

or correclty stated?
(d) Is the credit column total of the trial balance overstated, understated,

or correctly stated?
(e) If the debit column  total of the trial balance is  2,40,000 before

correcting the error, what is the total of credit column.

Numerical Questions

1. Rectify the following errors:
(i) Credit sales to Mohan  7,000 were not recorded.

(ii) Credit purchases from Rohan  9,000 were not recorded.
(iii) Goods returned to Rakesh  4,000 were not recorded.
(iv) Goods returned from Mahesh  1,000 were not recorded.

2. Rectify the following errors:
(i) Credit sales to Mohan  7,000 were recorded as 700.

(ii) Credit purchases from Rohan  9,000 were recorded as  900.
(iii) Goods returned to Rakesh  4,000 were recorded as  400.
(iv) Goods returned from Mahesh  1,000 were recorded as 100.

3. Rectify the following errors:
(i) Credit sales to Mohan  7,000 were recorded as 7,200.

(ii) Credit purchases from Rohan  9,000 were recorded as  9,900.
(iii) Goods returned to Rakesh  4,000 were recorded as  4,040.
(iv) Goods returned from Mahesh  1,000 were recorded as 1,600.

Reprint 2025-26



218 Accountancy

4. Rectify the following errors:
(a) Salary paid  5,000 was debited to employee’s personal account.
(b) Rent  Paid  4,000 was posted to landlord’s personal account.
(c) Goods withdrawn by proprietor for personal use  1,000 were debited

to sundry expenses account.
(d) Cash received from Kohli  2,000 was posted to Kapur’s account.
(e) Cash paid to Babu  1,500 was posted to Sabu’s account.

5. Rectify the following errors:
(a) Credit Sales to Mohan  7,000 were recorded in purchases book.
(b) Credit Purchases from Rohan   9,00 were recorded in sales book.
(c) Goods returned to Rakesh  4,000 were recorded in the sales return

book.
(d) Goods returned from Mahesh  1,000 were recorded in purchases return

book.
(e) Goods returned from Nahesh  2,000 were recorded in purchases book.

6. Rectify the following errors:
(a) Sales book overcast by  700.
(b) Purchases book overcast by  500.
(c) Sales return book overcast by  300.
(d) Purchase return book overcast by  200.

7. Rectify the following errors:
(a) Sales book undercast by 300.
(b) Purchases book undercast by 400.
(c) Return Inwards book undercast by 200.
(d) Return outwards book undercast by 100.

8. Rectify the following errors and ascertain the amount of difference in trial
balance by preparing suspense account:
(a) Credit sales to Mohan  7,000 were not posted.
(b) Credit purchases from Rohan  9,000 were not posted.
(c) Goods returned to Rakesh  4,000 were not posted.
(d) Goods returned from Mahesh  1,000 were not posted.
(e) Cash paid to Ganesh  3,000 was not posted.
(f) Cash sales  2,000 were not posted.

(Ans: Difference in trial balance  2,000 excess credit).
9. Rectify the following errors and ascertain the amount of difference in trial

balance by preparing suspense account:
(a) Credit sales to Mohan  7,000 were posted as  9,000.
(b) Credit purchases from Rohan  9,000 were posted as  6,000.
(c) Goods returned to Rakesh  4,000 were posted as  5,000.
(d) Goods returned from Mahesh  1,000 were posted as  3,000.
(e) Cash sales  2,000 were posted as  200.

(Ans: Difference in trial balance  5,800 excess debit.)

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 219

10. Rectify the following errors:
(a) Credit sales to Mohan  7,000 were posted to Karan.
(b) Credit purchases from Rohan  9,000 were posted to Gobind.
(c) Goods returned to Rakesh  4,000 were posted to Naresh.
(d) Goods returned from Mahesh  1,000 were posted to Manish.
(e) Cash sales  2,000 were posted to commission account.

11. Rectify the following errors assuming that a suspense account was opened.
Ascertain the difference in trial balance.
(a) Credit sales to Mohan  7,000 were posted to the credit of his account.
(b) Credit purchases from Rohan  9,000 were posted to the debit of his

account as  6,000.
(c) Goods returned to Rakesh  4,000 were posted to the credit of his

account.
(d) Goods returned from Mahesh  1,000 were posted to the debit of his

account as  2,000.
(e) Cash sales  2,000 were posted to the debit of sales account as  5,000.
(Ans: Difference in trial balance  3,000 excess debit).

12. Rectify the following errors assuming that a suspense account was opened.
Ascertain the difference in trial balance.
(a) Credit sales to Mohan  7,000 were posted to Karan as  5,000.
(b) Credit purchases from Rohan  9,000 were posted to the debit of Gobind

as  10,000.
(c) Goods returned to Rakesh  4,000 were posted to the credit of Naresh

as  3,000.
(d) Goods returned from Mahesh  1,000 were posted to the debit of Manish

as  2,000.
(e) Cash sales  2,000 were posted to commission account as  200.
(Ans: Difference in trial balance  14, 800 excess debit).

13. Rectify the following errors assuming that suspense account was opened.
Ascertain the difference in trial balance.
(a) Credit sales to Mohan  7,000 were recorded in Purchase Book. However,

Mohan’s account was correctly debited.
(b) Credit purchases from Rohan  9,000 were recorded in sales book.

However, Rohan’s account was correctly credited.
(c) Goods returned to Rakesh  4,000 were recorded in sales return book.

However, Rakesh’s account was correctly debited.
(d) Goods returned from Mahesh  1,000 were recorded through purchases

return book. However, Mahesh’s account was correctly credited.
(e) Goods returned to Naresh  2,000 were recorded through purchases

book. However, Naresh’s account was correctly debited.
(Ans: Difference in trial balance  6,000 excess debit).

Reprint 2025-26



220 Accountancy

14. Rectify the following errors :
(a) Furniture purchased for  10,000 wrongly debited to purchases account.
(b) Machinery purchased on credit from Raman for  20,000 was recorded

through purchases book.
(c) Repairs on machinery  1,400 debited to machinery account.
(d) Repairs on overhauling of secondhand machinery purchased  2,000

was debited to Repairs account.
(e) Sale of old machinery at book value of  3,000 was credited to sales account.

15. Rectify the following errors assuming that suspension account was opened.
Ascertain the difference in trial balance.
(a) Furniture purchased for  10,000 wrongly debited to purchase account

as  4,000.
(b) Machinery purchased on credit from Raman for  20,000 recorded

through Purchases Book as  6,000.
(c) Repairs on machinery  1,400 debited to Machinery account as

 2,400.
(d) Repairs on overhauling of second hand machinery purchased  2,000

was debited to Repairs account as  200.
(e) Sale of old machinery at book value  3,000 was credited to sales account

as  5,000.
(Ans : Difference in trial balance  8,800 excess credit).

16. Rectify the following errors :
(a) Depreciation provided on machinery  4,000 was not posted.
(b) Bad debts written off  5,000 were not posted.
(c) Discount allowed to a debtor  100 on receiving cash from him was not

posted.
(d) Discount allowed to a debtor  100 on receiving cash from him was not

posted to discount account.
(e) Bill receivable for  2,000 received from a debtor was not posted.

17. Rectify the following errors :
(a) Depreciation provided on machinery  4,000 was posted as  400.
(b) Bad debts written off  5,000 were posted as  6,000.
(c) Discount allowed to a debtor  100 on receiving cash from him was

posted as  60.
(d) Goods withdrawn by proprietor for personal use  800 were posted as

 300.
(e) Bill receivable for  2,000 received from a debtor was posted as

 3,000.
18. Rectify the following errors assuming that suspense account was opened.

Ascertain the difference in trial balance.
(a) Depreciation provided on machinery  4,000 was not posted to

Depreciation account.

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 221

(b) Bad debts written-off  5,000 were not posted to Debtors account.
(c) Discount allowed to a debtor  100 on receiving cash from him was not

posted to discount allowed account.
(d) Goods withdrawn by proprietor for personal use  800 were not posted

to Drawings account.
(e) Bill receivable for  2,000 received from a debtor was not posted to

Bills receivable account.
(Ans: Difference in trial balance  1,900 excess credit).

19. Trial balance of Anuj did not agree. It showed an excess credit of  6,000. He
put the difference to suspense account. He discovered the following erro
(a) Cash received from Ravish  8,000 posted to his account as

 6,000.
(b) Returns inwards book overcast by  1,000.
(c) Total of sales book  10,000 was not posted to Sales account.
(d) Credit purchases from Nanak  7,000 were recorded in sales Book.

However, Nanak’s account was correctly credited.
(e) Machinery purchased for  10,000 was posted to purchases account as

 5,000. Rectify the errors and prepare suspense account.
(Ans: Total of suspense account  19,000).

20. Trial balance of Raju showed an excess debit of  10,000. He put the difference
to suspense account and discovered the following errors :
(a) Depreciation written-off the furniture  6,000 was not posted to

Furniture account.
(b) Credit sales to Rupam  10,000 were recorded as  7,000.
(c) Purchases book undercast by  2,000.
(d) Cash sales to Rana  5,000 were not posted.
(e) Old Machinery sold for  7,000 was credited to sales account.
(f) Discount received  800 from kanan on playing cash to him was not

posted. Rectify the errors and prepare suspense account.
(Ans: Balance carried forward in suspense account  1,000 (cr.)).

21. Trial balance of Madan did not agree and he put the difference to
suspense account. He discovered the following errors:
(a) Sales return book overcast by  800.
(b) Purchases return to Sahu  2,000 were not posted.
(c) Goods purchased on credit from Narula  4,000 though taken into

stock, but no entry was passed in the books.
(d) Installation charges on new machinery purchased  500 were debited

to sundry expenses account as  50.
(e) Rent paid for residential accommodation of madam (the proprietor)

 1,400 was debited to Rent account as  1,000.
Rectify the errors and prepare suspense account to ascertain the
difference in trial balance.

(Ans: Difference in trial balance  2,050 excess credit).

Reprint 2025-26



222 Accountancy

22. Trial balance of Kohli did not agree and showed an excess debit of  16,300.
He put the difference to a suspense account and discovered the following
errors:
(a) Cash received from Rajat  5,000 was posted to the debit of Kamal as

 6,000.
(b) Salaries paid to an employee  2,000 were debited to his personal account

as  1200.
(c) Goods withdrawn by proprietor for personal use  1,000 were credited

to sales account as  1,600.
(d) Depreciation provided on machinery  3,000 was posted to Machinery

account as  300.
(e) Sale of old car for  10,000 was credited to sales account as

 6,000. Rectify the errors and prepare suspense account.
(Ans: total of suspense account :  17,700).

23. Give journal entries to rectify the following errors assuming that suspense
account had been opened.
(a) Goods distributed as free sample  5,000 were not recorded in the books.
(b) Goods withdrawn for personal use by the proprietor  2,000 were not

recorded in the books.
(c) Bill receivable received from a debtor  6,000 was not posted to his

account.
(d) Total of Returns inwards book  1,200 was posted to Returns outwards

account.
(e) Discount allowed to Reema  700 on receiving cash from her was

recorded in the books as  70.
(Ans: Difference in trial balance  3,600 excess debit).

24. Trial balance of Khatau did not agree. He put the difference to suspense account
and discovered the following errors :
(a) Credit sales to Manas  16,000 were recorded in the purchases book as

 10,000 and posted to the debit of Manas as  1,000.
(b) Furniture purchased from Noor  6,000 was recorded through purchases

book as  5,000 and posted to the debit of Noor  2,000.
(c) Goods returned to Rai  3,000 recorded through the Sales book as

 1,000.
(d) Old machinery sold for  2,000 to Maneesh recorded through sales

book as  1,800 and posted to the credit of Manish as  1,200.
(e) Total of Returns inwards book  2,800 posted to Purchase account.

Rectify the above errors and prepare suspense account to ascertain the
difference in trial balance.

(Ans: Difference in trial balance  15,000 excess debit).
25. Trial balance of John did not agree. He put the difference to suspense account

and discovered the following errors :
(a) In the sales book for the month of January total of page 2 was carried

forward to page 3 as  1,000 instead of  1200 and total of page 6 was
carried forward to page 7 as  5,600 instead of  5,000.

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 223

(b) Wages paid for installation of machinery  500 was posted to wages
account as  50.

(c) Machinery purchased from R & Co. for  10,000 on credit was entered
in Purchase Book as  6,000 and posted there from to R & Co. as
 1,000.

(d) Credit sales to Mohan  5,000 were recorded in Purchases Book.
(e) Goods returned to Ram  1,000 were recorded in Sales Book.
(f) Credit purchases from S & Co. for  6,000 were recorded in sales book.

However, S & Co. was correctly credited.
(g) Credit purchases from M & Co.  6,000 were recorded in Sales Book as

 2,000 and posted there from to the credit of M & Co. as
 1,000.

(h) Credit sales to Raman  4,000 posted to the credit of Raghvan as
 1,000.

(i) Bill receivable for  1,600 from Noor was dishonoured and posted to
debit of Allowances account.

(j) Cash paid to Mani  5,000 against our acceptance was debited to Manu.
(k) Old furniture sold for  3,000 was posted to Sales account as

 1,000.
(l) Depreciation provided on furniture  800 was not posted.

(m) Material  10,000 and wages  3,000 were used for construction of
building. No adjustment was made in the books.
Rectify the errors and prepare suspense to ascertain the difference in
trial balance.

(Ans : Difference in trial balance  13,850 excess credit).

Checklist to Test Your Understanding

Test your understanding - I

Trial Balance Total  5,17,000

Test your understanding - II

1. Purchases A/c Dr. 5,000
To Rajni’s A/c 5,000

Rajni’s A/c Dr. 5,000
To Sales A/c 5,000

Rajni’s A/c Dr. 10,000
To Sales A/c 5,000
To Purchases A/c 5,000

2. Purchases A/c Dr. 8,000
To Rao’s A/c 8,000

Reprint 2025-26



224 Accountancy

Furniture A/c Dr. 8,000
To Purchases A/c 8,000

3. Cash A/c Dr. 15,000
To Commission A/c 15,000

Cash A/c Dr. 15,000
To Sales A/c 15,000

Commission A/c Dr. 15,000
To Sales A/c 15,000

4. Cash A/c Dr. 6, 000
To Nadeem’s A/c 6,000

Cash A/c Dr. 6,000
To Karim’s A/c 6,000

Test Your Understanding - III

1. Error of Commission

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 12, 000
To Sales A/c 12,000

Mohan’s A/c Dr. 10,000
To Sales A/c 10,000

Suspense A/c Dr. 2,000
To Mohan’s A/c 2,000

2. Error of Partial omission

xxx A/c Dr. 2,000
To Cash A/c 2,000

Neha’s A/c Dr. 2,000
To Suspense A/c 2,000

Neha’s A/c Dr. 2,000
To Suspense A/c 2,000

Reprint 2025-26



Trial Balance and Rectification of Errors 225

3. Error of Commission

Sales Return A/c Dr. 1,600
To Megha’s A/c 1,600

Sales Returns A/c Dr. 1,600
To Megha’s A/c 1,600

Suspense A/c Dr. 600
To Megha’s A/c 600

4. Error of Commission
xxx Dr. 1,500

To Furniture A/c 1,500

Depreciation A/c Dr. 1,500
To Furniture A/c 1,500

Depreciation A/c Dr. 1,500
To Suspense A/c 1,500

Test Your Understanding - IV

1. (c) 2. (c) 3. (d) 4. (a) 5. (b) 6. (a) 7. (b) 8. (b) 9. (d)

Reprint 2025-26



226 Accountancy

##7##
Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 7

Matching principle requires that the revenue of
a given period is matched against the expenses

for the same period. This ensures ascertainment of
the correct amount of profit or loss. If some cost is

L incurred whose benefit extend to more than one
EARNING OBJECTIVES

accounting period, it is not justified to charge the
After studying this chapter, entire cost as expense in the year in which it is
you will be able to :

incurred. In fact, such a cost must be spread over
• explain the meaning of the periods in which it provides benefits.

depreciation and
Depreciation, on fixed assets, which is the main

distinguish it from
amortisation and subject matter of the present chapter, deals with such
depletion; a situation. Further, it may not always be possible

• state the need for to ascertain with certainty the amount of some
charging depreciation particular expense. Recall the principle of
and identify its causes; conservatism (prudence) which requires that instead

• compute depreciation of ignoring such items of costs, adequate provision
using straight line and must be made and charged against profits of the
written down value current period. Moreover, a part of profit may be
methods;

retained in the business in the form of reserves to
• record transactions provide for growth, expansion or meeting certain

relating to depreciation
specific needs of the business in future. This  chapter

and disposition of
assets; deals with two distinct topics and hence is being

• explain the meaning presented in two different sections. First section deals
and purpose of creating with depreciation and second section  deals with
provisions and reserves; provisions and reserves.

• distinguish between
reserves and provisions;

SECTION – I
• explain the nature of

various types of 7.1 Depreciation
provisions and reserves
including secret reserve. Now you are aware that fixed assets are the assets

which are used in business for more than one

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 227

accounting year. Fixed assets (technically referred to as “depreciable assets”)
tend to reduce their value once they are put to use. In general, the term
“Depreciation” means decline in the value of a fixed assets due to use, passage
of time or obsolescence. In other words, if a business enterprise procures a
machine and uses it in production process then the value of machine declines
with its usage. Even if the machine is not used in production process, we can
not expect it to realise the same sales price due to the passage of time or
arrival of a new model (obsolescence). It implies that fixed assets are subject
to decline in value and this decline is technically referred to as depreciation.

As an accounting term, depreciation is that part of the cost of a fixed asset
which has expired on account of its usage and/or lapse of time. Hence,
depreciation is an expired cost or expense, charged against the revenue of a
given accounting period. For example, a machine is purchased for `1,00,000
on April 01, 2017. The useful life of the machine is estimated to be 10 years. It
implies that the machine can be used in the production process for next 10
years till March 31, 2016. You know that by its very nature, ` 1,00,000 is a
capital expenditure during the year 2017-18. However, when income statement
(Statement of Profit and Loss) is prepared, the entire amount of ̀ 1,00,000 can
not be charged against the revenue for the year 2017-18, because of the reason
that the capital expenditure amounting to ̀ 1,00,000 is expected to derive  benefits
(or revenue) for 10 years and not one year. Therefore, it is logical to charge only
a part of the total cost say ̀ 10,000  (one tenth of  ̀  1,00,000) against the revenue
for the year 2017-18. This part represents the expired cost or loss in the value
of machine on account of its use or passage of time and is referred to as
‘Depreciation’. The amount of depreciation, being a charge against profit, is
debited to Income Statement (Statement of Profit and Loss).

7.1.1 Meaning of Depreciation

Depreciation may be described as a permanent, continuing and gradual
shrinkage in the book value of fixed assets. It is based on the cost of assets
consumed in a business and not on its market value.

According to Institute of Cost and Management Accounting, London (ICMA)
terminology “The depreciation is the diminution in intrinsic value of the asset
due to use and/or lapse of time.”

Accounting Standard-6 issued by The Institute of Chartered Accountants
of India (ICAI) defines depreciation as “a measure of the wearing out, consumption
or other loss of value of depreciable asset arising from use, effluxion of time or
obsolescence through technology and market-change. Depreciation is allocated
so as to charge fair proportion of depreciable amount in each accounting period
during the expected useful life of the asset. Depreciation includes amortisation
of assets whose useful life is pre-determined”.

Reprint 2025-26



228 Accountancy

Box  1

AS-6 (Revised): Depreciation

• Depreciation is “a measure of the wearing out, consumption or other loss of
value of depreciable asset arising from use, effluxion of time or obsolescence
through technology and market-change. Depreciation is allocated so as to charge
fair proportion of depreciable amount in each accounting period during the
expected useful life of the asset. Depreciation includes amortisation of assets
whose useful life is pre-determined”.

• Depreciation has a significant effect in determining and presenting the financial
position and results of operations of an enterprise. Depreciation is charged in
each accounting period by reference to the extent of the depreciable amount.

• The subject matter of depreciation, or its base, are ‘depreciable’ assets which.
• “are expected to be used during more than one accounting period.
• have a limited useful life; and
• are held by an enterprise for use in production or supply of goods and services,

for rental to others, or for administrative purposes and not for the purpose of
sale in the ordinary course of business.”

• The amount of depreciation basically depends upon three factors, i.e. Cost, Useful
life and Net realisable value.

• Cost of a fixed asset is “the total cost spent in connection with its acquisition,
installation and commissioning as well as for add item or improvement of the
depreciable asset”.

• Useful life of an asset is the “period over which it is expected to be used by the
enterprise”.

• There are two main methods of calculating depreciation amount.
• straight line method
• written down value method

• Selection of appropriate method depends upon the following factors:
• type of the asset
• nature of the use of such asset
• circumstances prevailing in the business.

• The selected depreciation method should be applied consistently from period to
period. Change in depreciation method may be allowed only under specific
circumstances.

Depreciation has a significant effect in determining and presenting the
financial position and results of operations of an enterprise. Depreciation is
charged in each accounting period by reference to the extent of the depreciable
amount. It should be noted that the subject matter of depreciation, or its
base, are ‘depreciable’ assets which:
• “are expected to be used during more than one accounting period;
• have a limited useful life; and
• are held by an enterprise for use in production or supply of goods and

services, for rental to others, or for administrative purposes and not for
the purpose of sale in the ordinary course of business.”

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 229

Examples of depreciable assets are machines, plants, furnitures, buildings,
computers, trucks, vans, equipments, etc. Moreover, depreciation is the
allocation of ‘depreciable amount’, which is the “historical cost”, or other
amount substituted for historical cost less estimated salvage value.

Another point in the allocation of depreciable amount is the ‘expected useful
life’ of an asset. It has been described as “either (i) the period over which a
depreciable asset is expected to the used by the enterprise, or (ii) the number
of production of similar units expected to be obtained from the use of the
asset by the enterprise.”

7.1.2 Features of Depreciation

Above mentioned discussion on depreciation highlights the following features
of depreciation:
1. It is decline in the book value of fixed assets.
2. It includes loss of value due to effluxion of time, usage or obsolescence.

For example, a business firm buys a machine for ` 1,00,000 on  April 01,
2017. In the year 2017, a new version of the machine arrives in the market.
As a result, the machine bought by the business firm becomes outdated.
The resultant decline in the value of old machine is caused by obsolescence.

3. It is a continuing process.
4. It is an expired cost and hence must be deducted before calculating taxable

profits. For example, if profit before depreciation and tax is ` 50,000, and
depreciation is ̀  10,000; profit before tax will be:

  (`)
Profit before depreciation & tax 50,000
 (-) Depreciation (10,000)
Profit before tax  40,000

5. It is a non-cash expense. It does not involve any cash outflow. It is the
process of writing-off the capital expenditure already incurred.

Do it Yourself

 Look at your surroundings and identify at least five depreciable assets in your home,
school, hospital, printing press and in a bakery.

Reprint 2025-26



230 Accountancy

7.2 Depreciation and other Similar Terms

There are some terms like ‘depletion’ and ‘amortisation’, which are also used in
connection with depreciation. This has been due to the similar treatment given
to them in accounting on the basis of similarity of their outcome, as they represent
the expiry of the usefulness of different assets.

7.2.1 Depletion

The term depletion is used in the context of extraction of natural resources like
mines, quarries, etc. that reduces the availability of the quantity of the material
or asset. For example, if a business enterprise is into mining business and
purchases a coal mine for ` 10,00,000. Then the value of coal mine declines
with the extraction of coal out of the mine. This decline in the value of mine is
termed as depletion. The main difference between depletion and depreciation is
that the former is concerned with the exhaution of economic resources, but the
latter relates to the usage of an asset. In spite of this, the result is erosion in the
volume of natural resources and expiry of the service potential. Therefore,
depletion and depreciation are given similar accounting treatment.

7.2.2 Amortisation

Amortisation refers to writing-off the cost of intangible assets like patents,
copyright, trade marks, franchises, goodwill which have utility for a specified
period of time. The procedure for amortisation or periodic write-off of a portion
of the cost of intangible assets is the same as that for the depreciation of fixed
assets. For example, if a business firm buys a patent for ` 10,00,000 and
estimates that its useful life will be 10 years then the business firm must write-
off  ̀  10,00,000 over 10 years. The amount so written- off is technically referred
to as amortisation.

7.3 Causes of Depreciation

These have been very clearly spelt out as part of the definition of depreciation in
the Accounting Standard 6 and are being elaborated here.

7.3.1 Wear and Tear due to Use or Passage of Time

Wear and tear means deterioration, and the consequent diminution in an assets
value, arising from its use in business operations for earning  revenue. It reduces
the asset’s technical capacities to serve the purpose for, which it has been meant.
Another aspect of wear and tear is the physical deterioration. An asset
deteriorates simply with the passage of time, even though they are not being put
to any use. This happens especially when the assets are exposed to the rigours
of nature like weather, winds, rains, etc.

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 231

7.3.2 Expiration of Legal Rights

Certain categories of assets lose their value after the agreement governing their
use in business comes to an end after the expiry of pre-determined period.
Examples of such assets are patents, copyrights, leases, etc. whose utility to
business is extinguished immediately upon the removal of legal backing to them.

7.3.3 Obsolescence

Obsolescence is another factor leading to depreciation of fixed assets. In ordinary
language, obsolescence means the fact of being “out-of-date”. Obsolescence
implies to an existing asset becoming out-of-date on account of the availability
of better type of asset. It arises from such factors as:
• Technological changes;
• Improvements in production methods;
• Change in market demand for the product or service output of the asset;
• Legal or other description.

7.3.4 Abnormal Factors

Decline in the usefulness of the asset may be caused by abnormal factors such as
accidents due to fire, earthquake, floods, etc. Accidental loss is permanent but
not continuing or gradual. For example, a car which has been repaired after an
accident will not fetch the same price in the market even if it has not been used.

7.4 Need for Depreciation

The need for providing depreciation in accounting records arises from conceptual,
legal, and practical business consideration. These considerations provide
depreciation a particular significance as a business expense.

7.4.1 Matching of Costs and Revenue

The rationale of the acquisition of fixed assets in business operations is that these
are used in the earning of revenue. Every asset is bound to undergo some wear
and tear, and hence lose value, once it is put to use in business. Therefore,
depreciation is as much the cost as any other expense incurred in the normal
course of business like salary, carriage, postage and stationary, etc. It is a charge
against the revenue of the corresponding period and must be deducted before
arriving at net profit according to ‘Generally Accepted Accounting Principles’.

7.4.2 Consideration of Tax

Depreciation is a deductible cost for tax purposes. However, tax rules for the
calculation of depreciation amount need not necessarily be similar to current
business practices,

Reprint 2025-26



232 Accountancy

7.4.3 True and Fair Financial Position

If depreciation on assets is not provided for, then the assets will be over valued
and the balance sheet will not depict the correct financial position of the business.
Also, this is not permitted either by established accounting practices or by specific
provisions of law.

7.4.4 Compliance with Law

Apart from tax regulations, there are certain specific legislations that indirectly
compel some business organisations like corporate enterprises to provide
depreciation on fixed assets.

Test Your Understanding - I

State whether the following statements are true or false:

1. Depreciation is a non-cash expense.

2. Depreciation is also charged on current assets.

3. Depreciation is decline in the market value of tangible fixed assets.

4. The main cause of depreciation is wear and tear caused by its usage.

5. Depreciation must be charged so as to ascertain true profit or loss of the business.
6. Depletion term is used in case of intangible assets.

7. Depreciation provides fund for replacement.

8. When market value of an asset is higher than book value, depreciation is not
charged.

9. Depreciation is charged to reduce the value of asset to its market value.

10. If adequate maintenance expenditure is incurred, depreciation need not be
charged.

7.5 Factors Affecting the Amount of Depreciation

The determination of depreciation depends on three parameters, viz. cost,
estimated useful life and probable salvage value.

7.5.1 Cost of Asset

Cost (also known as original cost or historical cost) of an asset includes invoice
price and other costs, which are necessary to put the asset in use or working
condition. Besides the purchase price, it includes freight and transportation
cost, transit insurance, installation cost, registration cost, commission paid on
purchase of asset add items such as software, etc. In case of purchase of a
second hand asset it includes initial repair cost to put the asset in workable

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 233

condition. According to Accounting Standand-6 of ICAI, cost of a fixed asset is
“the total cost spent in connection with its acquisition, installation and
commissioning as well as for addition or improvement of the depreciable asset”.
For example, a photocopy machine is purchased for ` 50,000 and ` 5,000 is
spent on its transportation and installation. In this case the original cost of the
machine is ` 55,000 (i.e. ` 50,000 + `5,000 ) which will be written-off as
depreciation over the useful life of the machine.

7.5.2 Estimated Net Residual Value

Net Residual value (also known as scrap value or salvage value for accounting
purpose) is the estimated net realisable value (or sale value) of the asset at the
end of its useful life. The net residual value is calculated after deducting the
expenses necessary for the disposal of the asset. For example, a machine is
purchased for  ̀  50,000 and is expected to have a useful life of 10 years. At the
end of 10th  year it is expected to have a sale value of ` 6,000 but expenses
related to its disposal are estimated at ̀  1,000. Then its net residual value shall
be ` 5,000 (i.e. ` 6,000 – ̀  1,000).

7.5.3 Depreciable Cost

Depreciable cost of an asset is equal to its cost (as calculated in point 7.5.1
above) less net residual value (as calculated in point 7.5.2,) Hence, in the above
example, the depreciable cost of machine is ` 45,000 (i.e., ` 50,000 –
` 5,000.) It is the depreciable cost, which is distributed and charged as
depreciation expense over the estimated useful life of the asset. In the above
example, ̀  45,000 shall be charged as depreciation over a period of 10 years. It
is important to mention here that total amount of depreciation charged over the
useful life of the asset must be equal to the depreciable cost. If total amount of
depreciation charged is less than the depreciable cost then the capital expenditure is
under recovered. It violates the principle of proper matching of revenue and expense.

7.5.4 Estimated Useful Life

Useful life of an asset is the estimated economic or commercial life of the asset.
Physical life is not important for this purpose because an asset may still exist
physically but may not be capable of commercially viable production. For
example, a machine is purchased and it is estimated that it can be used in
production process for 5 years. After 5 years the machine may still be in good
physical condition but can’t be used for production profitably, i.e., if it is still
used the cost of production may be very high. Therefore, the useful life of the
machine is considered as 5 years irrespective of its physical life. Estimation of
useful life of an asset is difficult as it depends upon several factors such as

Reprint 2025-26



234 Accountancy

usage level of asset, maintenance of the asset, technological changes, market
changes, etc.  As per Accounting Standard – 6 useful life of an asset is normally
the “period over which it is expected to be used by the enterprise”. Normally,
useful life is shorter than the physical life. The useful life of an asset is expressed
in number of years but it can also be expressed in other units, e.g., number of
units of output (as in case of mines) or number of working hours. Useful life
depends upon the following factors :
• Pre-determined by legal or contractual limits, e.g., in case of leasehold asset,

the useful life is the period of lease.
• The number of shifts for which asset is to be used.
• Repair and maintenance policy of the business organisation.
• Technological obsolescence.
• Innovation/improvement in production method.
• Legal or other restrictions.

7.6 Methods of Calculating Depreciation Amount

The depreciation amount to be charged for during an accounting year depends
upon depreciable amount and the method of allocation. For this, two methods
are mandated by law and enforced by professional accounting practice in India.
These methods are straight line method and written down value method. Besides
these two main methods there are other methods such as – annuity method,
depreciation fund method, insurance policy method, sum of years digit method,
double declining method, etc. which may be used for determining the amount of
depreciation. The selection of an appropriate method depends upon the following :

• Type of the asset;

• Nature of the use of such asset;

• Circumstances prevailing in the business;

As per Accounting Standard-6, the selected depreciation method should be
applied consistently from period to period. Change in depreciation method may
be allowed only under specific circumstances.

7.6.1 Straight Line Method

This is the earliest and one of the widely used methods of providing depreciation.
This method is based on the assumption of equal usage of the asset over its
entire useful life. It is called straight line for a reason that if the amount of
depreciation and corresponding time period is plotted on a graph, it will result
in a straight line (figure 7.1).

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 235

It is also called fixed installment method because the amount of depreciation
remains constant from year to year over the useful life of the asset. According to
this method, a fixed and an equal amount is charged as depreciation in every
accounting period during the lifetime of an asset. The amount annually charged
as depreciation is such that it reduces the original cost of the asset to its scrap
value, at the end of its useful life. This method is also known as fixed percentage
on original cost method because same percentage of the original cost (infact
depreciable cost) is written off as depreciation  from year to year.

The depreciation amount to be provided under this method is computed
by using the following formula:

Cost of asset - Estimated net residential value
Depreciation  = 

Estimated useful life of the asset

Rate of depreciation under straight line method is the percentage of the total
cost of the asset to be charged as deprecation during the useful lifetime of the
asset. Rate of depreciation is calculated as follows:

Annual depreciation amount
Rate of Depreciation = × 100

Acquisition cost

Consider the following example, the original cost of the asset is ̀  2,50,000.
The useful life of the asset is 10 years and net residual value is estimated to
be ` 50,000. Now, the amount of depreciation to be charged every year will be
computed as given below:

Annual Depreciation Amount

Acqusition cost of  asset − Estimated net residential value
=

Estimated life of  asset

` 2,50, 000 − ` 50, 000
i.e. = = ` 20, 000

10

Fig. 7.1 : Depreciation amount under straight line method

Reprint 2025-26



236 Accountancy

The rate of depreciation will be calculated as :

Annual depreciation amount
(i) Rate of Depreciation = ×100

Acquisition cost

From point (i), the annual depreciation amounts to ` 20,000.

` 20,000
Thus, the rate of depreciation will be = ×100 = 8%

` 2,50,000

7.6.1.1 Advantages of Straight Line Method

Straight Line method has certain advantages which are stated below:

• It is very simple, easy to understand and apply. Simplicity makes it a popular
method in practice;

• Asset can be depreciated upto the net scrap value or zero value. Therefore,
this method makes it possible to distribute full depreciable cost over useful
life of the asset;

• Every year, same amount is charged as depreciation in profit and loss account.
This makes comparison of profits for different years easy;

• This method is suitable for those assets whose useful life can be estimated
accurately and where the use of the asset is consistent from year to year
such as leasehold buildings.

7.6.1.2 Limitations of Straight Line Method

Although straight line method is simple and easy to apply it suffers from
certain limitations which are given below.
• This method is based on the faulty assumption of same amount of the utility

of an asset in different accounting years;
• With the passage of time, work efficiency of the asset decreases and repair

and maintenance expense increases. Hence, under this method, the total
amount charged against profit on account of depreciation and repair taken
together, will not be uniform throughout the life of the asset, rather it will
keep on increasing from year to year.

7.6.2 Written Down Value Method

Under this method, depreciation is charged on the book value of the asset. Since
book value keeps on reducing by the annual charge of depreciation, it is also
known as ‘reducing balance method’. This method involves the application of a
pre-determined proportion/percentage of the book value of the asset at the
beginning of every accounting period, so as to calculate the amount of
depreciation. The amount of depreciation reduces year after year.

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 237

For example, the original cost of the asset is ̀  2,00,000 and depreciation is
charged @ 10% p.a. at written down value, then the amount of depreciation will
be computed as follows:

10
(i) Depreciation (I year) = ` 20, 00, 000 × = ` 20, 000

100
(ii) Written down value   = ` 2,00,000 – 20,000 = `1,80,000

(at the end of the I year)

10
(iii) Depreciation (II year) = ` 1, 80, 000 × = ` 18,000

100
(iv) Written down value = ` 1,80,000 – ̀ 18,000 = 1,62,000

(at the end of the II year)

10
(v) Depreciation (III year) = ` 1, 62, 000 × = ` 16,200

100
(vi) Written down value = ` 1,62,000 – ` 16,200 = ` 1,45,800
    (at the end of III year)

As evident from the example, the amount of depreciation goes on reducing
year after year. For this reason, it is also known ‘reducing installment’ or
‘diminishing value’ method. This method is based upon the assumption that
the benefit accruing to business from assets keeps on diminishing as the
asset becomes old (refer figure 7.2). This is due to the reason that a pre-
determined percentage is applied to a gradually shrinking balance on the
asset account every year. Thus, large amount is recovered depreciation charge
in the earlier years than in later years.

         

Fig. 7.2 : Depreciation amount using written down value method

Under written down value method, the rate of depreciation is computed by using
the following formula:

 s 
R = 1−n ×100
 c 
 

Reprint 2025-26



238 Accountancy

Where,   r = Rate of depreciation
 n = Expected useful life
 s = Scrap value

 c = Cost of an asset
For example, the original cost of a truck is ` 9,00,000 and its net salvage

value after 16 years of useful life is ` 50,000 then the appropriate rate of
depreciation will be computed as under:

 50,000 
R = 1−16  ×100 = (1− 0.834) × 100 = 16.6%
 9,00,000 
 

7.6.2.1 Advantages of Written Down Value Method

Written down value method has the following advantages:

• This method is based on a more realistic assumption that the benefits from
asset go on diminishing (reducing) with the passage of time. Hence, it calls
for proper allocation of cost because higher depreciation is charged in earlier
years when asset’s utility is higher as compared to later years when it becomes
less effective.

• It results into almost equal burden of depreciation and repair expenses taken
together every year on profit and loss account;

• Income Tax Act accept this method for tax purposes;
• As a large portion of cost is written-off in earlier years, loss due to obsolescence

gets reduced;
• This method is suitable for fixed assets which last for long and which require

increased repair and maintenance expenses with passage of time. It can also
be used where obsolescence rate is high.

7.6.2.2  Limitations of Written Down Value Method

Although this method is based upon a more realistic assumption it suffers from
the following limitations.
• As depreciation is calculated at fixed percentage of written down value,

depreciable cost of the asset cannot be fully written-off. The value of the
asset can never be zero;

• It is difficult to ascertain a suitable rate of depreciation.

7.7 Straight Line Method and Written Down Method: A Comparative Analysis

Straight line and written down value methods are generally used for calculating
depreciation amount in practice. Following are the points of differences between
these two methods.

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 239

7.7.1 Basis of Charging Depreciation

In straight line method, depreciation is charged on the basis of original cost or
(historical cost). Whereas in written down value method, the basis of charging
depreciation is net book value (i.e., original cost less depreciation till date) of the
asset, in the beginning of the year.

7.7.2 Annual Charge of Depreciation

The annual amount of depreciation charged every year remains fixed or constant
under straight line method. Whereas in written down value method the annual
amount of depreciation is highest in the first year and subsequently declines in
later years. The reason for this difference, is the difference in the basis of charging
depreciation under both methods. Under straight line method depreciation is
calculated on original cost while under written down value method it is calculated
on written down value.

7.7.3 Total Charge Against Profit and Loss Account on Account of
Depreciation and Repair Expenses

It is a well-accepted phenomenon that repair and maintenance expenses
increase in later years of the useful life of the asset. Hence, total charge against
profit and loss account in respect of depreciation and repair expenses increases
in later years under straight line method. This happens because annual
depreciation charge remains fixed while repair expenses increase. On the other
hand, under written down value method, depreciation charge declines in later
years, therefore total of depreciation and repair charge remains similar or equal
year after year.

7.7.4 Recognition by Income Tax Law

Straight line method is not recognised by Income Tax Law while written down
value method is recognised by the Income Tax Law.

7.7.5 Suitability

Straight line method is suitable for assets in which repair charges are low the
possibility of obsolescence is low and scrap value depends upon the time period
involved, such as freehold land and buildings, patents, trade marks, etc. Written
down value method is suitable for assets which are affected by technological
changes and require more repair expenses with passage of time such as plant
and machinery, vehicles, etc.

Reprint 2025-26



240 Accountancy

Basis of Difference Straight Line Method Written Down Value
Method

1. Basis of charging depre- Original cost Book Value (i.e. original
ciation cost less depreciation

charged till date)
2. Annual depreciation charge Fixed (Constant) year Declines year after year

3. Total charge against Unequal year after year. Almost equal every year.
profit and loss account in It increases in later years.
respect of depreciation
and repairs

4. Recognition by income Not recognised Recognised
tax law

5. Suitablity It is suitable for assets in It is suitable for assets,
which repair charges are which are affected by
less, the possibility of technological changes
and obsolescence is low and require more repair
scrap value depends upon expenses with passage of
the time period involved. time.

Fig. 7.3 : Comparison of straight line and written down value method

7.8 Methods of Recording Depreciation

In the books of account, there are two types of arrangements for recording
depreciation on fixed assets:
• Charging depreciation to asset account or
• Creating Provision for depreciation/Accumulated depreciation account.

7.8.1 Charging Depreciation to Asset account

According to this arrangement, depreciation is deducted from the depreciable
cost of the asset (credited to the asset account) and charged (or debited) to profit
and loss account. Journal entries under this recording method  are as follows:

1. For recording purchase of asset (only in the year of purchase)
Asset A/c Dr. (with the cost of asset including

installation, freight, etc.)

To Bank/Vendor A/c
2. Following two entries are recorded at the end of every year

(a) For deducting depreciation amount from the cost of the asset.
Depreciation A/c Dr. (with the amount of depreciation)

To Asset A/c
(b) For charging depreciation to profit and loss account.

Profit & Loss A/c Dr. (with the amount of depreciation)
To Depreciation A/c

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 241

3. Balance Sheet Treatment
When this method is used, the fixed asset appears at its  net book value  (i.e. cost
less depreciation charged till date) on the asset side of the balance sheet and not at
its original cost (also known as historical cost).

7.8.2 Creating Provision for Depreciation Account/Accumulated
Depreciation Account

This method is designed to accumulate the depreciation provided on an asset in
a separate account generally called ‘Provision for Depreciation’ or ‘Accumulated
Depreciation’ account. By such accumulation of depreciation the asset account
need not be disturbed in any way and it continues to be shown at its original
cost over the successive years of its useful life. There are some basic characteristic
of this method of recording depreciation. These are given below:
• Asset account continues to appear at its original cost year after year over its

entire life;
• Depreciation is accumulated on a separate account instead of being adjusted

in the asset account at the end of each accounting period.
The following journal entries are recorded under this method:
1. For recording purchase of asset (only in the year of purchase)

Asset A/c Dr. (with the cost of asset including
installation, expenses etc.)

To  Bank/Vendor A/c (cash/credit purchase)

2. Following two journal entries are recorded at the end of each year:

(a) For crediting depreciation amount to provision for depreciation account
Depreciation A/c Dr. (with the amount of depreciation)

To Provision for depreciation A/c
(b) For charging depreciation to profit and loss account

Profit & Loss A/c Dr. (with the amount of depreciation)

To Depreciation A/c

3. Balance sheet treatment
In the balance sheet, the fixed asset continues to appear at its original cost on the asset

side. The depreciation charged till that date appears in the provision for depreciation account,
which is shown either on the “liabilities side” of the balance sheet or by way of deduction
from the original cost of the asset concerned on the asset side of the balance sheet.

Illustration 1

M/s Singhania and Bros. purchased  a plant for ` 5,00,000 on April 01, 2017, and spent
` 50,000 for its installation. The salvage value of the plant after its useful life of 10 years
is estimated to be ̀  10,000. Record journal entries for the year 2016-17 and draw up Plant
Account and Depreciation Account for first three years given that the depreciation is
charged using straight line method if :

(i) The books of account close on March 31 every year; and
(ii) The firm charges depreciation to the asset account.

Reprint 2025-26



242 Accountancy

Solution
Books of Singhania and Bros.

Journal

Date Particulars L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

2016
Apr. 01 Plant A/c Dr. 5,00,000

To Bank A/c 5,00,000
(Purchased plant for ` 5,00,000)

Apr. 01 Plant A/c Dr. 50,000
To Bank A/c 50,000

(Expenses incurred on installation)

2017

Mar. 31 Depreciation A/c Dr. 54,000
To Plant A/c 54,000

(Depreciation charged on asset)

Mar. 31 Profit and Loss A/c Dr. 54,000
To Depreciation A/c 54,000

(Depreciation debited to profit and
loss account)

Plant  Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016 2017
Apr. 01 Bank 5,00,000 Mar. 31 Depreciation 54,000

Balance c/d 4,96,000
Bank 50,000
(Installation
expenses)

5,50,000 5,50,000

2017 2018
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 4,96,000 Mar. 31 Depreciation 54,000

Balance c/d 4,42,000

4,96,000 4,96,000

2018 2019
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 4,42,000 Mar. 31 Depreciation 54,000

Balance c/d 3,88,000

4,42,000 4,42,000
2019
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 3,88,000

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 243

Depreciation Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amounts
` `

2017 2017
Mar. 31 Plant 54,000 Mar. 31 Profit and Loss 54,000
2018 2018
Mar. 31 Plant 54,000 Mar. 31 Profit and Loss 54,000
2019 2019

Mar. 31 Plant 54,000 Mar. 31 Profit & Loss 54,000

Workings Notes
(1) Calculation of original cost

(`)
Purchase cost 5,00,000
Add: Installation cost   50,000
Original cost            5,50,000
Salvage value 10,000
Useful life 10 years

` 5 ,50, 000 −` 10, 000
(2)  Depreciation amount = = ` 54, 000 p.a.

10

Illustration 2

M/s Mehra and Sons acquired a machine for ` 1,80,000 on October 01, 2016, and spent

`  20,000 for its installation. The firm writes-off depreciation at the rate of 10% on original
cost every year. Record necessary journal entries for the year 2017 and draw up Machine
Account and Depreciation Account for first three years given that:

(i) The book of accounts closes on March 31 every year; and
(ii) The firm charges depreciation to asset account.

Solution
Books of  Mehra and Sons

Journal

Debit Credit
Date Particulars L.F. Amount Amount

` `

2016
Oct. 01 Machine A/c Dr. 1,80,000

To Bank A/c 1,80,000
(Purchased machine for `1,80,000)

Oct. 01 Machine A/c Dr. 20,000
To Bank A/c 20,000

(Expenses incurred on installation)

Reprint 2025-26



244 Accountancy

2017
Mar. 31 Depreciation A/c Dr. 10,000

To Machine A/c 10,000
Depreciation charged on machine)

Mar. 31 Profit and Loss A/c Dr. 10,000
To Depreciation A/c 10,000

(Depreciation debited to profit and loss
account)

2018
Mar. 31 Depreciation A/c Dr. 20,000

To Machine A/c 20,000
(Depreciation charged on machine)

Mar. 31 Profit and Loss A/c Dr. 20,000
To Depreciation A/c 20,000

(Depreciation debited to profit and loss
account)

2019
Mar. 31 Depreciation A/c Dr. 20,000

To Machine A/c 20,000
(Depreciation charged on machine)

Mar. 31 Profit and Loss A/c Dr. 20,000
To Depreciation A/c 20,000

(Depreciation debited to profit and
loss account)

Books of M/s Mehra and Sons
Machine Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016 2017
Oct. 01 Bank 1,80,000 Mar. 31 Depreciation 10,000
Oct. 01 Bank 20,000 (for 6 months)

(Installation Balance c/d 1,90,000
expenses) Mar. 31

2,00,000 2,00,000
2017 2018
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 1,90,000 Mar. 31 Depreciation 20,000

1,70,000
Balance c/d

1,90,000 1,90,000

2018 2019
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 1,70,000 Mar. 31 Depreciation 20,000

Balance c/d 1,50,000

1,70,000 1,70,000

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 245

 Depreciation Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Mar. 31 Machine 10,000 Mar. 31 Profit & Loss 10,000

10,000 10,000
2018 2018

Mar. 31 Machine 20,000 Mar. 31 Profit & Loss 20,000
20,000 20,000

2019 2019
Dec. 31 Machine 20,000 Dec. 31 Profit & Loss 20,000

20,000 20,000

Working Notes

(1) Calculation of original cost of the machine
 `

Purchase cost  1,80,000
Add Installation cost     20,000

Original cost  2,00,000

(2) Depreciation expense = 10% of ̀  2,00,000 every year
= ` 20,000 p.a.

(3) During the year 2016, depreciation shall be charged only for 6 months, as
acquisition date is October 01, 2016, i.e., the asset is used only for 6 months
during the year 2016-17.

6
(4) Depreciation (2016-17) = ` 20,000 x =`10,000

12
Illustration 3

Based on data given in question number 2 record journal entries and prepare Machine
account, Depreciation account and Provision for Depreciation account for the first 3 years
if provision for depreciation account is maintained by the firm.

Solution

Books of  Mehra and Sons
Machine Account

Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount   Date Particulars J.F. Amounts

` `

2016 2017
Oct. 1 Bank 1,80,000 Mar. 31 Balance c/d 2,00,000
Oct. 1 Bank

(Installation 20,000
expenses)

2,00,000 2,00,000

Reprint 2025-26



246 Accountancy

2017 2018
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 2,00,000 Mar. 31 Balance c/d 2,00,000

2,00,000 2,00,000

Provision for Depreciation Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amounts
` `

2016 2016
Mar. 31 Balance c/d 10,000 Mar. 31 Depreciation 10,000

10,000 10,000

2017 2017
Mar. 31 Balance c/d 30,000 Apr. 01 Balance b/d 10,000

Mar. 31 Depreciation 20,000

30,000 30,000

2018 2018

Mar. 31 Balance c/d 50,000 Apr. 1 Balance b/d 30,000

2017
Mar. 31 Depreciation 20,000

50,000 50,000

Depreciation Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Mar. 31 Provision for 10,000 Mar.31 Profit & Loss 10,000

Deprection
10,000 10,000

2018 2018
Mar. 31 Provision for 20,000 Mar.31 Profit & Loss 20,000

Depreciation
20,000 20,000

2019 2019
Mar. 31 Provision for 20,000 Mar.31 Profit & Loss 20,000

Depreciation

20,000 20,000

Illustration 4

M/s. Dalmia Textile Mills purchased machinery on April 01, 2016 for ` 2,00,000  on credit
from M/s Ahuja and sons and spent ` 10,000 for its installation. Depreciation is

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 247

provided @10% p.a. on written down value basis. Prepare  Machinery Account for the first
three years. Books are closed on March 31, every year.

Solution

Books of Dalmia Textiles mills
Machinery Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2016 2017
Apr. 01 Bank 2,00,000 Mar. 31 Depreciation 21,0001

Bank 10,000 Balance c/d 1,89,000

2,10,000 2,10,000

2017 2018
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 1,89,000 Mar. 31 Depreciation 18,9002

Balance c/d 1,70,100

1,89,000 1,89,000

2018 2019
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 1,70,100 Mar. 31 Depreciation 17,0103

Balance c/d 1,53,090

1,70,100 1,70,100

2020 Balance b/d 1,53,090

Working Notes

1. Calculation of the amount of depreciation (`)
Original cost on 01.04.2016 2,10,000 (i.e. 2,00,000 + 10,000)
Less: Depreciation for 2016-17   (21,000)
WDV on 01.04.2017 1,89,000
Less: Depreciation for 2017-18   (18,900)
WDV on 01.04.2018 1,70,100
Less: Depreciation for 2018-19   (17,010)
WDV on 01.04.2017  1,53,090

Illustration 5

M/s Sahani Enterprises acquired a printing machine for ` 40,000 on July 01, 2014 and
spent ̀  5,000 on its transport and installation. Another machine for ̀  35,000 was purchased
on January 01, 2016. Depreciation is charged at the rate of 20% on written down value.
Prepare Printing Machine  account.

Reprint 2025-26



248 Accountancy

Solution

Books of Sahani Enterprises
Printing Machine Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2014 2015
Jul. 01 Bank 40,000 Mar. 31 Depreciation 6,7501

Bank 5,000 Balance c/d 38,250
45,000 45,000

2015 2016

Apr. 01 Balance b/d 38,250  Mar. 31 Depreciation 9,4002

Jan. 01 Bank 35,000 Balance c/d 63,850
73,250 73,250

2016 2017
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 63,850 Mar.31 Depreciation  12,7703

Balance c/d 51,080
63,850 63,850

2017
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 51,080

Working Notes

    (`)
Orignal cost machine purchased on July 01, 2014 45,000
(–) Depreciation till Mar.  31, 2015 (for 9 months @ 20%) (6,750)1

38,250
+ Cost of new machine purchased  on Jan. 01, 2016 35,000

73,250
(–) Depreciation for the year 2015-2016
(20% of 38,250 + 20% of ` 35,000 for 3 month)  (9,400)2

WDV on Mar. 31, 2016 63,850
(–) Depreciation for the year 2016 – 17 (20% of ` 63,850) (12,770)3

WDV on Mar. 31, 2017  51,080

Test Your Understanding - II

Basaria Confectioner bought a cold storage plant on July 01, 2014 for `1,00,000.
Compare the amount of depreciation charged for first three years using:

1. Rate of depreciation @ 10% on original cost basis;
2. Rate of depreciation @ on written down value basis;
3. Also, plot the computed amount of depreciation on a graph.

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 249

7.9 Disposal of Asset

Disposal of asset can take place either (a) at the end of its useful life or (b) during
its useful life (due to obsolescence or any other abnormal factor).

If it is sold at the end of its useful life, the amount realised on account of the sale
of asset as scrap should be credited to the asset account and the balance is
transferred to profit and loss account. In this regard the following journal entries
are recorded.
1. For sale of asset as scrap

Bank  A/c Dr.
To Asset A/c

2. For transfer of balance in asset account
(a) In case of profit

Asset A/c Dr.
To Profit and Loss A/c

(b) In case of loss
Profit and Loss A/c Dr.

To Asset A/c

In case, however, the provision for depreciation account has been in use
for recording the depreciation, then before passing the above entries transfer
the balance of the provision for depreciation account to the asset account by
recording the following journal entry:

Provision for depreciation A/c Dr.
To Asset A/c

For example, R.S. Limited purchased a vehicle for ` 4,00,000. After
4 years its salvage value is estimated at ` 40,000. To find out the amount of
depreciation to be charged every year based on straight line basis, and show
as to how the vehicle account would appear for four years assuming it is sold
for ̀  50,000 at the end when

(a) depreciation is charged to asset account; and
(b) provision for depreciation account is maintained.

Consider the following entries in the book of account of R.S. Limited

(a) When depreciation is charged to assets account

Books of R.S. Limited
Vehicle Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

I Bank 4,00,000 End of Depreciation 90,000
year the year Balance c/d 3,10,000

4,00,000 4,00,000

Reprint 2025-26



250 Accountancy

II Balance b/d 3,10,000 End of Depreciation 90,000
year the year Balance c/d 2,20.000

3,10,000 3,10,000

III Balance b/d 2,20,000 End of Depreciation 90,000
year the year Balance c/d 1,30,000

2,20,000 2,20,000
IV Balance b/d 1,30,000 Depreciaton 99,000
year Profit and 10,000 Bank 50,000

loss (Profit on
sale of vehicle)

1,40,000 1,40,000

(b) When Provision for depreciation account is maintained.

Books of R.S. Limited

Vehicle Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

I Bank 4,00,000 End of Balance c/d 4,00,000
year the year

4,00,000 4,00,000

II Balance b/d 4,00,000 End of Balance c/d 4,00,000
year the year

4,00,000 4,00,000

III Balance b/d 4,00,000 End of Balance c/d 4,00,000
year the year

4,00,000 4,00,000

IV Balance b/d 4,00,000 Provison for 3,60,000
year Profit and loss 10,000 depreciation

(Profit on Sale Bank 50,000
of Vehicle)

4,10,000 4,10,000

Provision for Depreciation
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

Ist Balance b/d 90,000 End of Depreciation 90,000
year year

90,000 90,000

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 251

II Balance b/d 1,80,000 End of Balance c/d 90,000
year the year Depreciation 90,000

1,80,000 1,80,000

III Balance b/d 2,70,000 End of Balance c/d 1,80,000
year the year Depreciation 90,000

2,70,000 2,70,000

IV Machinery 3,60,000 End of Balance c/d 2,70,000
year the year Provison for 90,000

Depreciation

3,60,000 3,60,000

7.9.1 Use of Asset Disposal Account

Asset disposal account is designed to provide a complete and clear view of all
the transactions involved in the sale of an asset under one account head. The
concerned variables are the original cost of the asset, depreciation accumulated
on the asset upto date, sale price of the asset, value of the parts of the asset
retained for use, if any and the resultant profit or loss on disposal. The balance
of this amount is transferred to the profit and loss account.

This method is generally used when a part of the asset is sold  and provision
for depreciation account exists.

Under this method, a new account titled Asset Disposal Account  is opened.
The original cost of the asset being sold is debited to the asset disposal account
and accumulated depreciation amount appearing in provision for depreciation
account relating to that asset till the date of disposal is credited to the asset
disposal account. The net amount realised from the sale of the asset is also
credited to this account. The balance of asset disposal account shows profit
or loss which is transferred to profit and loss account. The advantage of this
method is that it gives a full picture of all the transactions related to asset
disposal at one place. The journal entries required for the preparation of asset
disposal account is as follows:

1. Asset Disposal A/c Dr. (with the original cost of asset,
To Asset A/c being sold)

2. Provision for Depreciation A/c Dr. (with the accumulated balance in
To Asset Disposal A/c provision for depreciation account)

3. Bank A/c Dr. (with the net sales proceeds)
To Asset Disposal A/c

Asset Disposal Account may ultimately show a debit or credit balance. The
debit balance on the account indicate loss on disposal and would be dealt with
as follows:

Reprint 2025-26



252 Accountancy

Profit and Loss A/c Dr. (with the amount of loss on sale)
To Asset Disposal A/c

The credit balance of the account, profit on disposal and would be closed
by the following journal entry:

Asset Disposal A/c Dr. (with the amount of profit on sale)
To Profit and Loss A/c

For example, Karan Enterprises has the following balances in its books
as on March 31, 2017

Machinery (gross value): ` 6,00,000
Provision for depreciation: ` 2,50,000

A machine purchased for ̀  1,00,000 on November 01, 2013, having accumulated
depreciation amounting to ` 60,000 was sold on April 1, 2017 for ` 35,000. The
Asset Disposal account will be prepared in the following manner:

Books of Karan Enterprises
Machinery Disposal Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars L.F. Amount
` `

2017 2017
Apr. 01 Machinery 1,00,000 Apr. 01 Provision for 60,000

depreciation 
Apr. 01 Bank 35,000
2018
Mar. 31 Profit & Loss

(Loss on sale) 5,0001

1,00,000 1,00,000

Machinery Account
Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars Amount Date Particulars Amount

` `

2017 2017
April 01 Balance b/d 6,00,000 Apr. 01 Machine

Disposal 1,00,000
2018
Mar. 31 Balance c/d 5,00,000

6,00,000 6,00,000

Working Notes

(1) Computation of loss on sale of machinery `

Original cost of the asset being sold 1,00,000
Less: accumulated depreciation  (60,000)

40,000

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 253

(2) Sales value realised (35,000)
Loss on sale (i.e. ` 40,000 – ` 35,000) 5,0001

Illustration 6

On January 01, 2015, Khosla Transport Co. purchased five trucks for ` 20,000 each.
Depreciation has been provided at the rate of 10% p.a. using straight line method and
accumulated in provision for depreciation acount.  On January 01, 2016, one truck was
sold for ` 15,000. On July 01, 2017, another truck (purchased for ` 20,000 on Jan, 01,
2014) was sold for ` 18,000. A new truck costing ` 30,000 was purchased on October 01,
2016. You are required to prepare trucks account, Provision for depreciation account and
Truck disposal account for the years ended on December 2015, 2016 and 2017 assuming
that the firm closes its accounts in December every year.

Solution

Book of Khosla Transport Co.
Trucks Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2015 2015

Jan. 01 Bank 1,00,000 Dec. 31 Balance c/d 1,00,000

(Purchase of
truck) 1,00,000 1,00,000

2016 2016
Jan. 01 Balance b/d 1,00,000 Jan. 01 Truck disposal 20,000

Dec 31 Balance c/d 80,000

1,00,000 1,00,000

2017 2017
Jan. 01 Balance b/d 80,000 Jul. 01 Truck  disposal 20,000
Oct. 01 Bank 30,000 Dec. 31 Balance c/d 90,000

(Purchase of
new truck) 1,10,000 1,10,000

Truck Disposal Account

Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount

` `

2016 2016
Jan. 01 Machinery 20,000 Jan. 01 Provision for  2,000

Depreciation
Jan. 01 Bank  (Sale) 15,000
Jan. 01 Profit & Loss 3,0004

(Loss on sale)
20,000 20,000

Reprint 2025-26



254 Accountancy

2017 2017
Jul. 01 Machinery 20,000 Jul. 01 Provision for
Jul. 01 Profit & Loss 3,000 Depreciation

(Profit on sale)5 (` 2,000 +
2,000 +1,000) 5,000

Jul. 01 Bank  (Sale) 18,000

23,000 23,000

Provision for Depreciation Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount 
` `

2015 2015
Dec. 31 Balance c/d 10,000 Dec. 31 Depreciation 10,0001

10,000 10,000

2016 2016
Jan. 01 Truck Disposal 2,000 Jan. 01 Balance b/d 10,000
Dec. 31 Balance c/d 16,000 Dec. 31 Depreciation 8,0002

18,000 18,000

2017 2017
Jan. 01 Truck Disposal 5,000 Jan. 01 Balance b/d 16,000
Dec. 31 Balance c/d 18,750 Dec. 31 Depreciation

(` 6000+
1000+750) 7,7503

23,750 23,750

Working Notes

1. Calculation of amount of depreciation `

Year - 2015
10% on ` 1,00,000 for one year 10,0001

Year - 2016
10% on ` 80,000 for one year 80002

Year – 2017
10% on ` 60,000 for 1 year 6,000
10% on ` 20,000 for six months 1,000
10% on ` 30,000 for three months 7,50

7,7503

2. Loss on sale of first truck
Original cost on January 01, 2015 20,000
Less depreciation at 10% (2,000)
Book value on January 1, 2016  18,000
Sales price realised on 01.01.2016   (15,000)
Loss on sale of first machine 3,0004

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 255

3. Profit on sale of second truck `

Original Cost of second truck 20,000
(Less) depreciation charged
2015 2,000
2016 2,000
2017 (upto June, 2016) 1,000 5,000
Book value of second truck  15,000
Sale price of second truck  18,000
Profit on sale  3,000

Illustration 7

On April 01, 2015, following balances appeared in the books of M/s Kanishka Traders:
Furniture account ` 50,000, Provision for depreciation on furniture ` 22,000. On October
01, 2015 a part of furniture purchased for Rupees 20,000 in April 01, 2011 was sold for
` 5,000. On the same date a new furniture costing ̀  25,000 was purchased. The depreciation
was provided @ 10% p.a. on original cost of the asset and no depreciation was charged on
the asset in the year of sale. Prepare furniture account and provision for depreciation
account for the year ending March 31, 2016.

Solution
Books of Kanishka Traders

Furniture Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2015 2015
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 50,000 Oct.01 Bank 5,000
Oct. 01 Bank 25,000  2016 Provision for  8,000

March 31 depreciation 7,0001

Profit and Loss
(Loss on sale)
Balance c/d 55,000

75,000 75,000

Provision for Depreciation on Furniture Account

Dr. Cr.
Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particular J.F. Amount

` `

2015 2015
Oct. 01 Furniture 8,000 Apr. 01 Balance b/d 22,000

(Accumulated
depreciation on
furniture sold)

2016 2016
Mar. 31 Balance c/d 18,250 Mar. 31 Depreciation

(` 3,000 + 4,250
26,250 1,250) 26,250

Reprint 2025-26



256 Accountancy

Working Notes

1. Calculation of amount of depreciation
Calculation of loss on sale `

Original cost of furniture on 01.10.2015 20,000
Less: Depreciation for 4 year from 01.04.2011 to
31.04.2015 (no depreciation for the year of sale
@10% p.a. on original cost 8,000
Value as on 01.10.2015 12,000
Sale price 5,000

2. Loss on sale 7,0001

Depreciation for the year 2015-16
10% of ` 30,000 (` 50,000 – ` 20,000) for full year 3,000
10%  of ` 25,000 for 6 month 1,250

 4,250

Illustration 8

Solve illustration 07, if the firm maintains furniture disposal account prepared along with
furniture account and provision for depreciation on furniture account.

Books of Anil Traders
Furniture Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2015 2015
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 50,000 Apr. 01 Furniture 20,000

disposal
Oct.01 Bank 25,000 2016

Mar. 31 Balance c/d 55,000

75,000 75,000

Provision for Depreciation on Furniture Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particular J.F. Amount
` `

2015 2015
Oct.01 Furniture 8,000 Apr.01 Balance b/d 22,000

disposal
2016 2016
Mar. 31 Balance c/d 18,250 Mar.31 Depreciation 4,250

26,250 26,250

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 257

Furniture Disposal Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particular J.F. Amount
` `

2015 2015
Oct.01 Furniture 20,000 Oct.01 Provision for

Depreciation 8,000
Bank 5,000
Profit & Loss 
(Loss on sale) 7,000

20,000 20, 000

Illustration 9

On Jan 01, 2012 Jain & Sons purchased a second hand plant costing ̀  2,00,000 and spent
` 10,000 on its overhauling. It also  spent ` 5,000 on transportation and installation of
the plant. It was decided to provide for depreciation @ of 20% on written down value. The
plant was destroyed by fire on July 31, 2015 and an insurance claim of ` 50,000 was
admitted by the insurance company. Prepare plant account, accumulated depreciation
account and plant disposal account assuming that the company closes its books on
December 31, every year.

Solution

Books of Jain & Sons.

Plant Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2012 2012
Jan. 01 Bank 2,15,000 Dec. 31 Balance c/d 2,15,000

2,15,000 2,15,000

2013 2013
Jan. 01 Balance b/d 2,15,000 Dec. 31 Balance c/d 2,15,000

2,15,000 2,15,000

2014 2014
Jan. 01 Balance b/d 2,15,000 Dec. 31 Balance c/d 2,15,000

2,15,000 2,15,000

2015 2015
Jan. 01 Balance b/d 2,15,000 Jul. 31 Plant disposal 2,15,000

2,15,000 2,15,000

Reprint 2025-26



258 Accountancy

Accumulated Depreciation Account
Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2012 2012
Dec. 31 Balance c/d 43,000 Dec. 31 Depreciation 43,0001

43,000 43,000

2013 2013
Jan. 01 Balance c/d 77,400 Jan. 01 Balance b/d 43,000

Depreciation 34,4002

77,400 77,400

2014 2014
Dec. 31 Balance c/d 1,04,920 Jan. 01 Balance b/d 77,400

Dec. 31 Depreciation 27,5203

1,04,920 1,04,920

2015
2015 Jan. 01 Balance b/d 1,04,920
Jul. 31 Plant disposal 1,17,763 July 31 Depreciation 12,8434

1,17,763 1,17,763

Plant Disposal Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2015 2015
Jul. 31 Plant 2,15,000 Jul. 31 Accumulated 1,17,763

depreciation 
Insurance Co. 50,000
Profit & Loss 47,2375

(Loss on sale)
2,15,000 2,15,000

Working Notes:

1. Calculation of Depreciation Amount (`)
Original cost on 01.01.2012 2,15,000
(2,00,000 + 10,000+ 5,000)
Depreciation for the year 2012
(@20% of ` 2,15,000) (43,0001)

1,72,000

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 259

Depreciation for the year 2013
(@20% of ` 1,72,000)    (34,4002)

1,37,600

Depreciation for the year 2014
(@20% of ` 1,37,600)    27,5203

1,10,080

Depreciation till 31.07.15 (12,8434)
(@20% of ` 1,10,080) 97,237

Insurance claim (50,000)
Loss on disposal    47,2375

7.10 Effect of any Addition or Extension to the Existing Asset

An existing asset may require some additions or extensions for being suitable
for operations. Such additions/extensions may or may not become an integral
part of the asset. The amount incurred on such additions/extensions is
capitalised and written off as depreciation over the life of the asset. It is
important to mention here that the amount so incurred is in addition to usual
repair and maintenance expenses. AS-6 (Revised) mentions that

• Any addition or extension, which becomes an integral part of the existing
asset should be depreciated over the useful life of that asset;

• The depreciation on such addition or extension may also be provided
at the rate applied to the existing asset;

• Where an addition or extension retains a separate identity and is capable
of being used after the existing asset is disposed off, depreciation, should
be provided independently on the basis of its own useful life.

Illustration 10

M/s Digital Studio bought a  machine for ` 8,00,000 on April 01, 2013. Depreciation was
provided on straight-line basis at the rate of 20% on original cost. On April 01, 2015
a substantial modification was made in the machine to make it more efficient at a cost of
` 80,000. This amount is to be depreciated @ 20% on straight line basis. Routine
maintenance expenses during the year 2013-14 were ` 2,000.

Draw up the Machine account, Provision for depreciation account and charge to profit
and loss account in respect of the accounting year ended on March 31, 2016.

Reprint 2025-26



260 Accountancy

Solution

Books  of Digital Studio

Machine Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2015 2016
Apr 01 Balance b/d 800,000  Mar 31 Balance c/d 8,80,000

Bank 80,000

8,80,000 8,80,000

Provision for Depreciation Account

Dr. Cr.

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2014 2015
Mar 31 Balance c/d 4,96,000 April 01 Balance b/d 3,20,0001

2016
Mar 31 Depreciation 1,76,0002

4,96,000 4,96,000

Working Notes

1. Cost of modification is capitalised but routine repair expenses are treated as
revenue expenditure.

2. Calculation of balance of provision for depreciation account on 01.04.2014.
Original Cost on 01.04.2013 = ̀  8,00,000
Depreciation for the years 2013-14 and 2014-15 = `  3,20,0001

(@ 20% of ` 8,00,000 )
3. Depreciation for the year 2015-16 is calculated as under:

20% of 8,00,000 = ̀  1,60,000
20% of ` 80,000 = ̀  16,000
Total Depreciation for 2015-16 = ̀  1,76,0002

4. Amount to be charged to  profit and loss account
Depreciation   ` 1,76,000
Repair and maintenance        ` 2,000

Illustration 11

M/s Nishit printing press bought a printing machine for ` 6, 80,000 on April 01, 2015.
Depreciation was provided on straight line basis at the rate of 20% on original cost. On
April 01, 2017 a modification was made in the machine to increase its technical reliability
for `  70,000. On the same date, an important component of the machine was replaced for

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 261

` 20,000 due to excessive wear and tear. Routine maintenance expenses during the year
are ̀  5,000

Prepare machinery account, provision for depreciation account. Show the working notes

accordingly for the year ending March 31, 2018.

Machinery Account

Date Particular J.F. Account Date Particular J.F. Account
` `

2017 2018
Apr. 01 Balance b/d 6,80,000 Mar. 31 Balance c/d 7,70,000

Bank 70,000
Bank 20,000

7,70,000 7,70,000

Provision for Depreciation Account

Date Particulars J.F. Amount Date Particulars J.F. Amount
` `

2018 2017
Mar.31 Balance c/d 4,26,000 Apr.01 Balance b/d 2,72,000

2018
Mar.31 Depreciation 1,54,000

4,26,000 4,26,000

Working Notes         `

1. Cost of Machine for the year 2015 = 6,80,000

Depreciation Charged for the

 20 
Years 2015-16 and 2016-17 = 2  × 6,80,000

100 

= 2,72,000

2. Depreciation for the year 2017-18 = ` 6,80,000

20% of 6,80,000 = 1,36,000

20% of 90,000 = 18,000

(i.e., ` 70,000 + ` 20,000)

Depreciation for the year 2017-18 = 1,54,000

Reprint 2025-26



262 Accountancy

SECTION – II

Provisions and Reserve

7.11 Provisions

There are certain expenses/losses which are related to the current accounting
period but amount of which is not known with certainty because they are not
yet incurred. It is necessary to make provision for such items for ascertaining
true net profit. For example, a trader who sells on credit basis knows that
some of the debtors of the current period would default and would not pay or
would pay only partially. It is necessary to take into account such an expected
loss while calculating true and fair profit/loss according to the principle of
Prudence or Conservatism. Therefore, the trader creates a Provision for Doubtful
Debts to take care of expected loss at the time of realisation from debtors.  In
a similar way, Provision for repairs and renewals may also be created to provide
for expected repair and renewal of the fixed assets. Examples of provisions are :
• Provision for depreciation;
• Provision for bad and doubtful debts;
• Provision for taxation;
• Provision for discount on debtors; and
• Provision for repairs and renewals.

It must be noted that the amount of provision for expense and loss is a
charge against the revenue of the current period. Creation of provision ensures
proper matching of revenue and expenses and hence the calculation of true
profits. Provisions are created by debiting the profit and loss account. In the
balance sheet, the amount of provision may be shown either:
• By way of deduction from the concerned asset on the assets side. For example,

provision for doubtful debts is shown as deduction from the amount of
sundry debtors and provision for depreciation as a deduction from the
concerned fixed assets;

• On the liabilities side of the balance sheet alongwith current liabilities, for
example provision for taxes and provision for repairs and renewals.

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 263

7.11.1 Accounting Treatment for Provisions

The accounting treatment of all types of provisions is almost similar. Therefore,
the accounting treatment is explained here taking up the case of provision for
doubtful debts.

As already stated that when business transaction takes place on credit basis,
debtors account is created and its balance is shown on the asset-side of the
balance sheet. These debtors may be of three types:

• Good Debtors are those from where collection of debt is certain.
• Bad Debts are those debtors from where collection of money is not

possible and the amount of credit given is a certain loss.
• Doubtful Debts are those debtors who may pay but business firm is not

sure about the collection of full amount from them. In fact, as a matter
of business experience, some percentage of such debtors are not likely
to pay, hence treated as doubtful debts. To consider this possible loss
on account of non-payment by some debtors, it is a common practice
(and necessary also) to make a suitable provision for doubtful debts at
the time of ascertaining true profit or loss. The provision for doubtful
debts is usually calculated as a certain percentage of the total amount
due from sundry debtors after deducting/writing-off all known bad
debts. Provision for doubtful debts is also called ‘Provision for bad and
doubtful debts’. It is created by debiting the amount of required provision
to the profit and loss account and crediting it to provision for doubtful
debts account.
For creating a provision for doubtful debts  the following journal entry
is recorded:

Profit and Loss A/c Dr. (with the amount of provision)

To Provision for doubtful debts A/c

This is explained with the help of the following example
Observe an extract of the trial balance from the books of Trehan Traders

on March 31, 2014 is given below:

Date Account title L.F. Debit Credit
Amount Amount

` `

Sundry Debtors 68,000

Additional Information

• Bad debts proved bad but not recorded amounted to ` 8,000
• Provision is to be maintained at 10% of debtors.

Reprint 2025-26



264 Accountancy

In order to create the provision for doubtful debts, the following journal
entries will be recorded:

Journal

Date Particulars L.F.  Amount  Amount
` `

2014
Mar. 31 Bad debts A/c Dr. 8,000

To  Sundry debtors A/c 8,000
(Bad debts written off)

Mar. 31 Profit & Loss A/c Dr. 8,000
        To  Bad debts  A/c 8,000
(Bad debts debited to profit and
loss account)

Mar. 31 Profit and Loss A/c Dr. 6,0001

        To  Provision for doubtful debts a/c 6,0001

(For creating provision for doubtful debts)

Working Notes

Provision for doubtful debts @10% of sundry debtors i.e.
` 68,000 –  ` 8000 =  ̀  60,000

10
` 6000× =  ` 60001

100

7.12 Reserves

A part of the profit may be set aside and retained in the business to provide for
certain future needs like growth and expansion or to meet future contingencies
such as workmen compensation. Unlike provisions, reserves are the
appropriations of profit to strengthen the financial position of the business.
Reserve is not a charge against profit as it is not meant to cover any known
liability or expected loss in future. However, retention of profits in the form of
reserves reduces the amount of profits available for distribution among the
owners of the business. It is shown under the head Reserves and Surpluses on
the liabilities side of the balance sheet after capital.Examples of reserves are:
• General reserve;
• Workmen compensation fund;
• Investment fluctuation fund;
• Capital reserve;
• Dividend equalisation reserve;
• Reserve for redemption of debenture.

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 265

7.12.1 Difference between Reserve and Provision

The points of difference between reserve and provision are explained below:

1. Basic nature : A provision is a charge against profit whereas reserve is an
appropriation of profit. Hence, net profit cannot be calculated unless all
provisions have been debited to profit and loss account, while a reserve is
created after the calculation of net profit.

2. Purpose : Provision is made for a known liability or expense pertaining to
current accounting period, the amount of which is not certain. On the
other hand reserve is created for strengthening the financial position of
the business. Some reserves are also mandatory under the law.

3. Presentation in balance sheet: Provision is shown either (i) by way of deduction
from the item on the asset side for which it is created, or (ii) on the liabilities
side along with current liabilities. On the other hand, reserve is shown on
the liabilities side after capital.

4. Effect on taxable profits : Provision is deducted before calculating taxable
profits. Hence, it reduces taxable profits. A reserve is created from profit
after tax and therefore it has no effect on taxable profit.

5. Element of compulsion : Creation of provision is necessary to ascertain true
and fair profit or loss in compliance with ‘Prudence’ or ‘Conservatism’ concept.
It has to be made even if there are no profits. Whereas creation of a reserve is
generally at the discretion of the management. However, in certain cases law
has stipulated for the creation of specific reserves such as Debenture
Redemption Reserve. Reserve cannot be created unless there are profits.

6. Use for the payment of dividend : Provision cannot be used for distribution
as dividends while general reserve can be used for dividend distribution.

Basis of Difference Provision Reserve

1. Basic nature Charge against profit. Appropriation of profit.
2. Purpose It is created for a known It is made for strengthening

liability or expense pertaining the financial position of
to current accounting period, the business.Some reserves
the amount of which is not are also mandatory under law.
certain.

3. Effect on taxable It reduces taxable profits. It has no effect on taxable
profits. profit.

4. Presentations in It is shown either (i) by way It is shown on the liabilities.
Balance sheet of deduction from the item on side after capital amount.

the asset side for which it is
created, or (ii) In the liabilities
side along with current
liabilities.

Reprint 2025-26



266 Accountancy

5. Element of Creation of provision is Generally, creation of a Reserve
compulsion necessary to ascertain true is at the discretion of the mana-

and fair profit or loss in gement. Reserve cannot be
compliance ‘Prudence’ or created unless there are profits.
‘Conservatism’ concept. However, in certain cases law
It must be made even has stipulated for the creation
if there are no profits. of specific reserves such as

‘Debenture’ ‘Redemption ’
reserve.

6. Use for the payment It can not be used for It can be used for divided
of dividend dividend distribution. distribution.

Fig. 7.4 : Showing comparison between provisions and reserves

7.12.2 Types of Reserves

A reserve is created by retention of profit of the business can be for either a
general or a specific purpose.
1. General reserve : When the purpose for which reserve is created is not

specified, it  is called General Reserve. It is also termed as free reserve because
the management can freely utilise it for any purpose. General reserve
strengthens the financial position of the business.

2. Specific reserve : Specific reserve is the reserve, which is created for some
specific purpose and can be utilised only for that purpose. Examples of
specific reserves are given below :
(i) Dividend equalisation reserve: This reserve is created to stabilise or

maintain dividend rate. In the year of high profit, amount is transferred
to  Dividend Equalisation reserve. In the year of low profit, this reserve
amount is used to maintain the rate of dividend.

(ii) Workmen compensation fund: It is created to provide for claims of the
workers due to accident, etc.

(iii) Investment fluctuation fund: It is created to make for decline in the
value of investment due to market fluctuations.

(iv) Debenture redemption reserve: It is created to provide funds for
redemption of debentures.

Reserves are also classified as revenue and capital reserves according to the
nature of the profit out of which they are created.
(a) Revenue reserves : Revenue reserves are created from revenue profits which

arise out of the normal operating activities of the business and are otherwise
freely available for distribution as dividend. Examples of revenue
reserves are:
• General reserve;
• Workmen compensation fund;

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 267

• Investment fluctuation fund;
• Dividend equalisation reserve;
• Debenture redemption reserve;

(b) Capital reserves: Capital reserves are created out of capital profits which do
not arise from the normal operating activities. Such reserves are not  available
for distribution as dividend. These reserves can be used for writing off capital
losses or issue of bonus shares in case of a company. Examples of capital
profits, which are treated as capital reserves, whether transferred as such
or not, are :
• Premium on issue of shares or debenture.
• Profit on sale of fixed assets.
• Profit on redemption of debentures.
• Profit on revaluation of fixed asset & liabilities.
• Profits prior to incorporation.
• Profit on reissue of forfeited shares

7.12.3 Difference between Revenue and Capital Reserve

Revenue reserves and capital reserves are differentiated on the following grounds:

1. Source of creation : Revenue reserve is created out of revenue profits, which
arise out of the normal operating activities of the business and are otherwise
available for dividend distribution. On the other hand capital reserve is created
primarily out of capital profit, which do not arise from the normal operating
activities of the business and are not available for distribution as dividend.
But revenue profits may also be used for creation of capital reserves.

2. Purpose : Revenue reserve is created to strengthen the financial position, to
meet unforeseen contingencies or for some specific purposes. Whereas capital
reserve is created for compliance of legal requirements or accounting practices.

3. Usage : A specific revenue reserve can be utilised only for the earmarked
purpose while a general reserve can be utilised for any purpose including
distribution of dividend. Whereas a capital reserve can be utilised for specific
purposes as provided in the law in force, e.g., to write off capital losses or
issue of bonus shares.

Basis of Difference Revenue Reserve Capital Reserve

1.  Source of creation It is created out of revenue It is created primarily out of
profits which arise out of capital profit which do not arise
normal operating activities out of the normal operating
of the business and are activities of the business and not
otherwise available for available for dividend distribution.
dividend distribution. But revenue profits may also be

used for this purpose.

Reprint 2025-26



268 Accountancy

2.  Purpose It is created to strengthen It is created for compliance of
the financial position, to legal requirements or accounting
meet unforeseen practices.
contingencies or for some
specific purposes.

3.  Usage A specific revenue reserve It can be utilised for specific
can be utilised only for the purposes as provided in the law
earmarked purpose while a in force e.g., to write off capital
general reserve can be losses or issue of bonus shares.
utilised for any purpose
including distribution of
dividend.

Fig. 7.5 : Difference between capital reserve and revenue reserve

7.12.4 Importance of  Reserves

A business firm may consider it proper to set up some mechanism to protect
itself from the consequences of unknown expenses and losses, it may be required
to bear in future. It may also regard it as more appropriate in certain cases to
reduce the amount that can be drawn by the proprietors as profit in order to
conserve business resource to meet certain significant demands in future. An
example of such a demand is the much needed expansion in the scale of business
operations. This is presented as the justification for reserves in business activities
and in accounting. The amount so set aside may be meant for the purpose of :

• Meeting a future contingency
• Strengthening the general financial position of the business;
• Redeeming a long-term liability like debentures, etc.

7.13 Secret Reserve

Secret reserve is a reserve which does not appear in the balance sheet. It may
also help to reduce  the disclosed profits and also the tax liability. The secret
reserve can be merged with the profits during the lean periods to show improved
profits. Management may resort to creation of secret reserve by charging higher
depreciation than required. It is termed as ‘Secret Reserve’, as it is not known to
outside stakeholders. Secret reserve can also be created by way of :

• Undervaluation of inventories/stock
• Charging capital expenditure to profit and loss account
• Making excessive provision for doubtful debts
• Showing contingent liabilities as actual liabilities

Creation of secret reserves within reasonable limits is justifiable on grounds of
expediency, prudence and preventing competition from other firms.

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 269

Test Your Understanding - III

I State with reasons whether the following statements are True or False ;
(i) Making excessive provision for doubtful debits builds up the secret reserve in

the business.
(ii) Capital reserves are normally created out of free or distributable profits.
(iii) Dividend equalisation reserve is an example of general reserve.
(iv) General reserve can be used only for some specific purposes.
(v) ‘Provision’ is a charge against profit.

(vi) Reserves are created to meet future expenses or losses the amount of which is
not certain.

(vii) Creation of reserve reduces taxable profits of the business.

II Fill in the correct words :
(i) Depreciation is decline in the value of ...........
(ii) Installation, freight and transport expenses are a part of ...........
(iii) Provision is a ........... against profit.
(iv) Reserve created for maintaining a stable rate of dividend is termed as...........

Key Terms Introduced in the Chapter

• Depreciation, Depreciable cost, original cost, useful life;
• Depletion, Obsolescence, Amortisation;
• Salvage value/Residual value/Scrap value;
• Written down value/Reducing balance value/Diminishing value;
• Straight Line/Fixed Installment Method;
• Asset Disposal Account;
• Accumulated Depreciation/Provision for Depreciation Account, Reserve,

Provision, Capital Reserve, Revenue Reserve, General Reserve, Specific
Reserve, Secret Reserve, Provision for Doubtful Debts.

Summary With Reference to Learning Objectives

1. Meaning of depreciation : Depreciation is decline in the value of a tangible
fixed asset. In accounting, depreciation is the process of allocating depreciable
cost over useful life of a fixed asset.

2. Depreciation and similar terms : Depreciation term is used in the context of
tangible fixed assts. Depletion (in the context of extractive industries), and
amortisation (in the context of intangible assets) are other related terms.
Factors Affecting Depreciation :
• Wear and Tear due to use and/or passage of time
• Expiration of Legal Rights
• Obsolescence

3. Importance of depreciation :
• Depreciation must be charged to ascertain true and fair profit or loss.
• Depreciation is a non-cash operating expense.

4. Methods of charging depreciation : Depreciation amount can be calculated using :
• Straight line method, or
• Written down value method

Reprint 2025-26



270 Accountancy

5. Factors affecting the amount of depreciation :
Depreciation amount is determined by  —
• Original cost
• Salvage value, and
• Useful life of the asset

6. Provisions and Reserves : A provision is a charge against profit. It is created
for a known current liability the amount of which is uncertain. Reserve on
the other hand, is an appropriation of profit. It is created to strengthen the
financial position of the business.

7. Types of Reserves : Reserves may be —
• General reserve and specific reserve;
• Revenue reserve and capital reserve.

8. Secret Reserve : When total depreciation charged is higher than the total
depreciable cost, Secret reserve’ is created. Secret reserve is not explicitly
shown in the balance sheet.

Questions for Practice

Short Answers

1. What is ‘Depreciation’?
2. State briefly the need for providing depreciation.
3. What are the causes of depreciation?
4. Explain basic factors affecting the amount of depreciation.
5. Distinguish between straight line method and written down value method

of calculating depreciation.
6. “In case of a long term asset, repair and maintenance expenses are expected

to rise in later years than in earlier year”. Which method is suitable for
charging depreciation if the management does not want to increase burden
on profits and loss account on account of depreciation and repair.

7. What are the effects of depreciation on profit and loss account and balance
sheet?

8. Distinguish between ‘provision’ and ‘reserve’ .
9. Give four examples each of ‘provision’ and ‘reserves’.

10. Distinguish between ‘revenue reserve’ and ‘capital reserve’.
11. Give four examples each of ‘revenue reserve’ and ‘capital reserves’.
12. Distinguish between ‘general reserve’ and ‘specific reserve’.
13. Explain the concept of ‘secret reserve’.

Long Answers

1. Explain the concept of depreciation. What is the need for charging
depreciation and what are the causes of depreciation?

2. Discuss in detail the straight line method and written down value method
of depreciation. Distinguish between the two and also give situations where
they are useful.

3. Describe in detail two methods of recording  depreciation. Also give the
necessary journal entries.

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 271

4. Explain determinants of the amount of  depreciation.
5. Name and explain different types of reserves in details.
6. What are ‘provisions’. How are they created? Give accounting treatment in

case of provision for doubtful Debts.

Numerical Problems

1. On April 01, 2010, Bajrang Marbles purchased a Machine for ̀  1,80,000 and spent
` 10,000 on its carriage and ` 10,000 on its installation. It is estimated that its
working life is 10 years and after 10 years its scrap value will be ̀  20,000.
(a) Prepare Machine account and Depreciation account for the first four

years by providing depreciation on straight line method. Accounts are
closed on March 31st every year.

(b) Prepare Machine account, Depreciation account and Provision for
depreciation account (or accumulated depreciation account) for the first
four years by providing depreciation using straight line method accounts
are closed on March 31 every year.

(Ans:[a] Balance of Machine account  on April 1, 2014  `1,28,000.
[b] Balance of Provision for depreciation account  as on 1.04.2014

`72,000.)

2. On July 01, 2010, Ashok Ltd. Purchased a Machine for ̀  1,08,000 and spent
` 12,000 on its installation. At the time of purchase it was estimated that
the effective commercial life of the machine will be 12 years and after 12
years its salvage value will be ` 12,000.
Prepare machine account and depreciation Account in the books of Ashok
Ltd. For first three years, if depreciation is written off according to straight
line method. The account are closed on December 31st, every year.
(Ans: Balance of Machine account  as on 1.01.2013  `97,500).

3. Reliance Ltd. Purchased a second hand machine for ̀  56,000 on October 01,
2011 and spent ` 28,000 on its overhaul and installation before putting it to
operation. It is expected that the machine can be sold for ` 6,000 at the end
of its useful life of 15 years. Moreover an estimated cost of ̀  1,000 is expected
to be incurred to recover the salvage value of ̀  6,000. Prepare machine account
and Provision for depreciation account for the first three years charging
depreciation by fixed installment Method. Accounts are closed on March 31,
every year.
(Ans: Balance of provision for depreciation account  as on 31.03.15 ̀ 18,200).

4. Berlia Ltd. Purchased a second hand machine for ` 56,000 on July 01, 2015
and spent ̀  24,000 on its repair and installation and ̀  5,000 for its carriage.
On September 01, 2016, it purchased another machine for
` 2,50,000 and spent ` 10,000 on its installation.
(a) Depreciation is provided on machinery @10% p.a on original cost method

annually on December 31. Prepare machinery account and depreciation
account from the year 2015 to 2018.

(b) Prepare machinery account and depreciation account from the year 2011
to 2018, if depreciation is provided on machinery @10% p.a. on written
down value method annually on December 31.

(Ans: [a] Balance of Machine account  as on 1.01.19 `2,54,583.
 [b] Balance of Machine account  as on 1.01.19 `2,62,448).

Reprint 2025-26



272 Accountancy

5. Ganga Ltd. purchased a machinery on January 01, 2014 for ` 5,50,000 and
spent ̀  50,000 on its installation. On September 01, 2014 it purchased another
machine for ` 3,70,000. On May 01, 2015 it purchased another machine for
` 8,40,000 (including installation expenses).
Depreciation was provided on machinery @10% p.a. on original cost method
annually on December 31. Prepare:
(a) Machinery account and depreciation account for the years 2014, 2015,

2016 and 2017.
(b) If depreciation is accumulated in provision for Depreciation account

then prepare machine account  and provision for depreciation account
for the years 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2017.

(Ans: [a] Balance of machine account  as on 01.01.15 ` 12,22,666.
 [b] Balance of provision for dep. account as on 01.01.15 ` 5,87,334).

6. Azad Ltd. purchased furniture on October 01, 2014 for ̀  4,50,000. On March
01, 2015 it purchased another furniture for ` 3,00,000. On July 01, 2016 it
sold off the first furniture purchased in 2014 for ` 2,25,000. Depreciation is
provided at 15% p.a. on written down value method each year. Accounts are
closed each year on March 31. Prepare furniture account, and accumulated
depreciation account for the years ended on March 31, 2015, March 31, 2016
and March 31, 2017. Also give the above two accounts if furniture disposal
account is opened.
(Ans. Loss on sale of furniture `1,15,546,
Balance of provision for depreciation account  as on 31.03.15 ` 85,959.)

7. M/s Lokesh Fabrics purchased a Textile Machine on April 01, 2011 for
` 1,00,000. On July 01, 2012 another machine costing ` 2,50,000 was
purchased . The machine purchased on April 01, 2011 was sold for ̀  25,000
on October 01, 2015. The company charges depreciation @15% p.a. on straight
line method. Prepare machinery account and machinery disposal account for
the year ended March 31, 2016.
(Ans. Loss on sale of Machine account  `7,500.
Balance of machine account  as on 1.04.15 `1,09,375).

8. The following balances appear in the books of Crystal Ltd, on Jan 01, 2015
`

Machinery account on  15,00,000
Provision for depreciation account  5,50,000
On April 01, 2015 a machinery which was purchased on January 01, 2012 for
` 2,00,000 was sold for ̀  75,000. A new machine was purchased on July 01,
2015 for ` 6,00,000. Depreciation is provided on machinery at 20% p.a. on
Straight line method and books are closed on December 31 every year. Prepare
the machinery account and provision for depreciation account for the year
ending December  31, 2015.
(Ans. Profit on sale of Machine ` 5,000.
Balance of machine account as on 31.12.15 ` 19,00,000.

       Balance of Provision for depreciation account as on 31.12.15 ` 4,90,000).
9. M/s. Excel Computers has a debit balance of ` 50,000 (original cost

` 1,20,000) in computers account on April 01, 2010. On July 01, 2010 it
purchased another computer costing ` 2,50,000. One more computer was

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 273

purchased on January 01, 2011 for ̀  30,000. On April 01, 2014 the computer
which has purchased on July 01, 2010 became obselete and was sold for
` 20,000. A new version of the IBM computer was purchased on August 01,
2014 for ̀  80,000. Show Computers account in the books of Excel Computers
for the years ended on  March 31, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015. The
computer is depreciated @10 p.a. on straight line method basis.
(Ans: Loss on sale of computer ` 1,36,250.
Balance of computers account as on 31.03.15 ` 83,917).

10. Carriage Transport Company purchased 5 trucks at the cost of ̀  2,00,000 each
on April 01, 2011. The company writes off depreciation @ 20% p.a. on original
cost and closes its books on December 31, every year. On October 01, 2013,
one of the trucks is involved in an accident and is completely destroyed.
Insurance company has agreed to pay ̀  70,000 in full settlement of the claim.
On the same date the company purchased a second hand truck for ̀  1,00,000
and spent ̀  20,000 on its overhauling. Prepare truck account and provision for
depreciation account for the three years ended on December 31, 2013. Also
give truck account if truck disposal account is prepared.
(Ans: Loss of settlement of Truck Insurance `30,000.
Balance of Provision for depreciation A/c as on 31.12.13 `4,46,000.
Balance of Trucks account  as on 31.12.13 `9,20,000).

11. Saraswati Ltd. purchased a machinery costing ̀  10,00,000 on January 01, 2011.
A new machinery was purchased on 01 May, 2012 for ̀  15,00,000 and another
on July 01, 2014 for ` 12,00,000. A part of the machinery which originally cost
` 2,00,000 in 2011 was sold for ̀  75,000 on April 30, 2014. Show the machinery
account, provision for depreciation account and machinery disposal account
from 2011 to 2015 if depreciation is provided at 10% p.a. on original cost and
account are closed on December 31, every year.
(Ans: Loss on sale of Machine  `58,333.

       Balance of Provision for dep. A/c as on 31.12.15 ` 11,30,000.
Balance of Machine A/c as on 31.12.15 ` 35,00,000).

12. On  July 01, 2011 Ashwani purchased a machine for ` 2,00,000 on credit.
Installation expenses ` 25,000 are paid by cheque. The estimated life is 5
years and its scrap value after 5 years will be ` 20,000. Depreciation is to be
charged on straight line basis. Show the journal entry for the year 2011 and
prepare necessary ledger accounts for first three years.
(Ans: Balance of Machine A/c as on 31.12.13  `1,22,500).

13. On October 01, 2010, a Truck was purchased for ̀  8,00,000 by Laxmi Transport
Ltd. Depreciation was provided at 15% p.a. on the diminishing balance basis
on this truck. On December 31, 2013 this Truck was sold for ` 5,00,000.
Accounts are closed on 31st March every year. Prepare a Truck Account for
the four years.
(Ans: Profit on Sale of Truck `58,237).

14. Kapil Ltd. purchased a machinery on July 01, 2011 for ̀  3,50,000. It purchased
two additional machines, on April 01, 2012 costing ̀  1,50,000 and on October
01, 2012 costing ` 1,00,000. Depreciation is provided @10% p.a. on straight
line basis. On January 01, 2013, first machinery become useless due to
technical changes. This machinery was sold for ̀  1,00,000. prepare machinery
account for 4 years on the basis of calendar year.
(Ans: Loss on sale of machine ` 1,97,500.
Balance of Machine account as on 31.12.14 ` 1,86,250).

Reprint 2025-26



274 Accountancy

15. On January 01, 2011, Satkar Transport Ltd., purchased 3 buses for
` 10,00,000 each. On July 01, 2013, one bus was involved in an accident and
was completely destroyed and ` 7,00,000 were received from the Insurance
Company in full settlement. Depreciation is written off @15% p.a. on
diminishing balance method. Prepare bus account from 2011 to 2014. Books
are closed on December 31 every year.
(Ans: Profit on insurance claim ` 31,687.
Balance of Bus account as on 1.01.15 ` 10,44,013).

16. On October 01, 2011 Juneja Transport Company purchased 2 Trucks for
` 10,00,000 each. On July 01, 2013, One Truck was involved in an accident
and was completely destroyed and ̀  6,00,000 were received from the insurance
company in full settlement. On December 31, 2013 another truck was involved
in an accident and destroyed partially, which was not insured. It was sold off
for ` 1,50,000. On January 31, 2014 company purchased a fresh truck for
` 12,00,000. Depreciation is to be provided at 10% p.a. on the written down
value every year. The books are closed every year on March 31. Give the truck
account from 2011 to 2014.
(Ans: Loss on  Ist Truck Insurance claim ` 3,26,250.
Loss on  IInd   Truck ` 7,05,000.
Balance of Truck account as on 31.03.14 ` 11,80,000).

17. A Noida based Construction Company owns 5 cranes and the value of this
asset in its books on April 01, 2017 is ` 40,00,000. On October 01, 2017 it
sold one of its cranes whose value was ̀  5,00,000 on  April 01, 2017 at a 10%
profit. On the same day it purchased 2 cranes for ` 4,50,000 each.
Prepare cranes account. It closes the books on December 31 and provides for
depreciation on 10% written down value.
(Ans: Profit on sale of crane ` 47,500.
Balance of Cranes account as on 31.12.17 ` 41,15000).

18. Shri Krishan Manufacturing Company purchased 10 machines for ` 75,000
each on July 01, 2014. On October 01, 2016, one of the machines got destroyed
by fire and an insurance claim of ` 45,000 was admitted by the company. On
the same date another machine is purchased by the company for ̀  1,25,000.
The company writes off 15% p.a. depreciation on written down value  basis.
The company maintains the calendar year as its financial year. Prepare the
machinery account from 2014 to 2017.
(Ans: Loss on settle of insurance claim ` 7,735.
Balance of Machine account as on 31.12.17 ` 4,85,709).

19. On January 01, 2014, a Limited Company purchased machinery for
` 20,00,000. Depreciation is provided @15% p.a. on diminishing balance method.
On March 01, 2016, one fourth of machinery was damaged by fire and ̀  40,000
were received from the insurance company in full settlement. On September 01,
2016 another machinery was purchased by the company for ̀ 15,00,000.
Write up the machinery account from 2010 to 2013. Books are closed on
December 31, every year.
(Ans: Loss on settle of insurance claim ` 3,12,219.
Balance of Machine account as on 31.12.17 ` 19,94,260).

Reprint 2025-26



Depreciation, Provisions and Reserves 275

20. A Plant was purchased on 1st July, 2015 at a cost of ` 3,00,000 and
` 50,000 were spent on its installation. The depreciation is written off at 15%
p.a. on the straight line method. The plant was sold for ̀  1,50,000 on  October
01, 2017 and on the same date a new Plant was installed at the cost of
` 4,00,000 including purchasing value. The accounts are closed on December
31 every year.
Show the machinery account and provision for depreciation account for 3 years.
(Ans: Loss on sale of Plant ` 81,875.
Balance of Machine account as on 31.12.17 ` 4,00,000.
Balance of Provision for Depreciation account as on 31.12.17 ` 15,000.).

21. An extract of Trial balance from the books of Tahiliani and Sons Enterprises
on March 31, 2017 is given below:

Name of the Account Debit Amount Credit Amount
` `

Sundry debtors. 50,000
Bad debts 6,000
Provision for doubtful debts 4,000

Additional Information:
• Bad Debts proved bad but not recorded amounted to ` 2,000.
• Provision is to be maintained at 8% of Debtors.
Give necessary accounting entries for writing off the bad debts and creating
the provision for doubtful debts account. Also show the necessary accounts.
(Ans: New provision for Bad debts ` 3,840, profit and loss account [Dr.]
` 7,840.)

22. The following information are extract from the Trial Balance of M/s Nisha
traders on 31 March 2017.
Sundry Debtors 80,500
Bad debts 1,000
Provision for bad debts 5,000
Additional Information
Bad Debts ` 500
Provision is to be maintained at 2% of Debtors.
Prepare bad debts accound, Provision for bad debts account and profit and
loss account.
(Ans: New provision ` 1,600 Profit and loss account [Cr.] ` 1,900).

Checklist to Test Your Understanding

Test Your Understanding - I

1. T, 2. F, 3. F, 4. T, 5. T, 6. F, 7. T, 8. F, 9. F, 10. F,

Test Your Understanding - II

Depreciation for 1 year (2014-15) = ` 7500 (Charged for 9 months)

Reprint 2025-26



276 Accountancy

Depreciation for 2 year (2015-16) = ̀  1,00,000 – ` 7500 = ̀  92,500

10
  = ` 92500× = ̀  9250

100

Depreciation for 3 year (2016-17) = ` 92500 – 9250 = ̀  83050

10
  = ` 83050× = ` 8305

100

Test Your Understanding - III

1. (i) True (ii) False (iii) False (iv) False
(v) True (vi) False (vii) False

2. (i) Assets (ii) Acquisition cost
(iii) Charge (iv) Dividend equilisation fund.

Reprint 2025-26