Part I

Foundations of Business

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   1 13-01-2021   09:40:02



Chapter 1

##1##
Business, Trade and Commerce

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, the learner:

i.	 Appreciates  the contribution of business activities in the growth and 
development of an economy;

ii.	 Discusses the concept and objectives of business;

iii.	 Categorises business activities into occupation, profession, and 
employment

iv.	 Classifies industry in different types;

v.	 Explains Risk and Profit as a reward of Risk; and

vi.	 Enumerates factors for starting a business.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   2 13-01-2021   09:40:02



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 3

Imran, Manpreet, Joseph and Priyanka have been classmates in Class X. After 
their exams are over, they happen to meet at a common friend Ruchita’s house. 
Just when they were sharing their experiences of examination days, Ruchika’s 
father Raghuraj Chaudhary intervenes and asks about their well-being. He also 
enquires about their career plans. But none of them had a definite reply. Raghuraj 
who himself is a successful businessman tells them about business as a career 
opportunity. Joseph gets excited by the idea and says “yes, business is really good 
for making lots of money”. Raghuraj tells them that ‘there is a lot more to business 
than merely money’. Business activities lead to growth and development of any 
country, he added. He further tells them that the roots of business activities can be 
traced back to ancient times and how trading helps in the prosperity of the Indian 
subcontinent. Priyanka said that they have read about the Silk Route in their history 
textbooks. Raghuraj then gets busy with his day-to-day tasks. However, the four 
classmates begin raising questions. The conversation of the four classmates focused 
on how trading activities were conducted during ancient times. How far can the 
roots of trading activities be traced? Why was the Indian subcontinent referred to 
as ‘Swaran Bharat and Swaran Dweep’ by the then travellers to India? What made 
Columbus and Vasco da Gama undertake journeys to locate India? They decided 
to meet the commerce teacher of their school to find out answers to many such 
questions about the development, nature and purpose of business.

1.1 Introduction distribution and exchange so that the 
All human beings, wherever they may needs and wants of customers are 
be, require different types of goods satisfied. Business is a major economic 
and services to satisfy their needs. activity which is concerned with the 
If we look around, we observe people production and sale of goods and 
require different types of products services required by people. Business 
and services to satisfy their needs. is central to our lives. Although our 
How do they buy them? They go to the lives are also influenced by many other 
market, either physical or electronic institutions in modern society, such as 
over internet, where they find variety of schools, colleges, hospitals, political 
shops and sellers offering the required parties and religious bodies; business 
commodities and choose the best has a major influence on our daily 
which they require. lives. It, therefore, becomes important 

Have you ever wondered how do that we understand the concept, 
these products and services are made nature and purpose of business.
available in the market. The necessity Business starts with production 
of supplying goods and services is and end with consumption. Making the 
done by different set of people engaged finished products reach the consumer 
in various economic activities such involves a series of steps. The work of 
as production, manufacturing and production of goods is covered under 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   3 13-01-2021   09:40:02



4 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Industry and the remaining activities The goods were traded both 
belong to commerce. In a nutshell we internally and to the foreign lands, 
call them ‘Business’ which is a wider which generated surplus income. As 
term and includes Industry, trade and a result, the people were engaged 
commerce. in various economic activities such 

as agriculture and domestication 
TRANSFER OF GOODS AND SERVICES of animals, weaving cotton, dyeing 

(Monetary versus Barter) fabrics, making clay pots, utensils 
and handicrafts, sculpting, cottage 

Exchange Production industries, masonry, etc. Family 
or Purchase based workshops [karkhanas], for 

manufacturing, were important 
components of economic life. This 

ECONOMIC money was channelised into further 
ACTIVITIES investment, and led to the dominant 

growth of indigenous banking system 
to finance the trading activities.

Distribution Consumption An example of it is the use of 
age old Hundi and Chitties (used in 
southern region). These were used 

DIVISION OF INCOME SATISFACTION as documents to facilitate transfer of 
AMONG FACTORS OF OF NEEDS money from one hand to another for 

PRODUCTION AND WANTS trading activities. As an instrument 
of exchange it involved a contract 

1.1.1	 Role of Business in the which — (i) warrant the payment of 
Development of Economy money, the promise or order which is 

Business which includes trade and unconditional (ii) capable of change 
commerce have played a vital role through transfer by valid negotiation.
since times memorial. You have Why there was a need to create an 
studied in your earlier classes that our intangible form of exchange of money. 
country, India, had a golden past and It was so because travelling long 
the trading activities had a significant distances either by land or sea involved 
contribution to its prosperity and risk of theft and robbery. Hundi which 
gains. The archaeological evidences literally means ‘to collect’ was written 
have shown that trading activities were in vernacular language and facilitated 
the mainstay of the economy in ancient the safe transfer of money between 
times which were carried out by both parties and helped promotion of 
water and land routes. Silk route and trading activities. 
maritime trade were quite prominent The emergence of credit transactions 
in transporting goods and commodities and availability of loans and advances 
for trading purposes. enhanced commercial operations. The 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   4 13-01-2021   09:40:02



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 5

Hundi as practised by Indian Merchant Communities

Dhani-jog Darshani Payable to any person—no liability over who 
received payment.

Sah-jog Darshani Payable to a specif ic person, someone 
‘respectable’. Liability over who received payment.

Firman-jog Darshani Hundi made payable to order.

Dekhan-har Darshani Payable to the presenter or bearer.

Dhani-jog Muddati Payable to any person—no liability over who 
received payment, but payment over a fixed term.

Firman-jog Muddati Hundi made payable to order following a fixed 
term.

Jokhmi Muddati Drawn against dispatched goods. If goods lost in 
transit, the drawer or holder bears the coasts, 
and the Drawee carries no liability.

Indian subcontinent enjoyed the fruits cotton,  parrot,  live animals and 
of favourable balance of trade, where animal products, etc. Major imports 
exports exceeded imports with large were Horses, animal products, Chinese 
margins and the indigenous banking silks, linen, wine, gold, silver, copper, 
system benefitted the manufacturers, etc. There were all kinds of towns—
traders and merchants with additional port towns, manufacturing towns, 
capital funds for expansion and mercantile towns, the sacred centres, 
development.  Commercial  and and pilgrimage towns. Their existence 
Industrial banks later evolved to is an index of prosperity of merchant 
finance trade and commerce and communities and professional classes.
agricultural banks to provide both Business activities led to the 
short and long-term loans to finance growth of different aids to trade such 
agriculturists. as transportation, banking, finance 

Many leading trade centres were and communication which grew the 
developed in ancient times for the import prospects of trading activities. With the 
and export of goods, some of them active contribution of Indian traders 
being Patliputra, Peshawar, Taxila, and other merchant communities, the 
Indraprastha, Mithila, Maduram, Indian sub-continent was popularly 
Surat, Ujjain, Kanchi, Mithila. Major called ‘Swaran Bhoomi and Swaran 
exports items were Spices, wheat, Deep’ in the writings of many travellers, 
sugar, indigo, opium, sesame oil, such as Megasthenes, Faxian (FaHien), 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   5 13-01-2021   09:40:02



6 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Xuanzang (Huen Tsang), Al Beruni Between the 1st and the 7th 
(11th century), IbnBatuta (11th centuries CE, India is estimated to 
century), Frenchman Francois (17th have the largest economy of the ancient 

and medieval world, controlling about 
century) and others. They repeatedly one-third and one-fourth of the world’s 
refer to the prosperity of the country. wealth (timeline). 

1 AD: 32% (the largest  1000 AD: 32% (the largest 1500 AD: 24.36% (second in 
regional contribution) regional contribution) regional share)

1850 AD: 5–10% 1700–1750 AD: 25% of world’s 1700 AD: 1600 AD: 
industrial output 24.46% 24.41%

1870 AD: 9.2% (world income 1900 AD: 2% (global 1913 AD: 5.4% 
British Empire) industrial output) (British Empire)

1991 AD: Economic 1973 AD:  1952 AD: 3.8% of the 
liberalisation 3.1% world income

Source: Angus Maddison (2001 and 2003), The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective, OECD, 
Paris; Angus Maddison, The World Economy, Historical Statistics

Major Trade Centres in ancient times
	 1.	 Pataliputra: Known as Patna today. It was not only a commercial town, but 

also a major centre for export of stones.
	 2.	 Peshawar: It was an important exporting centre for wool and for the import 

of horses. It had a huge share in commercial transactions between India, 
China and Rome in the first century A.D.

	 3.	 Taxila: It served as a major centre on the important land route between 
India and Central Asia. It was also a city of financial and commercial banks. 
The city occupied an important place as a Buddhist centre of learning. The 
famous Taxila University flourished here.

	 4.	 Indraprastha: It was the commercial junction on the royal road where most 
routes leading to the east, west, south and north converged.

	 5.	 Mathura: It was an emporium of trade and people here subsisted on 
commerce. Many routes from South India touched Mathura and Broach.

	 6.	 Varanasi: It was well placed as it lay both on the Gangetic route and on the 
highway that linked North with the East. It grew as a major centre of textile 
industry and became famous for beautiful gold silk cloth and sandalwood 
workmanship. It had links with Taxila and Bharuch.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   6 13-01-2021   09:40:02



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 7

	 7.	 Mithila: The traders of Mithila crossed the seas by boats, through the Bay of 
Bengal to the South China Sea, and traded at ports on the islands of Java, 
Sumatra and Borneo. Mithila established trading colonies in South China, 
especially in Yunnan.

	 8.	 Ujjain: Agate, carnelian, muslin and mallow cloth were exported from Ujjain 
to different centres. It also had trade relations through the land route with 
Taxila and Peshawar.

	 9.	 Surat: It was the emporium of western trade during the Mughal period. 
Textiles of Surat were famous for their gold borders (zari). It is noteworthy 
that Surat hundi was honoured in far off markets of Egypt and Iran.

	10.	 Kanchi: Today known as Kanchipuram, it was here that the Chinese used 
to come in foreign ships to purchase pearls, glass and rare stones and in 
return they sold gold and silk.

	11.	 Madura: It was the capital of the Pandayas who controlled the pearl fisheries 
of the Gulf of Mannar. It attracted foreign merchants, particularly Romans, 
for carrying out overseas trade.

	12.	 Broach: It was the greatest seat of commerce in Western India. It was situated 
on the banks of river Narmada and was linked with all important marts by 
roadways.

	13.	 Kaveripatta: Also known as Kaveripatnam, it was scientific in its construction 
as a city and provided loading, unloading and strong facilities of merchandise. 
Foreign traders had their headquarters in this city. It was a convenient place 
for trade with Malaysia, Indonesia, China and the Far East. It was the centre 
of trade for perfumes, cosmetics,  scents, silk, wool, cotton, corals, pearls, 
gold and precious stones; and also for ship building.

	14.	 Tamralipti: It was one of the greatest ports connected both by sea and land 
with the West and the Far East. It was linked by road to Banaras and Taxila.

With the emergence of the British development with the objective of 
Empire roots in India the east india achieving a self-reliant socialistic 
company used revenues generated pattern of society. The measures taken 
by the provinces under its rule for towards the same was characterised 
purchasing Indian raw materials, by centralised economic planning and 
spices and goods. This changed the emphasis on public investment in 
condition of the Indian economy from basic and key industries. 
being an exporter of processed goods Due importance was given to 
to the exporter of raw materials and the  es tab l ishment  o f  modern 
buyer of manufactured goods. industries, modern technological 

After independence the process and scientific institutes, space and 
of rebuilding the economy started nuclear programmes. But lack of 
and India embarked on planned capital formation, rise in population, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   7 06/09/2024   14:39:35



8 BUSINESS  STUDIES

weak financial system, inadequate The Indian economy is emerging 
infrastructure and high huge as one of the faster growing economies 
expenditure on defence, high fiscal in the world today and a preferred FDI 
deficits and continuous deficits in destination. Rising incomes, savings, 
balance of payments were evident and investment opportunities, increased 
international community’s confidence domestic consumption and younger 
in India’s ability to manage its economy population ensures growth for decades 
was severely affected. The balance of to come. The high growth sectors have 
payment situation was precarious. been identified, which are likely to 
As a result, India agreed to economic grow at a rapid pace and the recent 
liberalisation in 1991. initiatives of the Government of India 

A three pronged approach of such as ‘Make in India’, Skill India’, 
stabilisation, restructuring and ‘Digital India’ is expected to help the 
globalisation of Indian economy was economy in terms of exports and 
adopted to address the changes in imports with steady and sustainable 
economic and business scenario and trade balance.
its integration with global economy. 
Government of India announced major Activity
economic reform packages aimed at Did you notice how business plays 
restoring the growth momentum in the a major role in the growth and 
economy. Major policy changes were development of any nation and why 
effected since 1991 w.r.t., fiscal, business is regarded as a backbone of 
monetary, trade, industry, agriculture, the Economy? Discuss in class.
infrastructure, foreign exchange and 
foreign investment since 1991. 1.2 Concept of Business

The term business is derived from 
the word ‘busy’. Thus, business 
means being busy. However, in a 
specific sense, business refers to an 
occupation in which people regularly 
engage in activities related to purchase, 
production and/or sale of goods and 
services with a view to earning profits. 

If you look around you will observe 
that people undertake various activities 
to satisfy their needs. These activities 
may be broadly classified into two 
groups — economic and non-economic 
activities. Economic activities are 
those by which we can earn our 
livelihood, whereas, non-economic 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   8 13-01-2021   09:40:07



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 9

activities are performed out of love, namely business, profession and 
sympathy, sentiment, patriotism, employment. Business may be defined 
etc. For example, a worker working as an economic activity involving the 
in a factory, a doctor operating in his production and sale of goods and 
clinic, a manager working in an office 
and a teacher teaching in a school services undertaken with a motive of 
are doing so to earn their livelihoods earning profit by satisfying human 
and are, therefore, engaged in an needs in society.
economic activity. On the other hand, 
a housewife cooking food for her family, Activity
or a boy helping an old man cross the 
road are performing non-economic Barter system is an old method of 
activities since they are doing so out exchange of goods and/or services for 

another set of goods and/or services. 
of love or sympathy. Is barter system an economic activity? 

Economic activit ies may be Give reasons for your answer.
further divided into three categories, 

Try it yourself:
State whether each of the following is an economic activity or not. Give 
reasons for your answer. 
1.	 Health worker treating her patient.
2.	 Store owner sympathies with a needy elderly person and gives 

medicines for his ailment.
3.	 Football coach giving training in football to his daughter for 

forthcoming match.
4.	 Services of a housewife doing household chores at home.
5.	 Donation made by a business house towards community kitchen 

run by an NGO for providing food, medicines to underprivileged 
people and migrant workers of the society during Covid 19 
pandemic.

1.2.1 Characteristics of Business 	 (i)	 An economic activity: Business 
Activities is considered to be an economic 

In order to appreciate how business activity because it is undertaken 
activity is different from other activities with the objective of earning 
in society, the nature of business or money or livelihood and not 
its fundamental character must be out of love, affection, sympathy 
explained in terms of its distinguishing or any other emotion. It may 
characteristics, which are as follows: be mentioned here that this 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   9 13-01-2021   09:40:07



10 BUSINESS  STUDIES

activity can be undertaken either characteristic of business is that 
on small and individual level, there should be sale or exchange 
e.g. (purchase and sale by a of goods or services between the 
shopkeeper) or on large scale seller and the buyer.
in a more formal and organised 	(iv)	 Dealings in goods and services 
level (purchase and sale by a on a regular basis: Business 
cooperative society or company). involves dealings in goods or 

	(ii)	 Production or procurement services on a regular basis. One 
of goods and services: Before single transaction of sale or 
goods are offered to people for purchase, therefore, does not 
consumption, these must be constitute business. Thus, for 
either produced or procured example, if a person sells his/
by business enterprises. Thus, her domestic radio set even at a 
every business enterprise either profit, it will not be considered a 
manufactures the goods it deals in business activity. But if he/she 
or acquires them from producers, sells radio sets regularly either 
to be further sold to consumers through a shop or from his/her 
or users. Goods may consist residence, it will be regarded as 
of consumable items of daily a business activity.
use, such as sugar, ghee, pen, 	 (v)	 Profit earning: One of the main 
notebook, etc., or capital goods, purpose of business is to earn 
like machinery, furniture, etc. income by way of profit. No 
Services may include facilities business can survive for long 
offered to consumers, business without profit. That is why, 
firms and organisations in the businessmen make all possible 
form of transportation, banking, efforts to maximise profits, by 
electricity, etc. increasing the volume of sales or 

	(iii)	 Sale or exchange of goods and reducing costs.
services: Directly or indirectly, 	(vi)	 Uncertainty of return: Uncertainty 
business involves transfer or of return refers to the lack of 
exchange of goods and services knowledge relating to the amount 
for value. If goods are produced of money that the business is 
not for the purpose of sale but going to earn in a given period. 
for personal consumption, it Every business invests money 
cannot be called a business (capital) to run its activities with 
activity. Cooking food at home the objective of earning profit. 
for the family is not business, But it is not certain as to what 
but cooking food and selling amount of profit will be earned. 
it to others in a restaurant is Also, there is always a possibility 
business. Thus, one essential of losses being incurred, despite 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   10 13-01-2021   09:40:07



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 11

the best efforts put into the accidents, natural calamities, etc. 
business. No business can altogether do 

	(vii)	 Element of risk: Risk is the away with risks.
uncertainty associated with an 
exposure to loss. It is caused by 1.2.3 Comparison of Business, 
some unfavourable or undesirable Profession and Employment
event. Risks are related with As has been mentioned earlier, 
factors, like changes in consumer economic activities may be divided into 
taste and fashion, changes in three major categories viz., Business, 
method of production, strike or Profession and Employment. The 
lockout at workplace, increased difference between these three terms 
competition in market, fire, theft, is given in figure 1.2.

Basic Business Profession Employment

1. Mode of  Entrepreneur’s Membership of a Appointment 
    establishment decision and other professional body letter and service 

legal formalities, if and certificate of agreement
necessary practice

2. Nature of work Provision of Rendering of Performing work as 
goods and personalised, per service contract 

services to the expert services or rules of service
public

3. Qualification No minimum Qualifications, Qualification 
qualification is expertise and and training as 

necessary training in specific prescribed by the 
field as prescribed employer
by the professional 

body is a must

4. Reward or  Profit earned Professional fee Salary or wages
    return

5. Capital  Capital Limited capital No capital required
     investment investment needed for 

required as per establishment
size and nature 

of business

6. Risk Profits are uncertain Fee is generally Fixed and regular 
and irregular; risk is regular and pay; no or little risk

present certain; some risk

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   11 13-01-2021   09:40:07



12 BUSINESS  STUDIES

7. Transfer of  Transfer Not possible Not possible
     interest possible with 

some formalities

8. Code of  No code of Professional code Norms of behaviour 
    conduct conduct is of conduct is to be laid down by the 

prescribed followed employer are to  
be followed

9. Example Shop, factory Legal, medical Jobs in banks, 
profession, insurance 
chartered companies, 

accountancy government 
departments

1.3 Classification of Business breeding and raising of animals. 
Activities The term industry is also used to 

mean groups of firms producing 
Various business activities may be similar or related goods. For example, 
classified into two broad categories cotton textile industry refers to all 
—industry and commerce. Industry manufacturing units producing textile 
is concerned with the production or goods from cotton. Similarly, electronic 
processing of goods and materials. industry would include all firms 
Commerce includes all those activities, producing electronic goods, and so on. 
which are necessary for facilitating the Further, in common parlance, certain 
exchange of goods and services. On the services, like banking and insurance, 
basis of these two categories, we may are also referred to as industry, say 
classify business firms into industrial banking industry, insurance industry, 
and commercial enterprises. Let us etc. Industries may be divided into 
examine in detail the activities relating three broad categories namely primary, 
to business. secondary and tertiary.

	 (i)	 Primary industries: These 
1.3.1 Industry include all those activities which 
Industry refers to economic activities, are concerned with the extraction 
which are connected with conversion of and production of natural 
resources into useful goods. Generally, resources and reproduction and 
the term industry is used for activities development of living organisms, 
in which mechanical appliances and plants, etc. These are divided as 
technical skills are involved. These follows.
include activities relating to producing 	(a)	 Extractive industries: 
or processing of goods, as well as, These industries extract 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   12 13-01-2021   09:40:07



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 13

or draw products from 	(a)	 Manufacturing industries: 
natural sources. Extractive These industries are engaged 
industries supply some basic in producing goods through 
raw materials that are mostly processing of raw materials 
products of geographical and, thus, creating form 
or natural environment. utilities. They bring out 
Products of these industries diverse finished products, 
are usually transformed into that we consume, or use 
many other useful goods by through the conversion 
manufacturing industries. of raw materials or partly 
I m p o r t a n t  e x t r a c t i v e finished materials in their 
industries include farming, manufacturing operations. 
mining, lumbering, hunting Manufacturing industries 
and fishing operations. may be further divided into 

	(b)	 Genetic industries: These four categories on the basis 
industries are engaged of method of operation for 
in breeding plants and production.
animals for their use in •	 Analytical industry which 
further reproduction. Seeds analyses and separates 
and nursery companies are different elements from 
typical examples of genetic the same materials, as 
industries. In additional, in the case of oil refinery.
activities of cattle breeding •	 Synthetical industry 
farms, poultry farms, and which combines various 
fish hatchery come under ingredients into a new 
genetic industries. product, as in the case of 

	(ii)	 Secondary industries: These are cement.
concerned with using materials, •	 Process ing industry 
which have  a l ready  been which involves successive 
extracted at the primary sector. stages for manufacturing 
These industries process such finished products, as in 
materials to produce goods for the case of sugar and 
final consumption or for further paper.
processing by other industrial •	 Assembling industry 
units. For example, mining of iron which assembles different 
ore is a primary industry, but component parts to make 
manufacturing of steel by way of a new product, as in the 
further processing of raw irons is case of television, car, 
a secondary industry. Secondary computer, etc.
industries may be further divided 	(b)	 Construction industries: 
as follows: These industries are involved 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   13 13-01-2021   09:40:07



14 BUSINESS  STUDIES

in the construct ion of 1.3.2 Commerce
buildings, dams, bridges, 
roads as well as tunnels Commerce includes two types of 
and canals. Engineering activities, viz., (i) trade and (ii) 
and architectural skills auxiliaries to trade. Buying and 
are an important part in selling of goods is termed as trade. 
construction industries. But there are a lot of activities that 

are required to facilitate the purchase 
	(iii)	 Tertiary industries:  These are and sale of goods. These are called 

concerned with providing support services or auxiliaries to trade and 
services to primary and secondary include transport, banking, insurance, 
industries as well as activities communication, advertisement, 
relating to trade. These industries packag ing  and  warehous ing . 
provide service facilities. As Commerce, therefore, includes both, 
business activities, these may buying and selling of goods, i.e., 
be considered part of commerce trade, as well as, auxiliaries, such as 
because as auxiliaries to trade transport, banking, etc.
these activities assist trade. Commerce provides the necessary 
Included in this category are l i nk  be tween  p roduce rs  and 
transport, banking, insurance, consumers. It embraces all those 
warehousing, communication, activities, which are necessary for 
packaging and advertising. maintaining a free flow of goods and 

Chart Showing Business Activities

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   14 13-01-2021   09:40:07



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 15

services. Thus, all activities involving a large scale and it is difficult for 
the removal of hindrances in the producers to themselves reach out 
process of exchange are included in to individual buyers for selling their 
commerce. The hindrances may be in products. Businessmen are engaged 
respect of persons, place, time, risk, in trading activities to make the goods 
finance, etc. The hindrance of persons available to consumers in different 
is removed by trade, thereby, making markets. In the absence of trade, it 
goods available to consumers from the would not be possible to undertake 
possession or ownership producers. production activities on a large scale.
Transport removes the hindrances of Activities which are meant for 
place by moving goods from the place assisting trade are known as auxiliaries 
of production to the markets for sale. to trade. These activities are generally 
Storage and warehousing activities referred to as services because these 
remove the hindrance of time by are in the nature of facilitating the 
facilitating holding of stocks of goods activities relating to industry and 
to be sold as and when required. trade. Transport, banking, insurance, 
Goods held in stock, as well as, goods warehousing, and advertising are 
in course of transport are subject regarded as auxiliaries to trade, i.e., 
to a risk of loss or damage due to activities playing a supportive role. 
theft, fire, accidents, etc. Protection In fact, these activities support not 
against these risks is provided by only trade, but also industry and, 
insurance of goods. Capital required hence, the entire business activity. 
to undertake the above activities is Auxiliaries are an integral part of 
provided by banking and financing commerce in particular and business 
institutions. Advertising makes it activity in general. These activities 
possible for producers and traders to help in removing various hindrances 
inform consumers about the goods which arise in connection with the 
and services available in the market. production and distribution of goods. 
Hence, commerce is said to consist of Transport facilitates movement of 
activities of removing the hindrances of goods from one place to another. 
persons, place, time, risk, finance and Banking provides financial assistance 
information in the process of exchange to the manufacturer and trader. 
of goods and services. Insurance covers various kinds of 

business risks. Warehousing creates 
1.3.3 Trade and Auxiliaries to Trade time utility by way of storage facilities. 
Trade is an essential part of commerce. Advertising provides information to 
It refers to sale, transfer or exchange the consumers. In other words, these 
of goods either physical or virtual. It activities facilitate movement, storage, 
helps in making the goods produced financing, risk coverage and sales 
available to the consumers or users. promotion of goods. Auxiliaries to 
These days’ goods are produced on trade are briefly discussed below:

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   15 13-01-2021   09:40:07



16 BUSINESS  STUDIES

	 (i)	 Transport and Communication: undertake collection of cheques, 
Production of goods generally takes remittance of funds to different 
place in particular locations. For places, and discounting of bills 
instance, tea is mainly produced on behalf of traders. In foreign 
in Assam; cotton in Gujarat and trade, commercial banks help 
Maharashtra; jute in West Bengal exporters in collecting money 
and Odisha; sugar in U.P., Bihar from importers. Commercial 
and Maharashtra and so on. banks also help promoters of 
But these goods are required for companies to raise capital from 
consumption in different parts of the public.
the country. The obstacle of place 
is removed by transport through 	(iii)	 Insurance: Business involves 
road, rail or coastal shipping. various types of risks. Factory 
Transport facilitates movement building, machinery, furniture, 
of raw material, to the place etc., must be protected against 
of production and the finished fire, theft and other risks. 
products from factories to the Material and goods help in stock 
place of consumption. Along or in transit are subject to the 
with transport facility, there is risk of loss or damage. Employees 
also a need for communication are also required to be protected 
facilities so that producers, against the risks of accident and 
traders and consumers may occupational hazards. Insurance 
exchange information with one provides protection in all such 
another. Thus, postal services cases. On payment of a nominal 
and telephone facilities may also premium, the amount of loss or 
be regarded as auxiliaries to damage and compensation for 
business activities. injury, if any, can be recovered 

from the insurance company.
	(ii)	 Banking and Finance: Business 

activities cannot be undertaken 	(iv)	 Warehousing: Usually, goods are 
unless funds are available for not sold or consumed immediately 
acquiring assets, purchasing after production. They are held 
raw materials and meeting other in stock to make them available 
expenses. Necessary funds can as and when required. Special 
be obtained by businessmen arrangement must be made for 
from a bank. Thus, banking the storage of goods to prevent 
helps business activities to loss or damage. Warehousing 
overcome the problem of finance. helps business firms to overcome 
Commercial banks, generally the problem of storage and 
lend money by providing overdraft facilitates the availability of goods 
and cash credit facilities, loans when needed. Prices are, thereby, 
and advances. Banks also maintained at a reasonable level 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   16 13-01-2021   09:40:07



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 17

through continuous supply of available goods and services 
goods. and inducing customers to buy 

	 (v)	 Adve r t i s ing  and  Pub l i c particular items. Advertisements 
Relations: There is an old saying are always a paid activity where 
“Advertising is what you pay business occupies space in print 
for and PR is what you pray or non-print media to promote its 
for”. Both advertisement and product or a service. PR activities, 
PR activities are the tools to on the other hand, are normally 
commerce, influence and promote unpaid where business enters 
your product, services or an idea into a strategic communication 
to you potential customers and to build a mutually beneficial 
motivate you target customers to relationship.
recognise your accomplishments. 

			   Advert is ing and publ ic 1.4 Objectives of Business

relation activities are one of An objective is the starting point of 
the most important methods of business. Every business is directed to 
promoting the sale of products the achievement of certain objectives. 
and services in a market place. Objectives refer to all that the business 
It  is practically impossible for people want to get in return for what 
producers and traders to contact they do. It is generally believed that 
each and every customer. Thus, business activity is carried out only for 
for promoting sales, information profit. Business persons themselves 
in made available through proclaim that their primary objective 
advertisements and publicity is produce or distribute goods or 
tools about their features, price, services for profit. Every business 
etc., to the potential customers. is said to be an attempt on the part 
Also, there is a need to persuade of business people to get more than 
potential customer’s and buyers what has been spent or invested, or 
about the utility featuress, quality, in other words, to earn profit which 
price, competitive information is the excess of revenue over cost. 
about the goods and services, etc. However, it is being increasingly 
The publicity of such attributes realised nowadays that business 
of products and services are enterprises are part of the society 
done using various techniques of and need to fulfil several objectives, 
maintaining public relation tools. including social responsibility, to 
The popular PR tool is the use of survive and prosper in the long run. 
press release in print and social Profit is found to be a leading objective 
media platforms. Advertising and but not the only one.
Public Relations activities helps Although earning profit cannot 
in providing information about be the only objective of business, its 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   17 13-01-2021   09:40:08



18 BUSINESS  STUDIES

importance cannot be ignored. Every 1.5 Objectives of Business
business is an attempt to reap more 
than what has been invested, and Objectives are needed in every area that 
profit is the excess of revenue over influences the survival and prosperity 
cost. Profit may be regarded as an of business. Since a business has 
essential objective of business for to balance a number of needs and 
various reasons: (i) it is a source of goals, it requires multiple objectives. 
income for business persons, (ii) it It cannot follow only one objective 
can be a source of finance for meeting and expect to achieve excellence. 
expansion requirements of business, Objectives have to be specific in 
(iii) it indicates the efficient working every area and sphere of business. 
of business, (iv) it can be taken as Objectives also enable the business 
the society’s approval of the utility to analyse their own performance and 
of business, and (v) it builds the take steps as necessary to improve 
reputation of a business enterprise. their performance in future. Some of 

However, too much emphasis these areas are described as follows.
on profit to the exclusion of other 	 (i)	 Market standing: Marinating 
objectives can be dangerous for goodwill and reputation of ones’ 
good business. Obsessed with profit, business is paramount to succeed 
business managers may neglect and prosper. It helps in forming a 
all other responsibilities towards distinct identity in the market and 
customers, employees, investors and is referred to as market standing 
society at large. They may even be in relation to its competitors. A 
inclined to exploit various sections of business enterprise must aim 
society to earn immediate profit. This at standing on stronger footing 
may result in the non-cooperation in terms of offering competitive 
or even opposition from the affected products at reasonable prices to 
people against the malpractices of its customers and serving them 
business enterprises. The enterprises to their satisfaction.
might lose business and may be 	(ii)	 Innovation: Innovation is central 
unable to earn profit. This is essential to the growth of any business 
for its own survival and prosperity. enterprise. It helps business to 

scale up and give competitive 
Activity edge to the enterprise in the 

market. Innovation is defined as 
When a business person conceptualises an introduction of new ideas or 
and starts a business; runs it, scales 
it up then why ‘maximising business methods in the way something is 
profit is not a sole objective of business? done or made. However, it does 
Discuss in your class. Give reasons. not imply that a new product 

is to be manufactured. Any 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   18 13-01-2021   09:40:08



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 19

modification in the existing important for its survival and 
product to enhance its operation growth.
also denotes innovativeness. 
There are two kinds of innovation 	(vi)	 Social responsibility: Social 
in every business, i .e. ,  ( i ) responsibility refers to the 
innovation in product or services; obligation of business firms to 
and (ii) innovation in various contribute resources for solving 
skills and activities needed to social problems and work in a 
supply products and services. No socially desirable manner.
business enterprise can flourish 
in a competitive world without 1.6 Business Risk
innovation. Therefore, innovation The term ‘business risk’ refers to 
becomes an important objective. the possibility of inadequate profits 

(	iii)	 Productivity: Productivity is or even losses due to uncertainties 
ascertained by comparing the or unexpected events. For example, 
value of output with the value of demand for a particular product may 
inputs. It is used as a measure decline due to change in tastes and 
of efficiency. In order to ensure preferences of consumers or due to 
continuous survival and progress, increased competition from other 
every enterprise must aim at producers. Lower demand results 
greater productivity through the in long sales and profits. In another 
best use of available resources. situation, the shortage of raw materials 

	(iv)	 P h y s i c a l  a n d  f i n a n c i a l in the market may shoot up its price. 
resources :  Any bus iness The firm using these raw materials will 
requires physical resources, have to pay more for buying them. As a 
like plants, machines, offices, result, cost of production may increase 
etc., and financial resources, which, in turn, may reduce profits.
i.e., funds to be able to produce Business enterprises constantly 
and supply goods and services face two types of risk: speculative 
to its customers. The business and pure. Speculative risks involve 
enterprise must aim at acquiring both the possibility of gain, as well 
these resources according to as, the possibility of loss. Speculative 
their requirements and use them risks arise due to changes in market 
efficiently. conditions, including fluctuations 

	 (v)	 Earning profits: One of the in demand and supply, changes in 
objectives of business is to earn prices or changes in fashion and 
profits on the capital employed. tastes of customers. Favourable 
Profitability refers to profit in market conditions are likely to result 
relation to capital investment. in gains, whereas, unfavourable 
Every business must earn a ones may result in losses. Pure risks 
reasonable profit which is so involve only the possibility of loss or 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   19 13-01-2021   09:40:08



20 BUSINESS  STUDIES

no loss. The chance of fire, theft or For example, a business dealing 
strike are examples of pure risks. in fashionable items has a high 
Their occurrence may result in loss, degree of risk. Similarly, a large-
whereas, non-occurrence may explain scale business generally has a 
absence of loss, instead of gain. higher risk than what a small 

scale has.
1.6.1 Nature of Business Risks 	(iv)	 Profit is the reward for risk 
Nature of business risks can be taking: ‘No risk, no gain’ is an 
understood in terms of their peculiar age-old principle which applies 
characteristics: to all types of business. Greater 
	 (i)	 Risk is an essential part of the risk involved in a business, 

every business: Every business higher is the chance of profit. An 
has some risk. No business can entrepreneur undertakes risks 

under the expectation of higher 
avoid risk, although the amount profit. Profit is thus the reward 
of risk may vary from business to for risk taking.
business. Risk can be minimised, 
but cannot be eliminated. 1.6.2 Cause of Business Risks

	(ii)	 Business risks arise due to Business risks arise due to a variety of 
uncertainties: Uncertainty refers causes, which are classified as follows:
to the lack of knowledge about 
what is going to happen in future. 	 (i)	 Natural causes: Human beings 
Natural calamities, change in have little control over natural 
demand and prices, changes in calamities, like flood, earthquake, 
government policies and prices, lightning, heavy rains, famine, 
improvement in technology, etc., property and income in 
etc., are some of the examples of business.
uncertainty which create risks for 	(ii)	 Human causes: Human causes 
business because the outcomes include such unexpected events, 
of these future events are not like dishonesty, carelessness or 
known. negligence of employees, stoppage 

	(iii)	 Degree of risk depends mainly of work due to power failure, 
upon the nature and size of strikes, riots, management 
business: Nature of business inefficiency, etc.
(i.e., type of goods and services (	iii)	 Economic causes :  These 
produced and sold) and size include uncertainties relating to 
of business (i.e., volume of demand for goods, competition, 
production and sale) are the price, collection of dues from 
main factors which determine customers, change of technology 
the amount of risk in a business. or method of production, etc. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   20 13-01-2021   09:40:08



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 21

Financial problems, like rise in Taking to entrepreneurship by starting 
interest rate for borrowing, levy one’s own business is a matter of 
of higher taxes, etc., also come aspiring to become an entrepreneur. It 
under these type of causes as is  defined as ‘a systematic, purposeful 
they result in higher unexpected and creative activity of identifying 
cost of operation or business. a need, mobilising resources and 

	(iv)	 Other  causes :  These are organising production with a view 
unforeseen events, like political to delivering value to the customers, 
d is turbances ,  mechanica l returns for the investors and profits 
failures, such as the bursting of for the self in accordance with the 
boiler, fluctuations in exchange risks and uncertainties associated 
rates, etc., which lead to the with business’. This definition points 
possibility of business risks. to factors need to be considered for 

starting the business. Starting and 
1.7 Starting a Business — Basic managing one’s business does not 

Factors emerge spontaneously. Rather, it is 
Starting a business enterprise is the outcome of interaction between 
similar to any other human effort a person and business environment. 
in which resources are employed The choice of being an entrepreneur 
to achieve certain objectives. The lies with an individual. In this regard, 
process of setting up one’s own it becomes imperative to look at both—
business is called entrepreneurship. factors in the environment, as well as, 
The person who set-up his business factors in the individual’s perception 
is called an entrepreneur. The of desirability and feasibility.
output of the process, that is, the 	 (i)	 Selection of type of business: 
business unit is called a business The first thing to be decided by an 
enterprise. It is interesting to note that entrepreneur is the nature and 
entrepreneurship besides providing type of business to be undertaken. 
self-employment to the entrepreneur is He/she will obviously like to 
responsible to a great extent for creation enter that branch of industry 
and expansion of opportunities for the and commerce, which has the 
other two economic activities too that possibility of greater amount 
is, employment and profession. And, in of profits. The decision will be 
the process, business entrepreneurship influenced by the customer 
becomes crucial for overall economic requirements in the market 
development of a nation. and also the kind of technical 

When you make this choice, you 
become a job-provider rather than a job- knowledge and interest the 
seeker, besides enjoying a host of other entrepreneur has for producing 
financial and psychological rewards. a particular product.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   21 13-01-2021   09:40:08



22 BUSINESS  STUDIES

	(ii)	 Size of business: Size of the business. Capital is required 
firm or scale of its operation for investment in fixed assets, 
is another important decision like land, building, machinery 
to be taken at the start of the and equipment and in current 
business. Whether the business assets, like raw materials, books, 
is for MSME sector or a large debts, stock of finished goods, 
scale enterprise. Whether it etc. Capital is also required for 
will operate for manufacturing meeting day-to-day expenses. 
or tertiary sector. Some factors 	 (v)	 Physical facilities: Availability 
favour a large size, whereas, of physical facilities, including 
others tend to restrict the scale machines and equipment, 
of operation. If the entrepreneur building and supportive services 
is confident that the demand for is an important factor to be 
the proposed product is likely to considered at the start of the 
be good over time and he/she can business. The decision relating 
arrange the necessary capital for to this factor will depend on the 
business, he/she can start the nature and size of business, 
operation at a large scale. availability of funds and the 

(iii)	 Location of business enterprise: process of production.
An important factor to be 	(vi)	 Competent and committed 
considered at the start of the worked force: Every enterprise 
business is the place where needs competent and committed 
the enterprise will be located. workforce to perform various 
Any mistake in this regard can activities so that physical and 
result in high cost of production, financial resources are converted 
inconvenience in getting, right into desired outputs. Since no 
kind of production inputs or individual entrepreneur can 
serving the customers in the do everything himself, he/she 
best possible way. Availability of must identify the requirement 
raw materials and labour; power of skilled and unskilled workers 
supply and services, like banking, and managerial staff. Plans 
transportation, communication, should also be made about how 
warehousing, etc., are important the employees will be trained 
factors while making a choice of and motivated to give their best 
location. performance.

	(iv)	 Financing the proposition: 	(vii)	 Tax planning: Tax planning has 
Financing is concerned with become necessary these days 
p r o v i d i n g  t h e  n e c e s s a r y because there are a number of 
capital for starting, as well as, tax laws in the country and they 
for continuing the proposed influence almost every aspect 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   22 13-01-2021   09:40:08



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 23

of the functioning of modern resources, fulfilling necessary 
business. The entrepreneur has legal formalities, starting the 
to consider in advance the tax production process and initiating 
liability under various tax laws the sales promotion campaign. A 
and its impact on business business enterprise can be a sole 
decisions. proprietor firm, a partnership 

	(viii)	Launching the enterprise: After firm or a company for which 
the decisions relating to the proper financial planning must 
above mentioned factors have be done to determine (a) the 
been taken, the entrepreneur requirement of capital, (b) source 
can go ahead with actual from where the capital will be 
launching of the enterprise which raised and (c) the best ways of 
would mean mobilising various utilising the capital in the firm.

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1.	 Why is business considered as economic activity?
2.	 How does business contribute to the economic development of a country? 
3.	 State the different types of economic activities.
4.	 State the meaning of business.
5.	 How would you classify business activities?
6.	 What are the various types of industries?
7.	 Explain any two business activities which are auxiliaries to trade.
8.	 What is the role of profit in business?
9.	 What is meant by business risk? 

10.	 State the causes of risks involved in business?

Long Answer Questions
1.	 Discuss the development of indigenous banking system in Indian 

subcontinent.
2.	 Define business. Describe its important characteristics.
3.	 Compare business with profession and employment.
4.	 Define Industry. Explain various types of industries giving examples.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   23 13-01-2021   09:40:08



24 BUSINESS  STUDIES

5.	 Describe the activities relating to commerce.
6.	 Explain any five objectives of business.
7.	 Explain the concept of business risk and its causes.
8.	 What factors are to be considered while starting a business? Explain.

Activities
1.	 Have you ever witnessed any shop or a business getting closed in your 

locality? Interact with the owner to find out the reasons for its closure or 
losses incurred. Prepare a project report on the factors to be considered for 
starting any business. 

2.	 ‘Make in India’ is an initiative launched by the Government of India on 25 
September 2014, to encourage national, as well as multinational companies 
to manufacture their products in India. The major objectives behind the ‘Make 
in India’ initiative are job creation and skill enhancement in 25 sectors of 
the economy. Collect information on any five such sectors of the economy 
that Make in India focuses on. Find out the amount of investment in these 
sectors in the past two years. What were the possible reasons that led to an 
interest of investors in these sectors? Present your report in the following 
format:

Sector Investment in  Investment in  Investment in  
Year  I Year  II Year  III

3.	 Nestled in the beautiful district of Assam is the district of Kamrup. In 
Kamrup, lies a small, tight knit community village called Sualkuchi. 
Sualkuchi is known for its silk weavers and the intricate art of silk weaving. 
There is a part of silk weaving called weft insertion or buta weaving. This 
requires complete attention, dedication and precision. The slow process is 
mentally and physically exhausting. It slows down productivity and leads to 
the workers being unable to take extra work. In this community of the quiet 
workers lived Dipak Bharali. Born in a simple family, he knew the weaving 
occupation was going to be his livelihood. The resourceful young man 
wanted to be a success and achieve something substantial.  He purchased 
a silk weaving loom and started a business with it. The venture was growing 
and income was quite good. Yet, something bothered Dipak. To expand the 
business of silk weaving, there was no other option but to keep purchasing 
more looms. He tried to find other means of investment and progress. The 
simple minded villagers told him just to increase the number of looms. Dipak 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   24 13-01-2021   09:40:08



BUSINESS, TRADE AND COMMERCE 25

was frustrated with their answers and pushed himself to think outside the 
box. He thought he could make a machine that will automate the process of 
weft insertion or buta weaving.

4.	 One fine day, Dipak and his brother were reminiscing about their childhood. 
A good part of their childhood had revolved around creating fun games out 
of simple objects and ideas. He remembered his brother trying to make 
an electro-magnet by using some wires and nails. Another game involved 
placing a safety pin or nail on paper and moved using a magnet below the 
paper. Like the proverbial light bulb going on in somebody’s mind, Dipak’s 
brain was triggered by this memory. 

5.	 He knew this was the push he needed to create a solution for his dilemma. 
Now that he had the idea, he had to create the device. An entrepreneur is 
one who succeeds despite failing numerous times. After a mind boggling 80 
tries, he developed the ideal device ‘Chaneki’. ‘Chaneki’ is made of recyclable 
materials, making not only a useful but an eco-friendly invention. The 
device made machine to run 40 times faster than manual weft insertion of 
motifs! Several weavers have now mastered Chaneki and increased output 
majorly. This difference has allowed productivity and quality to increase, 
pleasing both the owners and weavers. 

6.	 It is always easy to walk the path taken by everybody. The ones who carve 
their own route and plant flags on unknown territories are the real risk 
takers and entrepreneurs. Dipak Bharali well deserve of all he has achieved. 
Small things come in big packages. And sometimes the biggest questions 
of life are answered in the most simplest of ways. (Based on data at www.
nif.org.in)

Answer the Following Questions
1.	 Which objective of business is discussed in the above case? 
2.	 How has the identified objective of business contributed to the growth of 

business unit? Give reasons. 
3.	 Why does business require multiple objectives for its sustainable growth?

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 1 .indd   25 13-01-2021   09:40:08



Chapter 2

##2##
Forms of Business 
Organisation

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 identify different forms of business organisation;

•	 explain features, merits and limitations of different forms of business 
organisations;

•	 distinguish between various forms of organisations; and

•	 discuss the factors determining choice of an appropriate form of 
business organisation.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   26 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 27

Neha, a bright final year student was waiting for her results to be declared. While 
at home she decided to put her free time to use. Having an aptitude for painting, 
she tried her hand at decorating clay pots and bowls with designs. She was excited 
at the praise showered on her by her friends and acquaintances on her work. She 
even managed to sell a few pieces of unique hand pottery from her home to people 
living in and around her colony. Operating from home, she was able to save on 
rental payments. She gained a lot of popularity by word of mouth publicity as a sole 
proprietor. She further perfected her skills of painting pottery and created new motifs 
and designs. All this generated great interest among her customers and provided a 
boost to the demand for her products. By the end of summer, she found that she 
had been able to make a profit of Rs. 2500 from her paltry investment in colours, 
pottery and drawing sheets. She felt motivated to take up this work as a career. 
She has, therefore, decided to set up her own artwork business. She can continue 
running the business on her own as a sole proprietor, but she needs more money 
for doing business on a larger scale. Her father has suggested that she should form 
a partnership with her cousin to meet the need for additional funds and for sharing 
the responsibilities and risks. Side by side, he is of the opinion that it is possible 
that the business might grow further and may require the formation of a company. 
She is in a fix as to what form of business organisation she should go in for?

2.1	I ntroduction Let us start our discussion with 
If one is planning to start a business sole proprietorship — the simplest form 
or is interested in expanding an of business organisation, and then 

move on to analysing more complex 
existing one, an important decision forms of organisations.
relates to the choice of the form of 
organisation. The most appropriate 2.2	S ole Proprietorship
form is determined by weighing the 
advantages and disadvantages of each Do you often go in the evenings to buy 
type of organisation against one’s own registers, pens, chart papers, etc., 
requirements. from a small neighbourhood stationery 

Var ious forms o f  business store? Well, in all probability in the 
organisations from which one can course of your transactions, you have 
choose the right one include: interacted with a sole proprietor.
	 (a)	 Sole proprietorship,               	 Sole proprietorship is a popular 

form of business organisation and 
	 (b)	 Joint Hindu family business, is the most suitable form for small 
	 (c)	 Partnership, businesses, especially in their initial 

years of operation. Sole proprietorship 
	 (d)	 Cooperative societies, and refers to a form of business organisation 
	 (e)	 Joint stock company. which is owned, managed and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   27 13-01-2021   09:40:59



28 BUSINESS  STUDIES

controlled by an individual who is the the owner is personally responsible 
recipient of all profits and bearer of for payment of debts in case the assets 
all risks. This is evident from the term of the business are not sufficient to 
itself. The word “sole” implies “only”, meet all the debts. As such the owner’s 
and “proprietor” refers to “owner”. personal possessions such as his/her 
Hence, a sole proprietor is the one who personal car and other assets could be 
is the only owner of a business. sold for repaying the debt. Suppose 

This form of business is particularly the total outside liabilities of XYZ dry 
common in areas of personalised cleaner, a sole proprietorship firm, are 
services such as beauty parlours, hair Rs. 80,000 at the time of dissolution, 
saloons and small scale activities like but its assets are Rs. 60,000 only. In 
running a retail shop in a locality. such a situation the proprietor will 

Sole trader is a type of business unit where a person is solely responsible for 
providing the capital, for bearing the risk of the enterprise and for the management 
of business.

J.L. Hansen
The individual proprietorship is the form of business organisation at the head of 
which stands an individual as one who is responsible, who directs its operations 
and who alone runs the risk of failure.
	 L.H. Haney

Features have to bring in Rs. 20,000 from her 
Salient characteristics of the sole personal sources even if she has to 
proprietorship form of organisation sell her personal property to repay the 

firm’s debts. 
are as follows:

(iii)  Sole risk bearer and profit 
(i)  Formation and closure: There recipient: The risk of failure of 
is no separate law that governs sole business is borne all alone by the sole 
proprietorship. Hardly any legal proprietor. However, if the business 
formalities are required to start a is successful, the proprietor enjoys 
sole proprietary business, though all the benefits. He receives all the 
in some cases one may require a business profits which become a direct 
license. Closure of the business can reward for his risk bearing.
also be done easily. Thus, there is 
ease in formation as well as closure (iv)  Control: The right to run the 
of business. business and make all decisions lies 

absolutely with the sole proprietor. He 
(ii)  Liability: Sole proprietors have can carry out his plans without any 
unlimited liability. This implies that interference from others.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   28 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 29

(v) No separate entity: In the eyes of (i)  Quick decision making: A sole 
the law, no distinction is made between proprietor enjoys considerable degree 
the sole trader and his business, as of freedom in making business 
business does not have an identity decisions. Further the decision making 
separate from the owner. The owner is prompt because there is no need to 
is, therefore, held responsible for all consult others. This may lead to timely 
the activities of the business. capitalisation of market opportunities 
(vi)  Lack of business continuity: as and when they arise.

 The 
sale proprietorship business is owned (ii) Confidentiality of information: 
and controlled by one person, therefore Sole decision making authority 
death, insanity, imprisonment, enables the proprietor to keep all 
physical ailment or bankruptcy of the the information related to business 
sole proprietor will have a direct and operations confidential and maintain 
detrimental effect on the business secrecy. A sole trader is also not bound 
and may even cause closure of the by law to publish firm’s accounts.
business. (iii) Direct incentive: A sole proprietor 
Merits directly reaps the benefits of his/her 
Sole proprietorship offers many efforts as he/she is the sole recipient 
advantages. Some of the important of all the profit. The need to share 
ones are as follows: profits does not arise as he/she is the 

A Refreshing Start: Coca Cola Owes its Origin to a Sole Proprietor!
The product that has given the world its best-known taste was born in Atlanta, 
Georgia, on May 8, 1886. Dr. John Stith Pemberton, a local pharmacist, produced 
the syrup for Coca-Cola®, and carried a jug of the new product down the street to 
Jacobs’ Pharmacy, where it was sampled, pronounced “excellent” and placed on 
sale for five cents a glass as a soda fountain drink. Dr. Pemberton never realised 
the potential of the beverage he created. He gradually sold portions of his business 
to various partners and, just prior to his death in 1888, sold his remaining 
interest in Coca-Cola to Asa G. Candler. An Atlantan with great business acumen, 
Mr. Candler proceeded to buy additional business rights and acquire complete 
control. 

On May 1, 1889, Asa Candler published a full-page advertisement in The Atlanta 
Journal, proclaiming his wholesale and retail drug business as “sole proprietors 
of Coca-Cola ... Delicious. Refreshing. Exhilarating. Invigorating.” Sole 
ownership, which Mr. Candler did not actually achieve until 1891, needed an 
investment of $ 2,300.
It was only in 1892 that Mr. Candler formed a company called The Coca-Cola 
Corporation.
Source: Website of Coca Cola company. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   29 13-01-2021   09:40:59



30 BUSINESS  STUDIES

single owner. This provides maximum (ii)  Limited life of a business 
incentive to the sole trader to work concern: The sole proprietorship 
hard. business is owned and controlled 
(iv) Sense of accomplishment: There by one person, so death, insanity, 
is a personal satisfaction involved in imprisonment, physical ailment or 
working for oneself. The knowledge bankruptcy of a proprietor affects the 
that one is responsible for the success business and can lead to its closure.
of the business not only contributes to (iii)  Unlimited liability: A major 
self-satisfaction but also instils in the disadvantage of sole proprietorship is 
individual a sense of accomplishment that the owner has unlimited liability. 
and confidence in one’s abilities. If the business fails, the creditors can 

recover their dues not merely from 
(v) Ease of formation and closure: An the business assets, but also from the 
important merit of sole proprietorship is personal assets of the proprietor. A 
the possibility of entering into business poor decision or an unfavourable 
with minimal legal formalities. There circumstance can create serious 
is no separate law that governs sole financial burden on the owner. That is 
proprietorship. As sole proprietorship why a sole proprietor is less inclined 
is the least regulated form of business, to take risks in the form of innovation 
it is easy to start and close the business or expansion.
as per the wish of the owner. (iv)  Limited managerial ability: The 

owner has to assume the responsibility 
Limitations of varied managerial tasks such as 

purchasing, selling, financing, etc. It is 
Not with standing various advantages, rare to find an individual who excels in 
the sole proprietorship form of all these areas. Thus decision making 
organisation is not free from limitations. may not be balanced in all the cases. 
Some of the major limitations of sole Also, due to limited resources, sole 
proprietorship are as follows: proprietor may not be able to employ 
(i)  Limited resources: Resources of and retain talented and ambitious 
a sole proprietor are limited to his/ employees.
her personal savings and borrowings Though sole proprietorship suffers 
from others. Banks and other lending from various shortcomings, many 
institutions may hesitate to extend a entrepreneurs opt for this form of 

organisation because of its inherent 
long term loan to a sole proprietor. advantages. It requires less amount of 
Lack of resources is one of the major capital. It is best suited for businesses 
reasons why the size of the business which are carried out on a small 
rarely grows much and generally scale and where customers demand 
remains small. personalised services.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   30 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 31

2.3	 Joint Hindu Family Business birth. It is governed by the Hindu 
Joint Hindu family business is a Succession Act, 1956.
specific form of business organisation (ii)  Liability: The liability of all 
found only in India. It is one of the members except the karta is limited 
oldest forms of business organisation to their share of co-parcenery property 
in the country. It refers to a form of of the business. The karta, however, 
organisation wherein the business is has unlimited liability.
owned and carried on by the members 
of the Hindu Undivided Family (HUF). (iii) Control: The control of the family 
It is governed by the Hindu Law. The business lies with the karta. He takes 
basis of membership in the business is all the decisions and is authorised to 
birth in a particular family and three manage the business.  His decisions 
successive generations can be members are binding on the other members.
in the business. ( iv)  Continuity:  The business 

The business is controlled by continues even after the death of 
the head of the family who is the the karta as the next eldest member 
eldest member and is called karta. All takes up the position of karta, leaving 
members have equal ownership right the business stable. The business 
over the property of an ancestor and can, however, be terminated with the 
they are known as co-parceners. mutual consent of the members.

Gender Equality in the Joint Hindu Family a Reality
According to the Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act, 2005, the daughter of a 
coparcener of a Joint Hindu Family shall, by birth, become a coparcener. At the 
time of partition of such a ‘Joint Hindu Family’ the coparcenary property shall be 
equally divided to all the coparceners irrespective of their gender (male or female). 
The eldest member (male or female) of ‘Joint Hindu Family’ shall become Karta. 
Married daughter has equal rights in property of a Joint Hindu Family.

Features (v)  Minor Members: The inclusion 
The following points highlight the of an individual into the business 
essential characteristics of the joint occurs due to birth in a Hindu 
Hindu family business. Undivided Family. Hence, minors can 
(i)  Formation: For a joint Hindu also be members of the business.
family business, there should be at 
least two members in the family and Merits
ancestral property to be inherited by 
them. The business does not require The advantages of the joint Hindu 
any agreement as membership is by family business are as follows:

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   31 13-01-2021   09:40:59



32 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(i)  Effective control: The karta has and management of business, but 
absolute decision making power. This also suffers from the disadvantage of 
avoids conflicts among members as having unlimited liability. His personal 
no one can interfere with his right to property can be used to repay business 
decide.  This also leads to prompt and debts.
flexible decision making. (iii)  Dominance of karta: The karta 
(ii)  Continued business existence: individually manages the business 
The death of the karta will not affect which may at times not be acceptable 
the business as the next eldest to other members. This may cause 
member will then take up the position. conflict amongst them and may even 
Hence, operations are not terminated lead to break down of the family unit.
and continuity of business is not 
threatened. (iv)  Limited managerial skills: 
(iii)  Limited liability of members: Since the karta cannot be an expert in 
The liability of all the co-parceners all areas of management, the business 
except the karta is limited to their share may suffer as a result of his unwise 
in the business, and consequently decisions. His inability to decide 
their risk is well-defined and precise. effectively may result into poor profits 

or even losses for the organisation.
( i v )   I n c r e a s e d  l o y a l t y  a n d 
cooperation: Since the business is The joint Hindu family business 
run by the members of a family, there is on the decline because of the 
is a greater sense of loyalty towards one diminishing number of joint Hindu 
other. Pride in the growth of business families in the country.
is linked to the achievements of the 
family. This helps in securing better 2.4	 Partnership

cooperation from all the members. The inherent disadvantage of the 
sole proprietorship in financing and 

Limitation managing an expanding business 
The following are some of the limitations paved the way for partnership as a 
of a joint Hindu family business. viable option. Partnership serves as an 

answer to the needs of greater capital 
(i) Limited resources: The joint Hindu investment, varied skills and sharing 
family business faces the problem of of risks.
limited capital as it depends mainly The Indian Partnership Act, 1932 
on ancestral property.  This limits the defines partnership as “the relation 
scope for expansion of business. between persons who have agreed 
(ii)  Unlimited liability of karta: to share the profit of the business 
The karta is burdened not only with carried on by all or any one of them 
the responsibility of decision making acting for all.”

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   32 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 33

Features liable to that extent. Individually too, 
Definitions given above point to the each partner can be held responsible 
following major characteristics of repaying the debts of the business. 
the partnership form of business However, such a partner can later 
organisation. recover from other partners an amount 
(i)  Formation: The partnership form of money equivalent to the shares in 
of business organisation is governed liability defined as per the partnership 
by the Indian Partnership Act, 1932. agreement.

Partnership is the relation between persons competent to make contracts 
who have agreed to carry on a lawful business in common with a view to 
private gain. 

L H Haney
Partnership is the relation which subsists between persons who have agreed to 
combine their property, labour or skill in some business and to share the profits 
therefrom between them.

The Indian Contract Act 1872

It comes into existence through a legal (iii)  Risk bearing: The partners 
agreement wherein the terms and bear the risks involved in running a 
conditions governing the relationship business as a team. The reward comes 
among the partners, sharing of in the form of profits which are shared 
profits and losses and the manner of by the partners in an agreed ratio. 
conducting the business are specified. However, they also share losses in 
It may be pointed out that the business the same ratio in the event of the firm 
must be lawful and run with the motive incurring losses.
of profit. Thus, two people coming 
together for charitable purposes will (iv) Decision making and control: 
not constitute a partnership. The partners share amongst themselves 
(ii)  Liability: the responsibility of decision making 

 The partners of a firm 
have unlimited liability. Personal and control of day to day activities. 
assets may be used for repaying Decisions are generally taken with 
debts in case the business assets are mutual consent. Thus, the activities 
insufficient. Further, the partners of a partnership firm are managed 
are jointly and individually liable for through the joint efforts of all the 
payment of debts. Jointly, all the partners.
partners are responsible for the debts (v)  Continuity:  Partnership is 
and they contribute in proportion to characterised by lack of continuity of 
their share in business and as such are business since the death, retirement, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   33 13-01-2021   09:40:59



34 BUSINESS  STUDIES

insolvency or insanity of any partner (ii)  Balanced decision making: The 
can bring an end to the business. partners can oversee different functions 
However, the remaining partners may according to their areas of expertise. 
if they so desire continue the business Because an individual is not forced to 
on the basis of a new agreement. handle different activities, this not only 
(vi )   Number of Partners:  The reduces the burden of work but also 
minimum number of partners needed leads to fewer errors in judgements. As 
to start a partnership firm is two. a consequence, decisions are likely to 
According to section 464 of the be more balanced.
Companies Act 2013, maximum (iii)  More funds: In a partnership, 
number of partners in a partnership the capital is contributed by a number 
firm can be 100, subject to the of partners. This makes it possible 
number prescribed by the government. to raise larger amount of funds as 
As per Rule 10 of The Companies compared to a sole proprietor and 
(miscelleneous) Rules 2014, at present undertake additional operations when 
the maximum number of members needed.
can be 50. (iv)  Sharing of risks: The risks 
(vii) Mutual agency: The definition of involved in running a partnership firm 
partnership highlights the fact that it are shared by all the partners. This 
is a business carried on by all or any reduces the anxiety, burden and stress 
one of the partners acting for all. In on individual partners.
other words, every partner is both an (v)  Secrecy: A partnership firm is not 
agent and a principal. He is an agent of 
other partners as he represents them legally required to publish its accounts 
and thereby binds them through his and submit its reports. Hence it is 
acts.  He is a principal as he too can able to maintain confidentiality of 
be bound by the acts of other partners. information relating to its operations.

Merits Limitations
The following points describe the A partnership firm of business 
advantages of a partnership firm. organisation suffers from the following 
(i)  Ease of formation and closure: A limitations:
partnership firm can be formed easily (i)  Unlimited liability: Partners 
by putting an agreement between are liable to repay debts even from 
the prospective partners into place their personal resources in case the 
whereby they agree to carryout the business assets are not sufficient to 
business of the firm and share risks. meet its debts. The liability of partners 
There is no compulsion with respect to is both joint and several which may 
registration of the firm. Closure of the prove to be a drawback for those 
firm too is an easy task. partners who have greater personal 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   34 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 35

wealth. They will have to repay the financial status of a partnership firm. 
entire debt in case the other partners As a result, the confidence of the public 
are unable to do so. in partnership firms is generally low.
(ii)  Limited resources: There is a 2.4.1	 Types of Partners
restriction on the number of partners, 
and hence contribution in terms of A partnership firm can have different 
capital investment is usually not types of partners with different roles 
sufficient to support large scale and liabilities. An understanding of 
business operations. As a result, these types is important for a clear 

understanding of their rights and 
partnership firms face problems in responsibilities. These are described 
expansion beyond a certain size. as follows: 
( i i i )   Possibi l ity of  confl icts: (i)  Active partner: An active partner 
Partnership is run by a group of is one who contributes capital, 
persons wherein decision making participates in the management of 
authority is shared. Difference in the firm, shares its profits and losses, 
opinion on some issues may lead to and is liable to an unlimited extent 
disputes between partners. Further, to the creditors of the firm. These 
decisions of one partner are binding partners take actual part in carrying 
on other partners. Thus an unwise out business of the firm on behalf of 
decision by some one may result in other partners.
financial ruin for all others. In case (ii)  Sleeping or dormant partner: 
a partner desires to leave the firm, Partners who do not take part in the 
this can result in termination of day to day activities of the business 
partnership as there is a restriction are called sleeping partners. A sleeping 
on transfer of ownership. partner, however, contributes capital 
(iv)  Lack of continuity: Partnership to the firm, shares its profits and 
comes to an end with the death, losses, and has unlimited liability.
retirement, insolvency or lunacy (iii)  Secret partner: A secret partner 
of any partner. It may result in is one whose association with the firm 
lack of continuity. However, the is unknown to the general public. 
remaining partners can enter into a Other than this distinct feature, in 
fresh agreement and continue to run all other aspects he is like the rest of 
the business. the partners. He contributes to the 
(v)  Lack of public confidence: A capital of the firm, takes part in the 
partnership firm is not legally required management, shares its profits and 
to publish its financial reports or make losses, and has unlimited liability 
other related information public. It towards the creditors.  
is, therefore, difficult for any member (iv)  Nominal partner: A nominal 
of the public to ascertain the true partner is one who allows the use of 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   35 13-01-2021   09:40:59



36 BUSINESS  STUDIES

his/her name by a firm, but does not partners, even though they do not 
contribute to its capital. He/she does contribute capital or take part in 
not take active part in managing the its management. Suppose Rani is a 
firm, does not share its profit or losses friend of Seema who is a partner in a 
but is liable, like other partners, to the software firm —Simplex Solutions. On 
third parties, for the repayments of the Seema’s request, Rani accompanies 
firm’s debts. her to a business meeting with Mohan 
(v)  Partner by estoppel: A person Softwares and actively participates in 
is considered a partner by estoppel the negotiation process for a business 
if, through his/her own initiative, deal and gives the impression that 
conduct or behaviour, he/she gives she is also a partner in Simplex 
an impression to others that he/ Solutions. If credit is extended to 
she is a partner of the firm. Such Simplex Solutions on the basis of these 
partners are held liable for the debts negotiations, Rani would also be liable 
of the firm because in the eyes of for repayment of such debt, as if she 
the third party they are considered is a partner of the firm.  

Table 2.1    Types of Partners

Type Capital 
contribution Management Share in 

profits/losses Liability

Active partner Contributes Participates in Shares profits/ Unlimited 
capital management losses liability

Sleeping or 
dormant Contributes Does not Shares profits/ Unlimited 
partner capital participate in 

management losses liability

Participates in 
Secret partner Contributes Shares profits/ Unlimited 

capital management, 
but secretly losses liability

Nominal Does not Does not Generally 
partner contribute participate in does not share Unlimited 

capital management profits/losses liability

Partner by Does not Does not Does not share Unlimited 
estoppel contribute participate in 

capital management profits/losses liability

Partner by Does not Does not Does not share Unlimited 
holding out contribute participate in 

capital management profits/losses liability

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   36 13-01-2021   09:40:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 37

Minor as a Partner
Partnership is based on legal contract between two persons who agree to share the 
profits or losses of a business carried on by them. As such a minor is incompetent 
to enter into a valid contract with others, he cannot become a partner in any firm. 
However, a minor can be admitted to the benefits of a partnership firm with the 
mutual consent of all other partners. In such cases, his liability will be limited to 
the extent of the capital contributed by him and in the firm. He will not be eligible 
to take an active part in the management of the firm. Thus, a minor can share only 
the profits and can not be asked to bear the losses. However, he can if he wishes, 
inspect the accounts of the firm. The status of a minor changes when he attains 
majority. In fact, on attaining majority, the minor has to decide whether he would 
like to become a partner in the firm. He has to give a public notice of his decision 
within six months of attaining majority. If he fails to do so, within the stipulated 
time, he will be treated as a full-fledged partner and will become liable to the debts 
of the firm to an unlimited extent, in the same way as other active partners are.

(vi)  Partner by holding out: A ‘partnership at will’ and ‘particular 
partner by ‘holding out’ is a person partnership’. On the basis of liability, 
who though is not a partner in a firm the two types of partnership include: 
but knowingly allows himself/herself one ‘with limited liability’ and the other 
to be represented as a partner in a one ‘with unlimited liability’. These 
firm. Such a person becomes liable types are described in the following 
to outside creditors for repayment of sections.
any debts which have been extended 
to the firm on the basis of such Classification on the basis of duration
representation. In case he is not 
really a partner and wants to save (i)  Partnership at will: This type of 
himself from such a liability, he should partnership exists at the will of the 
immediately issue a denial, clarifying partners. It can continue as long as 
his position that he is not a partner in the partners want and is terminated 
the firm. If he does not do so, he will when any partner gives a notice of 
be responsible to the third party for withdrawal from partnership to the 
any such debts. firm.

(ii)  Particular partnership: Partner-
2.4.2	 Types of Partnerships ship formed for the accomplishment of 
Partnerships can be classified on the a particular project say construction of 
basis of two factors, viz., duration a building or an activity to be carried 
and liability. On the basis of duration, on for a specified time period is called 
there can be two types of partnerships : particular partnership. It dissolves 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   37 13-01-2021   09:40:59



38 BUSINESS  STUDIES

automatically when the purpose for This form of partnership was 
which it was formed is fulfilled or when not permitted in India earlier. The 
the time duration expires. permission to form partnership firms 

with limited liability has been granted 
Classification on the basis of liability after introduction of New Small 

Enterprise Policy in 1991. The idea 
(i) General Partnership: In general behind such a move has been to enable 
partnership, the liability of partners the partnership firms to attract equity 
is unlimited and joint. The partners capital from friends and relatives of 
enjoy the right to participate in the small scale entrepreneurs who were 
management of the firm and their earlier reluctant to help, due to the 
acts are binding on each other as existence of unlimited liability clause 
well as on the firm. Registration of in the partnership form of business.
the firm is optional. The existence 
of the firm is affected by the death, 2.4.3	 Partnership Deed
lunacy, insolvency or retirement of A partnership is a voluntary association 
the partners. of people who come together for 
(ii)  Limited Partnership: In limited achieving common objectives. In order 
partnership, the liability of at least to enter into partnership, a clear 

agreement with respect to the terms, 
one partner is unlimited whereas the conditions and all aspects concerning 
rest may have limited liability. Such a the partners is essential so that there 
partnership does not get terminated is no misunderstanding later among 
with the death, lunacy or insolvency the partners. Such an agreement 
of the limited partners. The limited can be oral or written. Even though 
partners do not enjoy the right of it is not essential to have a written 
management and their acts do not agreement, it is advisable to have a 
bind the firm or the other partners. written agreement as it constitutes 
Registration of such partnership is an evidence of the conditions agreed 
compulsory. upon. The written agreement which 

Price Waterhouse Coopers was a Partnership Firm earlier
Price Waterhouse Coopers, one of the world’s top accountancy firms has been 
created in 1998 by the merger of two companies, Price Waterhouse and Coopers 
and Lybrand — each with historical roots going back some 150 years to the 19th 
century Great Britain. In 1850, Samuel Lowell Price set up his accounting business 
in London. In 1865, he was joined in partnership by William H. Holyland and 
Edwin Waterhouse. As the firm grew, qualified members of its professional staff 
were admitted to the partnership. By the late 1800s, Price Waterhouse had gained 
significant recognition as an accounting firm. Trace the journey of this partnership 
firm and prepare a report.
Source: Price Waterhouse Coopers archives in Columbia University.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   38 18-04-2024   11:26:11



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 39

specifies the terms and conditions that (a)	 	 A partner of an unregistered firm 
govern the partnership is called the cannot file a suit against the firm 
partnership deed.  or other partners,

The partnership deed generally 
includes the following aspects: 	 (b)	 The firm cannot file a suit against 
•	 Name of firm third parties, and 
•	 Nature of business and location 	 (c)	 The firm cannot file a case against 

of business the partners.
•	 Duration of business In view of these consequences, it is 
•	 Investment made by each partner therefore advisable to get the firm 
•	 Distribution of profits and losses registered. According to the India 
•	 Duties and obligations of the Partnership Act 1932, the partners 

partners may get the firm registered with the 
•	 Salaries and withdrawals of the Registrar of firms of the state in which 

partners the firm is situated. The registration 
•	 Terms governing admission, can be at the time of formation or at 

retirement and expulsion of a any time during its existence. The 
partner procedure for getting a firm registered 

•	 Interest on capital and interest is as follows:
on drawings 1.		Submission of application in the 

•	 Procedure for dissolution of the prescribed form to the Registrar of 
firm firms. The application should con-

•	 Preparation of accounts and their tain the following particulars:
auditing •	 Name of the firm

•	 Method of solving disputes •	 Location of the firm
•	 Names of other places where the 

2.4.4	 Registration firm carries on business 
Registration of a partnership firm •	 The date when each partner 
means the entering of the firm’s name, joined the firm
along with the relevant prescribed •	 Names and addresses of the 
particulars, in the Register of firms partners
kept with the Registrar of Firms. •	 Duration of partnership
It provides conclusive proof of the This application should be signed by 
existence of a partnership firm. all the partners.

It is optional for a partnership 2.		Deposit of required fees with the 
firm to get registered. In case a firm Registrar of Firms.
does not get registered, it is deprived 3.		The Registrar after approval will 
of many benefits. The consequences make an entry in the register of 
of non-registration of a firm are as firms and will subsequently issue a 
follows: certificate of registration.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   39 13-01-2021   09:41:00



40 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Cooperative is a form of organisation wherein persons voluntarily associate together 
as human beings on the basis of equality for the promotion of an economic interest 
for themselves. 

  E. H. Calvert
Cooperative organisation is “a society which has its objectives for the promotion of 
economic interests of its members in accordance with cooperative principles.

The Indian Cooperative Societies Act 1912

2.5   Cooperative Society Membership is open to all, irrespective 
The word cooperative means working of their religion, caste, and gender. 
together and with others for a common (ii)  Legal status: Registration of a 
purpose. cooperative society is compulsory. 

The cooperative society is a This accords a separate identity to 
voluntary association of persons, who the society which is distinct from its 
join together with the motive of welfare members. The society can enter into 
of the members. They are driven by the contracts and hold property in its 
need to protect their economic interests name, sue and be sued by others. As a 
in the face of possible exploitation at result of being a separate legal entity, 
the hands of middlemen obsessed with it is not affected by the entry or exit of 
the desire to earn greater profits. The its members.
cooperative society is to be registered (iii)  Limited liability: The liability of 
under the Cooperative Societies Act the members of a cooperative society 
1912. is limited to the extent of the amount 

contributed by them as capital. This 
Features defines the maximum risk that a 
The characteristics of a cooperative member can be asked to bear.
society are listed below. (iv) Control:	 In a cooperative society, 
(i)  Voluntary membership: The the power to take decisions lies in 
membership of a cooperative society the hands of an elected managing 
is voluntary. A person is free to join a committee. The right to vote gives 
cooperative society, and can also leave the members a chance to choose 
anytime as per his desire. There cannot the members who will constitute the 
be any compulsion for him to join or managing committee and this lends 
quit a society. Although procedurally the cooperative society a democratic 
a member is required to serve a notice character.
before leaving the society, there is (v)  Service motive: The cooperative 
no compulsion to remain a member. society through its purpose lays 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   40 06/09/2024   14:47:25



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 41

emphasis on the values of mutual of the society, and hence the risk of 
help and welfare. Hence, the motive of bad debts is lower. 
service dominates its working. If any (v)  Support from government: The 
surplus is generated as a result of its cooperative society exemplifies the idea 
operations, it is distributed amongst of democracy and hence finds support 
the members as dividend in conformity from the Government in the form of 
with the bye-laws of the society. low taxes, subsidies, and low interest 

rates on loans.
Merits

(vi) Ease of formation: The cooperative 
The cooperative society offers many society is a voluntary association of 
benefits to its members. Some of the persons who joined together with 
advantages of the cooperative form of motive of welfare of the members. 
organisation are as follows. The registration procedure is simple 
(i)  Equality in voting status:  The involving a few legal formalities. 
principle of ‘one man one vote’ governs Its formation is governed by the 
the cooperative society. Irrespective of provisions of Cooperative Societies 
the amount of capital contribution by Act 1912. 
a member, each member is entitled to 
equal voting rights. Limitations
(ii)  Limited liability: The liability of The cooperative form of organisation 
members of a cooperative society is suffers from the following limitations:
limited to the extent of their capital (i)  Limited resources: Resources of a 
contribution. The personal assets of cooperative society consists of capital 
the members are, therefore, safe from contributions of the members with 
being used to repay business debts. limited means. The low rate of dividend 
( i i i )   Stable existence:  Death, offered on investment also acts as a 
bankruptcy or insanity of the members deterrent in attracting membership or 
do not affect continuity of a cooperative more capital from the members.
society. A society, therefore, operates (ii)  Inefficiency in management: 
unaffected by any change in the Cooperative societies are unable to 
membership. attract and employ expert managers 
(iv)  Economy in operations: The because of their inability to pay them 
members generally offer honorary high salaries. The members who offer 
services to the society. As the focus honorary services on a voluntary 
is on elimination of middlemen, this basis are generally not professionally 
helps in reducing costs. The customers equipped to handle the management 
or producers themselves are members functions effectively.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   41 06/09/2024   14:47:40



42 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(iii)  Lack of secrecy: As a result may take a backseat if personal gain is 
of open discussions in the meetings given preference by certain members.
of members as well as disclosure 
obligations as per the Societies Act (7), 2.5.1	 Types of Cooperative 
it is difficult to maintain secrecy about Societies
the operations of a cooperative society. Various types of cooperative societies 
( iv )   Government  contro l :  In based on the nature of their operations 
return of the privileges offered by the are described below:
government, cooperative societies (i) Consumer’s cooperative societies: 
have to comply with several rules The consumer cooperative societies 
and regulations related to auditing are formed to protect the interests of 
of accounts, submission of accounts, consumers. The members comprise 
etc. Interference in the functioning of consumers desirous of obtaining 
of the cooperative organisation good quality products at reasonable 
through the control exercised by prices. The society aims at eliminating 
the state cooperative departments middlemen to achieve economy in 
also negatively affects its freedom of operations. It purchases goods in 
operation. bulk directly from the wholesalers and 
(v)  Differences of opinion: Internal sells goods to the members, thereby 
quarrels arising as a result of contrary eliminating the middlemen. Profits, 
viewpoints may lead to difficulties in if any, are distributed on the basis 
decision making. Personal interests of either their capital contributions 
may start to dominate the welfare to the society or purchases made by 
motive and the benefit of other members individual members.

Amul’s amazing Cooperative ventures!
Every day Amul collects 4,47,000 litres of milk from 2.12 million farmers (many 
illiterate), converts the milk into branded, packaged products, and delivers goods 
worth Rs. 6 crore (Rs. 60 million) to over 5,00,000 retail outlets across the country.

It all started in December 1946 with a group of farmers keen to free themselves 
from intermediaries, gain access to markets and thereby ensure maximum returns 
for their efforts. Based in the village of Anand, the Khera District Milk Cooperative 
Union (better known as Amul) expanded exponentially. It joined hands with other 
milk cooperatives, and the Gujarat network now covers 2.12 million farmers, 10,411 
village level milk collection centres and fourteen district level plants (unions). Amul 
is the common brand for most product categories produced by various unions: 
liquid milk, milk powder, butter, ghee, cheese, cocoa products, sweets, ice-cream 
and condensed milk. Amul’s sub-brands include variants such as Amulspray, 
Amulspree, Amulya and Nutramul. 
Source: Adapted from Pankaj Chandra, “Rediff.com”, Business Special, September 2005.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   42 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 43

(ii) Producer’s cooperative societies: society aims to eliminate middlemen 
These societies are set up to protect and improve competitive position of 
the interest of small producers. The its members by securing a favourable 
members comprise of producers market for the products. It pools 
desirous of procuring inputs for the output of individual members 
production of goods to meet the and performs marketing functions 
demands of consumers. The society like transportation, warehousing, 
aims to fight against the big capitalists packaging, etc., to sell the output 
and enhance the bargaining power at the best possible price. Profits 
of the small producers. It supplies are distributed according to each 
raw materials, equipment and other member’s contribution to the pool of 
inputs to the members and also buys output.
their output for sale. Profits among the 
members are generally distributed on (iv)  Farmer’s cooperative societies: 
the basis of their contributions to the These societies are established to 
total pool of goods produced or sold protect the interests of farmers by 
by the society. providing better inputs at a reasonable 

cost. The members comprise farmers 
(iii) Marketing cooperative societies: who wish to jointly take up farming 
Such societies are established to activities. The aim is to gain the 
help small producers in selling their benefits of large scale farming and 
products. The members consist increase the productivity. Such 
of producers who wish to obtain societies provide better quality seeds, 
reasonable prices for their output. The fertilisers, machinery and other 

Indian Companies in League of FORTUNE 
GLOBAL Organisations 

GLOBAL  Rank in Revenue 
Company

rank India (Crores)

Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. 117 2 5,35,793

Reliance Industries Ltd. 106 1 5,80,553

Tata Motors Ltd. 265 5 3,03,227

State Bank of India 236 4 3,30,687

ONGC 160 3 4,36,057

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   43 13-01-2021   09:41:00



44 BUSINESS  STUDIES

modern techniques for use in the business activities and has a legal 
cultivation of crops. This helps not status independent of its members. 
only in improving the yield and returns A company can be described as an 
to the farmers, but also solves the artificial person having a separate 
problems associated with the farming legal entity, perpetual succession and 
on fragmented land holdings. a common seal. The company form 
(v)  Credit cooperative societies: of organisation is governed by The 
Credit cooperative societies are Companies Act, 2013. As per section 
established for providing easy credit 2(20) of Act 2013, a company means 
on reasonable terms to the members. company incorporated under this Act 
The members comprise of persons who or any other previous company law. 
seek financial help in the form of loans. The shareholders are the owners 
The aim of such societies is to protect of the company while the Board of 
the members from the exploitation Directors is the chief managing body 
of lenders who charge high rates of elected by the shareholders. Usually, 
interest on loans. Such societies provide the owners exercise an indirect control 
loans to members out of the amounts over the business. The capital of the 
collected as capital and deposits from company is divided into smaller parts 
the members and charge low rates called ‘shares’ which can be transferred 
of interest. freely from one shareholder to another 

person (except in a private company).
	(vi) Cooperative housing societies: 
Cooperative housing societies are Features
established to help people with 
limited income to construct houses The definition of a joint stock company 
at reasonable costs. The members of highlights the following features of a 
these societies consist of people who company.
are desirous of procuring residential (i)  Artificial person: A company is a 
accommodation at lower costs. The creation of law and exists independent 
aim is to solve the housing problems of its members. Like natural persons, 
of the members by constructing houses a company can own property, incur 
and giving the option of paying in debts, borrow money, enter into 
instalments. These societies construct contracts, sue and be sued but unlike 
flats or provide plots to members on them it cannot breathe, eat, run, talk 
which the members themselves can and so on. It is, therefore, called an 
construct the houses as per their artificial person.
choice. 

(ii)  Separate legal entity: From the 
2.6	 Joint Stock Company day of its incorporation, a company 

acquires an identity, distinct from its 
A company is an association of members. Its assets and liabilities are 
persons formed for carrying out separate from those of its owners. The 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   44 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 45

law does not recognise the business directors hold a position of immense 
and owners to be one and the same. significance as they are directly 
(iii)  Formation: The formation of accountable to the shareholders for 
a company is a time consuming, the working of the company. The 
expensive and complicated process. shareholders, however, do not have the 
It involves the preparation of several right to be involved in the day-to-day 
documents and compliance with running of the business.

Previous Company law means any of the laws specified below:
	 1.	 Act relating to companies in force before the Indian companies Act, 1866 (10 

of 1866). 
	 2.	 The Indian companies Act, 1866 (10 of 1866).
	 3.	 The Indian companies Act, 1882 (6 of 1882).
	 4.	 The Indian companies Act, 1913 (6 of 1913).
	 5.	 The Registration of Transferred Companies Ordinance, 1942 (ordinance 42 

of 1942).
	 6.	 The Companies Act, 1956.

several legal requirements before it (vi)  Liability: The liability of the 
can start functioning.  Incorporation members is limited to the extent of 
of companies is compulsory under the capital contributed by them in a 
The Companies Act 2013 or any of company. The creditors can use only 
the previous company law, as state the assets of the company to settle their 
earlier. Such companies which are 
incorporated under companies Act claims since it is the company and not 
1956 or any company law shall be the members that owes the debt. The 
included in the list of companies. members can be asked to contribute 

to the loss only to the extent of the 
(iv) Perpetual succession: A company 
being a creation of the law, can be unpaid amount of share held by them. 
brought to an end only by law. It will Suppose Akshay is a shareholder in a 
only cease to exist when a specific company holding 2,000 shares of Rs.10 
procedure for its closure, called each on which he has already paid Rs. 
winding up, is completed. Members 7 per share. His liability in the event 
may come and members may go, but of losses or company’s failure to pay 
the company continues to exist. debts can be only up to Rs. 6,000 — the 
(v)  Control: The management and unpaid amount of his share capital (Rs. 
control of the affairs of the company is 3 per share on 2,000 shares held in the 
undertaken by the Board of Directors, company). Beyond this, he is not liable 
which appoints the top management to pay anything towards the debts or 
officials for running the business. The losses of the company.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   45 13-01-2021   09:41:00



46 BUSINESS  STUDIES

	(vii) Risk bearing: The risk of losses retirement, resignation, insolvency 
in a company is borne by all the share or insanity of its members as it has 
holders. This is unlike the case of sole a separate entity from its members. 
proprietorship or partnership firm A company will continue to exist 
where one or few persons respectively even if all the members die. It can be 
bear the losses. In the face of financial liquidated only as per the provisions 
difficulties, all shareholders in a of the Companies Act, 2013.
company have to contribute to the 
debts to the extent of their shares in ( iv)   Scope for expansion:  As 
the company’s capital. The risk of loss compared to the sole proprietorship 
thus gets spread over a large number and partnership forms of organisation, 
of shareholders. a company has large f inancial 

resources. Further, capital can be 
Merits attracted from the public as well 
The company form of organisation as through loans from banks and 
offers a multitude of advantages, some financial institutions. Thus there 
of which are discussed below. is greater scope for expansion. The 

investors are inclined to invest in 
(i) Limited liability: The shareholders shares because of the limited liability, 
are liable to the extent of the amount transferable ownership and possibility 
unpaid on the shares held by them. of high returns in a company.
Also, only the assets of the company 
can be used to settle the debts, leaving (v)  Professional management: 
the owner’s personal property free from A company can af ford to pay 
any charge. This reduces the degree of higher salaries to specialists and 
risk borne by an investor. professionals. It can, therefore, employ 
(ii)  Transfer of interest: The ease people who are experts in their area of 
of transfer of ownership adds to the specialisations. The scale of operations 
advantage of investing in a company as in a company leads to division of 
the share of a public limited company work. Each department deals with a 
can be sold in the market and as such particular activity and is headed by an 
can be easily converted into cash expert. This leads to balanced decision 
in case the need arises. This avoids making as well as greater efficiency in 
blockage of investment and presents the company’s operations.
the company as a favourable avenue 
for investment purposes. Limitations
(iii) Perpetual existence: Existence of The major limitations of a company 
a company is not affected by the death, form of organisation are as follows:

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   46 06/09/2024   14:54:59



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 47

(i)  Complexity in formation: The reduces the freedom of operations of a 
formation of a company requires company and takes away a lot of time, 
greater time, effort and extensive effort and money.
knowledge of legal requirements and (v)  Delay in decision making: 
the procedures involved. As compared Companies are democratically managed 
to sole proprietorship and partnership 
form of organisations, formation of a through the Board of Directors which 
company is more complex. is followed by the top management, 

middle management and lower level 
(ii)  Lack of secrecy: The Companies management. Communication as 
Act requires each public company well as approval of various proposals 
to provide from time-to-time a lot of may cause delays not only in taking 
information to the office of the registrar decisions but also in acting upon 
of companies. Such information is them.  
available to the general public also. 
It is, therefore, difficult to maintain (vi)  Oligarchic management: In 
complete secrecy about the operations theory, a company is a democratic 
of company. institution wherein the Board of 

Directors are representatives of the 
(iii)  Impersonal work environment: shareholders who are the owners. In 
Separat ion o f  ownership  and 
management leads to situations in practice, however, in most large sized 
which there is lack of effort as well organisations having a multitude 
as personal involvement on the of shareholders; the owners have 
part of the officers of a company. minimal inf luence in terms of 
The large size of a company further controlling or running the business. 
makes it difficult for the owners It is so because the shareholders are 
and top management to maintain spread all over the country and a very 
personal contact with the employees, small percentage attend the general 
customers and creditors. meetings. The Board of Directors as 
(iv)  Numerous regulations: The such enjoy considerable freedom in 
functioning of a company is subject exercising their power which they 
to  many legal  provis ions and sometimes use even contrary to 
compulsions. A company is burdened the interests of the shareholders. 
with numerous restrictions in respect Dissatisfied shareholders in such a 
of aspects including audit, voting, situation have no option but to sell 
filing of reports and preparation of their shares and exit the company. As 
documents, and is required to obtain the directors virtually enjoy the rights 
various certificates from different to take all major decisions, it leads to 
agencies, viz., registrar, SEBI, etc. This rule by a few. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   47 06/09/2024   14:54:59



48 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(vii)  Conflict in interests: There 	 (b)	 has a minimum of 2 and a maximum 
may be conflict of interest amongst of 200 members, excluding the 
various stakeholders of a company. present and past employees;
The employees, for example, may 
be interested in higher salaries, 	 (c)	 does not invite public to subscribe 
consumers desire higher quality to its securities and  
products at lower prices, and the It is necessary for a private company 
shareholders want higher returns in to use the word private limited after its 
the form of dividends and increase name. If a private company contravenes 

any of the aforesaid provisions, it 
in the intrinsic value of their shares. ceases to be a private company and 
These demands pose problems in loses all the exemptions and privileges 
managing the company as it often to which it is entitled.
becomes difficult to satisfy such The following are some of the privileges 
diverse interests. of a private limited company as against 
2.6.1	 Types of Companies a public limited company:

1.	 A private company can be formed 
A company can be either a private or 
a public company. These two types of by only two members whereas 
companies are discussed in detail in seven people are needed to form 
the following paragraphs. a public company.

2.	 There is no need to issue a pro-
Private Company spectus as public is not invited to 
A private company means a company subscribe to the shares of a pri-

vate company.
which: 3.	 Allotment of shares can be done 
	 (a)	 restricts the right of members to without receiving the minimum 

transfer its shares; subscription. A private limited 

Table 2.3    Difference between a Public Company and Private Company
Basis Public company Private company

Members Minimum - 7 Minimum - 2
Maximum - unlimited Maximum - 200

Minimum number of 
directors Three Two

Index of members Compulsory Not compulsory
Transfer of shares No restriction Restriction on transfer

Invitation to public to Can invite the public to Cannot invite the public 
subscribe to shares subscribe to its shares or to subscribe to its 

debentures securities 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   48 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 49

company can start business as 	 (b)	 has no restriction on transfer 
soon as it receives the certificate securities; and
of incorporation. 	 (c)	 is not prohibited from inviting 

4.	 A private company needs to have the public to subscribe to its 
only two directors as against the securities.
minimum of three directors in the However, a private company which is a 
case of a public company. Howev- subsidiary of a public company is also 
er the maximum number of direc- treated as a public company.
tors for both types of companies 
is fifteen. 2.7	C hoice of form of Business 

5.	 A private company is not required Organisation 
to keep an index of members 
while the same is necessary in After studying various forms of business 
the case of a public company. organisations, it is evident that each 

form has certain advantages as well as 
Public Company disadvantages. It, therefore, becomes 

vital that certain basic considerations 
A public company means a company 
which is not a private company. As per are kept in mind while choosing an 
The Companies Act, a public company appropriate form of organisation. The 
is one which: important factors determining the 
	 (a)	 has a minimum of 7 members and choice of organisation are listed in 

no limit on maximum members; Table 2.4 and are discussed as follows:

Table 2.4     Factors influencing the choice of 
           form of Business Organisation

Form of organisation
Factor Most advantageous Least advantageous

Availability of capital Company Sole proprietorship
Cost of formation Sole proprietorship Company
Ease of formation Sole proprietorship Company

Transfer of ownership Company (except private company) Partnership
Managerial skills Company Sole proprietorship

Regulations Sole proprietorship Company
Flexibility Sole proprietorship Company
Continuity Company Sole proprietorship
Liability Company Sole proprietorship

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   49 13-01-2021   09:41:00



50 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(i)  Cost and ease in setting up the is affected by such events as death, 
organisation: As far as initial business insolvency or insanity of the owners. 
setting-up costs are concerned, sole However, such factors do not affect the 
proprietorship is the most inexpensive continuity of business in the case of 
way of starting a business. However, organisations like joint Hindu family 
the legal requirements are minimum business, cooperative societies and 
and the scale of operations is small. companies. In case the business needs 
In case of partnership also, the a permanent structure, company 
advantage of less legal formalities and form is more suitable. For short 
lower cost is there because of limited term ventures, proprietorship or 
scale of operations. Cooperative partnership may be preferred.
societies and companies have to be (iv)  Management ability: A sole 
compulsorily registered. Formation proprietor may find it difficult to 
of a company involves a lengthy and have expertise in all functional areas 
expensive legal procedure. From the of management. In other forms of 
point of view of initial cost, therefore, organisations like partnership and 
sole proprietorship is the preferred company, there is no such problem. 

Division of work among the members 
form as it involves least expenditure. in such organisations allows the 
Company form of organisation, on managers to specialise in specific 
the other hand, is more complex and areas, leading to better decision 
involves greater costs. making. But this may lead to situations 
( i i )   Liabil ity:  In case of  so le of conflicts because of differences of 
proprietorship and partnership firms, opinion amongst people. Further, if the 
the liability of the owners/partners organisation’s operations are complex 
is unlimited. This may call for paying in nature and require professionalised 
the debt from personal assets of management, company form of 
the owners. In joint Hindu family organisation is a better alternative. 
business, only the karta has unlimited Proprietorship or partnership may be 
liability. In cooperative societies and suitable, where simplicity of operations 
companies, however, liability is limited allow even people with limited skills 
and creditors can force payment of to run the business. Thus, the 
their claims only to the extent of the nature of operations and the need for 
company’s assets. Hence, from the professionalised management affect 
point of view of investors, the company the choice of the form of organisation.
form of organisation is more suitable (v) Capital considerations: Companies 
as the risk involved is limited. are in a better position to collect 
(iii) Continuity: The continuity of sole large amounts of capital by issuing 
proprietorship and partnership firms shares to a large number of investors. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   50 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 51

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   51 13-01-2021   09:41:00

Table 2.5    Comparative Evaluation of Forms of Organisation

Basis of Sole nt Hindu Cooperative 
comparison proprietorship Partnership Joi

family business society Company

Minimal legal Less legal 
on is formalities, Registration Registration compulsory,

Formation formalities, Registrati
easiest optional, exemption from compulsory,

formation easy formation registration, greater legal lengthy and expensive 

easy formation formalities formation process

At least two Minimum Private-2
persons for At least 10 Public Company-7

Members Only owner Minimum-2 division of family adults, Maximum
Maximum: 50 property, no maximum Private Company-200

no maximum limit Public Company-
limit unlimited

Limited but 
more than 

Capital that can be Ancestral 
contribution Limited finance raised in property Limited Large financial resources

case of sole 
proprietorship

Liability Unlimited Unlimited and Unlimited 
joint (Karta), Limited Limited Limited

(Other members)

Owner takes all Partners take Elected 
Control and decisions, decisions, representative, Separation between 
management quick decision consent of all Karta takes i.e., managing ownership and 

making partners is decisions committee management
needed takes decisions

Unstable, More stable Stable business, 
Continuity business and but affected continues even if Stable because 

owner regarded by status of karta dies of separate Stable because of 
us

as one partners legal status separate legal stat



52 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Partnership firms also have the (vii)  Nature of business: If direct 
advantage of combined resources of personal contact is needed with the 
all partners. But the resources of a sole customers such as in the case of a 
proprietor are limited. Thus, if the scale grocery store, proprietorship may be 
of operations is large, company form 
may be suitable whereas for medium more suitable. For large manufacturing 
and small sized business one can opt units, however, when direct personal 
for partnership or sole proprietorship. contact with the customer is not required, 
Further, from the point of view of the company form of organisation may 
expansion, a company is more suitable be adopted. Similarly, in cases where 
because of its capability to raise more services of a professional nature are 
funds and invest in expansion plans. It required, partnership form is much 
is precisely for this purpose that in our more suitable. 
opening case Neha’s father suggested It would not be out of place to 
she should consider switching over to 
the company form of organisation. mention here that the factors stated 

above are inter-related. Factors like 
(vi)  Degree of control: If direct capital contribution and risk vary with 
control over operations and absolute the size and nature of business, and 
decision making power is required, hence a form of business organisation 
proprietorship may be preferred. But if 
the owners do not mind sharing control that is suitable from the point of view 
and decision making, partnership or of the risks for a given business when 
company form of organisation can be run on a small scale might not be 
adopted. The added advantage in the appropriate when the same business is 
case of company form of organisation carried on a large scale. It is, therefore, 
is that there is complete separation suggested that all the relevant factors 
of ownership and management and it must be taken into consideration while 
is  professionals who are appointed to making a decision with respect to the 
independently manage the affairs of form of organisation that should be 
a company. adopted.

Key Terms

Sole proprietorship	 Partnership	 Joint Hindu Family
Mutual agency	 Cooperative Societies	 Joint Stock Company
Perpetual succession	 Artificial person	 Holding company 
Co-parceners	 Incorporation of a Company	  
	

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   52 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 53

SUMMARY

Forms of business organisation refers to the types of organisations which 
differ in terms of ownership and management. The major forms of organisation 
include proprietorship, partnership, joint Hindu family business, cooperative 
society and company.
Sole proprietorship refers to a form of organisation where business is owned, 
managed and controlled by a single individual who bears all the risks and is 
the only recipient of all the profits. Merits of this form of organisation include 
quick decision making, direct incentive, personal satisfaction, and ease of 
formation and closure. But this form of organisation suffers from limitations 
of limited resources, unstable life span of business, unlimited liability of sole 
proprietor and his/her limited managerial ability.
Partnership is defined as an association of two or more persons who agree 
to carry on a business together and share the profits as well as bear risks 
collectively. Major advantages of partnership are: ease of formation and 
closure, benefits of specialisation, greater funds, and reduction of risk. Major 
limitations of partnership are unlimited  liability, possibility of conflicts, lack 
of continuity and lack of public confidence. As there are different types of 
partners such as active, sleeping, secret and nominal partners; so is the case 
with types of partnerships which can vary from general partnership, limited 
partnership, partnership at will to particular partnership.
Joint Hindu family business is a business owned and carried on by the 
members of a Hindu Undivided Family, which is governed by the Hindu law. 
Karta — the oldest male member of the family — controls the business. The 
strong points of joint Hindu family business include effective control, stability 
in existence, limited liability and increased loyalty among family members. But 
this form of organisation too suffers from certain limitations such as limited 
resources, lack of incentives, dominance of the karta and limited managerial 
ability.
A cooperative society is a voluntary association of persons who get together to 
protect their economic interests. The major advantages of a cooperative society 
are equality in voting, members’ limited liability, stable existence, economy in 
operations, support from government, and ease of formation. But this form of 
organisation suffers from weaknesses such as limited resources, inefficiency 
in management, lack of secrecy, government control, and differences among 
members in regard to the way society should be managed and organised. Based 
on their purpose and nature of members, various types of societies that can be 
formed include: consumers cooperative society, producers cooperative society, 
marketing cooperative society, farmers cooperative society, credit cooperative 
society, and cooperative housing society.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   53 13-01-2021   09:41:00



54 BUSINESS  STUDIES

A company, on the other hand, may be defined as an artificial person, existing 
only in the eyes of the law with perpetual succession and having a separate 
legal identity. While major advantages of a company form of organisation 
are members’ limited liability, transfer of interest, stable existence, scope for 
expansion, and professional management; its key limitations are: complexity 
in formation, lack of secrecy, impersonal work environment, numerous 
regulations, delay in decision making, oligarchic management, and conflict of 
interests among different shareholders.
Companies can be of two types — private and public. A private company is one 
which restricts transfer of shares and does not invite the public to subscribe 
to its securities. A public company, on the other hand, is allowed to raise its 
funds by inviting the public to subscribe to its securities. Furthermore, there 
is a free transferability of securities in the case of a public company.
Choice of form of organisation: Selection of an appropriate form of 
organisation can be made after taking various factors into consideration. 
Initial costs, liability, continuity, capital considerations, managerial ability, 
degree of control and nature of business are the key factors that need to taken 
into account while deciding about the suitable form of organisation for one’s 
business.

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1.	 Compare the status of a minor in a Joint Hindu family business with that 

in a partnership firm.
2.	 If registration is optional, why do partnership firms willingly go through this 

legal formality and get themselves registered? Explain. 
3.	 State the important privileges available to a private company.
4.	 How does a cooperative society exemplify democracy and secularism? 

Explain.
5.	 What is meant by ‘partner by estoppel’? Explain.
6.	 Briefly explain the following terms in brief.

(a)   Perpetual succession  		  (b)   Common seal  
(c)   Karta	 	 	 	 (d)   Artificial person

Long Answer Questions
1.	 What do you understand by a sole proprietorship firm? Explain its merits 

and limitation?

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   54 13-01-2021   09:41:00



FORMS OF BUSINESS ORGANISATION 55

2.	 Why is partnership considered by some to be a relatively unpopular form 
of business ownership? Explain the merits and limitations of partnership. 

3.	 Why is it important to choose an appropriate form of organisation? Discuss 
the factors that determine the choice of form of organisation.

4.	 Discuss the characteristics, merits and limitation of cooperative form of 
organisation. Also describe briefly different types of cooperative societies.

5.	 Distinguish between a Joint Hindu family business and partnership.
6.	 Despite limitations of size and resources, many people continue to prefer 

sole proprietorship over other forms of organisation?  Why?

Application Questions
1.	 In which form of organisation is a trade agreement made by one owner 

binding on the others? Give reasons to support your answer.
2.	 The business assets of an organisation amount to Rs. 50,000 but the debts 

that remain unpaid are Rs.  80,000.  What course of action can the creditors 
take if
(a)	 The organisation is a sole proprietorship firm
(b)	 The organisation is a partnership firm with Anthony and Akbar as 

partners. Which of the two partners can the creditors approach for 
repayment of debt? Explain giving reasons

3.	 Kiran is a sole proprietor. Over the past decade, her business has grown 
from operating a neighbourhood corner shop selling accessories such as 
artificial jewellery, bags, hair clips and nail art to a retail chain with three 
branches in the city. Although she looks after the varied functions in all the 
branches, she is wondering whether she should form a company to better 
manage the business. She also has plans to open branches countrywide.
(a)	 Explain two benefits of remaining a sole proprietor
(b)	 Explain two benefits of converting to a joint stock company
(c)	 What role will her decision to go nationwide play in her choice of form 

of the organisation?
(d)	 What legal formalities will she have to undergo to operate business as 

a company?

Projects
Divide students into teams to work on the following

(a)	 To study the profiles of any five neighbourhood grocery/stationery 
store

(b)	 To conduct a study into the functioning of a Joint Hindu family 
businesses

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   55 13-01-2021   09:41:00



56 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(c)	 To enquire into the profile of five partnerships firms
(d)	 To study the ideology and working of cooperative societies in the area
(e)	 To study the profiles of any five companies (inclusive of both private 

and public companies)

Assignments
1.	 Sonam and Sameer decided to begin a food processing business in District 

Kangra of Himachal Pradesh.  Help them in developing the partnership deed 
to avoid any dispute in future. 

Notes
1.	 Some of the following aspects can be assigned to the students for undertaking 

above mentioned studies.
2.	 Nature of business, size of the business measured in terms of capital 

employed, number of persons working, or sales turnover, problems faced, 
Incentive, reason behind choice of a particular form, decision making 
pattern, willingness to expand and relevant considerations, Usefulness of 
a form, etc.

3.	 Students teams should be encouraged to submit their findings and 
conclusions in the form of project reports and multi-media presentations. 

4.	 The specimen partnership deed is available as e-resource in the embedded 
QR code.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 2.indd   56 13-01-2021   09:41:00



Chapter 3

##3##
Private, Public and Global Enterprises

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 explain the concept and characteristics of business;

•	 explain the features of different forms of public enterprises viz., 
departmental, statutory corporations and government companies;

•	 critically examine the changing role of the public sector;

•	 explain the features of global enterprises; and

•	 appreciate the benefits of joint ventures.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   57 31-12-2020   11:54:45



58 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Anita, a student of Class XI, was going through some newspapers. The headlines 
stared at her face, Government plans to disinvest its shares in a few companies. 
The next day there was another news item on one public sector company incurring 
heavy losses and the proposal for closing the same. In contrast to this, she read 
another item on how some of the companies under the private sector were doing 
so well. She was actually curious to know what these terms like public sector, 
disinvestment, privatisation meant.

She learnt there are all kinds of business organisation-small or large, industrial 
or trading, privately owned or government owned existing in our country. These 
organisations affect our daily economic life and therefore become part of the 
Indian economy. Since the Indian economy consists of both privately owned and 
government owned business enterprises, it is known as a mixed economy. The 
Government of India has opted for a mixed economy where both private and 
government enterprises are allowed to operate. The economy, therefore, may be 
classified into two sectors, viz., private sector and public sector. 

Then there are businesses which operate in more than one country known as 
global enterprises. Therefore, you may have observed that all types of organisations 
are doing business in the country whether they are public, private or global.

3.1	 Introduction cities and towns has been greatly 
reduced. This is because of plenty of 

You must have come across all types private courier services firms operating 
of business organisations in your in bigger towns. Then there are 
daily life. In your neighbourhood businesses which operate in more 
market, there are shops owned by sole than one country known as global 
proprietors or big retail organisations enterprises. Therefore, you may have 
run by a company. Then there are observed that all types of organisations 
people providing you services like are doing business in the country 
legal services, medical services, being whether they are public, private or 
owned by more than one person global.
i.e., partnership firms. These are 
all privately owned organisations. 
Similarly, there are other offices 3.2	 Private Sector and Public 
or places of business which may Sector

be owned by the government. For The private sector consists of 
example, Railways is an organisation business owned by individuals or 
wholly owned and managed by the a group of individuals, as you have 
government. The post office, in your learnt in the previous chapter. The 
locality is owned by the Post and various forms of organisation are 
Telegraph Department, Government sole proprietorship, partnership, 
of India, though our dependence on joint Hindu family, cooperative 
their postal services, particularly in and company.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   58 13-01-2021   11:15:54



PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 59

The public sector consists of outside India. Thus, multinational 
various organisations owned and corporations or global enterprises 
managed by the government. These which operate in more than one 
organisations may either be partly or country gained entry into the Indian 
wholly owned by the central or state economy. Thus, we have public sector 
government. They may also be a part units, private sector enterprises and 
of the ministry or come into existence global enterprises coexisting in the 
by a Special Act of the Parliament. The Indian economy.
government, through these enterprises 
participates in the economic activities 3.3	 Forms of Organising Public 
of the country. Sector Enterprises

The government in its industrial 
policy resolutions, from time-to- Government’s participation in business 
time, defines the area of activities in and economic sectors of the country 
which the private sector and public needs some kind of organisational 
sector are allowed to operate. In the framework to function. You have 
Industrial Policy Resolution 1948, studied about the forms of business 
the Government of India had specified organisation in the private sector 
the approach towards development of viz., sole proprietorship, partnership, 
the industrial sector. The roles of the Hindu undivided family, cooperative 
private and public sector were clearly and company.
defined and the government through In the public sector, as it grows, an 
various Acts and Regulations was important question arises in respect of 
overseeing the economic activities of how it is to be organised or what form 
both the private and public sector. of organisation it should take. The 
The Industrial Policy Resolution, 1956 government has a major role to play in 
had also laid down certain objectives the formation of the public sector. But 
for the public sector to follow so as the government acts through its people, 
to accelerate the rate of growth and its offices, employees and they take 
industrialisation. The public sector decisions on behalf of the government. 
was given a lot of importance but at For this purpose, public enterprises 
the same time mutual dependency were formed by the government to 
of public and private sectors was participate in the economic activities 
emphasised. The 1991 industrial policy of the country. They are expected 
was radically different from all the to contribute to the economic deve-
earlier policies where the government lopment of the country in today’s 
was deliberating disinvestment of liberalised, competitive world. These 
public sector and allowing greater public enterprises are owned by 
freedom to the private sector. At the the public and are accountable to 
same time, foreign direct investment the public through the Parliament. 
was invited from business houses They are characterised by public 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   59 31-12-2020   11:54:45



60 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Indian Economy

Public Sector Private Sector

Departmental Government
Undertakings Companies Partnership Joint Cooperative Multinational

Hindu Corporations
Statutory Sole Family

Corporation Properietorship Company

Public Private
(Ltd.) (Ltd.)

ownership, public funds being used for 3.3.1	 Departmental Undertakings
its activities and public accountability. This is the oldest and most traditional 

A public enterprise may take form of organising public enterprises. 
any particular form of organisation These enterprises are established as 
depending upon the nature of its departments of the ministry and are 
operations and their relationship with considered part or an extension of 
the government. The suitability of a the ministry itself. The Government 
particular form of organisation would functions through these departments 
depend upon its requirements. At the and the activities performed by them 
same time, in accordance with general are an integral part of the functioning 
principles, any organisation in the public of the government. They have not 
sector should ensure organisational been constituted as autonomous or 
performance productivity and quality independent institutions and as such 
standards. are not independent legal entities. 

The forms of organisation which They act through the officers of 
a public enterprise may take are as the Government and its employees 
follows: are Government employees. These 
	 (i)	 Departmental undertaking undertakings may be under the 

central or the state government and 
	 (ii)	 Statutory corporation the rules of central/state government 
	(iii)	 Government company are applicable. Examples of these 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   60 31-12-2020   11:54:45



PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 61

undertakings are railways and post 	 (i)	 These undertakings facilitate the 
and telegraph department. Parliament to exercise effective 

control over their operations;
Features 	 (ii)	 These ensure a high degree of 
The  ma in  cha rac t e r i s t i c s  o f public accountability;
Departmental undertakings are as 	(iii)	 The revenue earned by the 
follows: enterprise goes directly to the 
	 (i)	 The funding of these enterprises treasury and hence is a source of 

come directly from the Govern- income for the Government;
ment Treasury and are an annual 	(iv)	 Where national security is 
appropriation from the budget concerned, this form is most 
of the Government. The revenue suitable since it is under the 
earned by these is also paid into direct control and supervision of 
the treasury; the concerned Ministry.

	 (ii)	 They are subject to accounting 
and audit controls applicable to Limitations
other Government activities; This form of organisation suffers from 

	(iii)	 The employees of the enterprise serious drawbacks, some of which are 
are Government servants and as follows:
their recruitment and conditions 	 (i)	 Departmental undertakings fail 
of service are the same as that of to provide flexibility, which is 
other employees directly under essential for the smooth  operation 
the Government. They are headed 
by Indian Administrative Service of business;
(IAS) officers and civil servants 	 (ii)	 The employees or heads of depart-
who are transferable from one ments of such undertakings are 
ministry to another; not allowed to take independent 

	(iv)	 It is generally considered to be decisions, without the approval 
a major subdivision of the of the ministry concerned. This 
Government department and is leads to delays, in matters where 
subject to direct control of the prompt decisions are required;
ministry; 	(iii)	 These enterprises are unable 

	 (v)	 They are accountable to the to take advantage of business 
ministry since their management opportunities. The bureaucrat’s 
is directly under the concerned over-cautious and conservative 
ministry. approval does not allow them to 

take risky ventures;
Merits 	(iv)	 There is red tapism in day-to-day 
Departmental undertakings have operations and no action can be 
certain advantages which are as taken unless it goes through the 
follows: proper channels of authority;

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   61 31-12-2020   11:54:45



62 BUSINESS  STUDIES

	 (v)	 There is a lot of political inter- government has the ultimate 
ference through the ministry; financial responsibility and has 

	(vi)	 These organisations are usually the power to appropriate its 
insensitive to consumer needs profits. At the same time, the state 
and  do not provide adequate also has to bear the losses, if any;
services to them. 	(iii)	 A statutory corporation is a body 

corporate and can sue and be 
3.3.2	 Statutory Corporations sued, enter into contract and 
Statutory corporations are public acquire property in its own name;
enterprises brought into existence by 	(iv)	 This type of enterprise is usually 
a Special Act of the Parliament. The independently financed. It obtains 
Act defines its powers and functions, funds by borrowings from the 
rules and regulations governing its government or from the public 
employees and its relationship with through revenues, derived from 
government departments. sale of goods and services. It has 

This is a corporate body created the authority to use its revenues;
by the legislature with defined powers 	 (v)	 A statutory corporation is not 
and functions and is financially subject to the same accounting 
independent with a clear control and audit procedures applicable 
over a specified area or a particular to government departments. It 
type of commercial activity. It is a is also not concerned with the 
corporate person and has the capacity central budget of the Government;
of acting in its own name. Statutory 	(vi)	 The employees of these enterprises 
corporations therefore have the power are not government or civil 
of the government and considerable servants and are not governed by 
amount of operating flexibility of government rules and regulations. 
private enterprises. The conditions of service of the 

employees are governed by the 
Features provisions of the Act itself. At 
Statutory corporations have certain times, some officers are taken 
distinct features, which are discussed from government departments, 
as below: on deputation, to head these 
	 (i)	 Statutory corporations are set up organisations.

under an Act of Parliament and 
are governed by the provisions Merits
of the Act. The Act defines the This form of organisation enjoys 
objects, powers and privileges of certain advantages in its working, 
a statutory corporation; which are as follows:

	 (ii)	 This type of organisation is 	 (i)	 They enjoy independence in their 
wholly owned by the state. The functioning and a high degree of 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   62 31-12-2020   11:54:45



PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 63

operational flexibility. They are 	(iv)	 The Government has a practice 
free from undesirable government of appointing advisors to the 
regulation and control; Corporation Board. This curbs 

	 (ii)	 Since the funds of these organi- the freedom of the corporation 
sations do not come from the in entering into contracts and 
central budget, the government other decisions. If there is any 
generally does not interfere in disagreement, the matter is 
their financial matters, including referred to the government for 
their income and receipts; final decisions. This further 

	(iii)	 Since they are autonomous delays action.
organisations they frame their 
own policies and procedures 3.3.3	 Government Company
within the powers assigned to A government company is established 
them by the Act. The Act may, under The Companies Act, 2013 
however, provide few issues/ and is registered and governed by 
matters which require prior the provisions of The Act. These 
approval of a particular ministry; are established for purely business 

	(iv)	 A statutory corporation is a purposes and in true spirit compete 
valuable instrument for economic with companies in the private sector.
development. It has the power According to the section 2(45) of the 
of the government, combined Companies Act 2013, a government 
with the initiative of private company means any company in 
enterprises. which not less than 51 per cent of the 

paid up capital is held by the central 
Limitations government, or by any state government 

or partly by Central government 
This type of organisation suffers from and partly by one or more State 
several limitations, which are as governments and includes a company 
follows: which is a subsidiary of a government 
	 (i)	 In reality, a statutory corporation company. Under the Companies 

does not enjoy as much operational Act 2013, there is no change in the 
flexibility as stated above. All definition of a company. All provisions 
actions are subject to many rules of the Act are applicable to government 
and regulations; companies unless otherwise specified. 

	 (ii)	 Government  and po l i t i ca l A government company may be formed 
interference has always been as a private limited company or a public 
there in major decisions or where limited company. There are certain 
huge funds are involved; provisions which are applicable to the 

	(iii)	 Where there is dealing with public, appointment/retirement of directors 
rampant corruption exists; and other managerial personnel. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   63 31-12-2020   11:54:45



64 BUSINESS  STUDIES

From the above it is clear that the 	(vi)	 These companies are exempted 
government exercises control over the from the accounting and audit 
paid up share capital of the company. rules and procedures. An auditor 
The shares of the company are is appointed by the Central 
purchased in the name of the President Government and the Annual 
of India. Since the government is Report is to be presented in 
the major shareholder and exercises the Parliament or the State 
control over the management of Legislature;
these companies, they are known as 	(vii)	 The government company obtains 
government companies. its funds from government 

shareholdings and other private 
Features shareholders. It is also permitted 

to raise funds from the capital 
Gove rnment  compan ies  have market.
certain characteristics which makes 
them distinct from other forms of Merits
organisations. These are discussed 
as follows: Government companies enjoy several 
	 (i)	 It is an organisation created under advantages, which are as follows:

the Companies Act, 2013 or any 	 (i)	 A government company can 
other previous Company Law. be established by fulfilling the 

	 (ii)	 The company can file a suit in requirements of the Indian 
a court of law against any third Companies Act. A separate Act 
party and be sued; in the Parliament is not required;

	(iii)	 The company can enter into a 	 (ii)	 It has a separate legal entity, 
contract and can acquire property apart from the Government;
in its own name; 	(iii)	 I t  enjoys autonomy in a l l 

	(iv)	 The management of the company management decisions and takes 
is regulated by the provisions of actions according to business 
the Companies Act, like any other prudence;

	(iv)	 These companies by providing 
public limited company; goods and services at reasonable 

	 (v)	 The employees of the company prices are able to control the 
are appointed according to their market and curb unhealthy 
own rules and regulations as business practices.
contained in the Memorandum 
and Articles of Association of Limitations
the company. The Memorandum 
and Articles of Association are Despite the autonomy given to 
the main documents of the these companies, they have certain 
company, containing the objects disadvantages:
of the company and its rules and 	 (i)	 Since the Government is the 
regulations; only shareholder in some of the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   64 31-12-2020   11:54:46



PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 65

companies, the provisions of the role of public sector was redefined. It 
Companies Act does not have was not supposed to play a passive role 
much relevance; but to actively participate and compete 

	 (ii)	 I t  e v a d e s  c o n s t i t u t i o n a l in the market with other private sector 
responsibility, which a company companies in the same industry. 
financed by the government They were also held accountable for 
should  have. It is not answerable losses and return on investment. If 
directly to the Parliament; a public sector was making losses 

	(iii)	 The government being the sole continuously, it was referred to the 
shareholder, the management Board for Industrial and Financial 
and administration rests in the Reconstruction (BIFR) for complete 
hands of the government. The overhauling or shut down. Various 
main purpose of a government committees were set up to study 
company, registered like other the working of inefficient public 
companies, is defeated. sector units with reports on how to 

improve their managerial efficiency 
3.4	C hanging Role of Public Sector and profitability. The role of public 
At the time of Independence, it was sector is definitely not what was 
expected that the public sector envisaged in the early 1960s or 70s.
enterprises would play an important (i)  Development of infrastructure: 
role in achieving certain objectives of the The development of infrastructure is a 
economy either by direct participation prerequisite for industrialisation in any 
in business or by acting as a catalyst. country. In the pre-Independence period, 
The public sector would build up basic infrastructure was not developed 
infrastructure for other sectors of the and therefore, industrialisation 
economy and invest in key areas. The progressed at a very slow pace. The 
private sector was unwilling to invest process of industrialisation cannot 
in projects which required heavy be sustained without adequate 
investment and had long gestation transportation and communication 
periods. The government then took it facilities, fuel and energy, and basic 
upon itself to develop infrastructural and heavy industries. The private 
facilities and provide for goods and sector did not show any initiative to 
services essential for the economy. invest in heavy industries or develop 

The Indian economy is in a stage it in any manner. They did not have 
of transition. The Five Year Plans in trained personnel or finances to 
the initial stages of development gave immediately establish heavy industries 
lot of importance to the public sector. which was the requirement of the 
In the post–1990s, the new economic economy.
policies, emphasised on liberalisation, It was only the government which 
privatisation and globalisation. The could mobilise huge capital, coordinate 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   65 31-12-2020   11:54:46



66 BUSINESS  STUDIES

industrial construction and train industries were deliberately set up. 
technicians and workforce. Rail, Four major steel plants were set up 
road, sea and air transport was the in the backward areas to accelerate 
responsibility of the government, and economic development, provide 
their expansion has contributed to the employment to the workforce and 
pace of industrialisation and ensured develop ancilliary industries. This was 
future economic growth. The public achieved to some extent but there is 
sector enterprises were to operate in scope for a lot more. Development 
certain spheres. Investments were to of backward regions so as to ensure 
be made to: a regional balance in the country is 
	 (a)	 Give infrastructure to the core one of the major objectives of planned 

sector, which requires huge development. Therefore, the govern-
capital investment, complex and ment had to locate new enterprises 
upgraded technology, big and in backward areas and at the same 
effective organisation structures time prevent the mushrooming growth 
like steel plants, power generation of private sector units in already 
plants, civil aviation, railways, advanced areas.
petroleum, state trading, coal, (iii)  Economies of scale: Where 
etc; large scale industries are required to 

	(b)	 Give a lead in investment to the be set up with huge capital outlay, 
core sector where private sector the public sector had to step in to 
enterprises are not functioning take advantage of economies of scale. 
in the desired direction, like Electric power plants, natural gas, 
fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, petroleum and telephone industries 
petro-chemicals, newsprint, are some examples of the public sector 
medium and heavy engineering; setting up large scale units. These 

	 (c)	 G i v e  d i r e c t i on  t o  fu tu r e units required a larger base to function 
investments like hotels, project economically which was only possible 
management, consultancies, with government resources and mass 
textiles, auto-mobiles, etc. scale production.

(ii) Regional balance: The government (iv)  Check over concentration of 
is responsible for developing all regions economic power: The public sector 
and states in a balanced way and acts as a check over the private 
removing regional disparties. Most of sector. In the private sector there 
the industrial progress was limited to are very few industrial houses which 
a few areas like the port towns in the would be willing to invest in heavy 
pre-Independence period. After 1951, industries with the result that wealth 
the government laid down in its Five gets concentrated in a few hands and 
Year Plans, that particular attention monopolostic practices are encouraged. 
would be paid to those regions which This gives rise to inequalities in income, 
were lagging behind and public sector which is detrimental to society.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   66 31-12-2020   11:54:46



PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 67

The public sector is able to set public sector from 17 to 8 
large industries which requires heavy (and then to 3): In the 1956 
investment and thus the income and resolution on Industrial policy, 
benefits that accrue are shared by 17 industries were reserved for 
a large of number of employees and the public sector. In 1991, only 
workers. This prevents concentration 8 industries were reserved for 
of wealth and economic power in the the public sector, they were 
private sector. restricted to atomic energy, arms 
(v)  Import substitution: During the and communication, mining, 
second and third Five Year Plan period, and railways. In 2001, only 
India was aiming to be self-reliant three industries were reserved 
in many spheres. Obtaining foreign exclusively for the public sector. 
exchange was also a problem and it These are atomic energy, arms 
was difficult to import heavy machinery and rail transport. This meant 
required for a strong industrial base. that the private sector could enter 
At that time, public sector companies all areas (except the three) and 
involved in heavy engineering which the public sector would have to 
would help in import substitution were compete with them.
established. Simultaneously, several The public sector has played a 
public sector companies like STC and vital role in the development of the 
MMTC have played an important role economy. However, the private sector 
in expanding exports of the country. is also quite capable of contributing 
(vi)  Government policy towards substantially to the nation building 
the public sector since 1991: The process. Therefore, both the public 
Government of India had introduced sector and the private sector need to 
four major reforms in the public sector be viewed as mutually complementary 
in its new industrial policy in 1991. parts of the national sector. Private 
The main elements of the Government sector units also have to assume 
policy are as follows: greater public responsibil it ies. 
•	 Restructure and revive potentially Simultaneously, the public sector 

viable PSUs needs to focus on achieving more in a 
•	 Close down PSUs, which cannot highly competitive market.

be revived 	(b)	 Disinvestment of shares of 
•	 Bring down governments equity in a select set of public sector 

all non-strategic PSUs to 26 per enterprises:  Disinvestment 
cent or lower, if necessary; and involves the sale of the equity 

•	 Fully protect the interest of shares to the private sector and 
workers. the public. The objective was to 

	(a)	 Reduction in the number of raise resources and encourage 
industries reserved for the wider participation of the general 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   67 31-12-2020   11:54:46



68 BUSINESS  STUDIES

public and workers in the the private sector: All public 
ownership of these enterprises. sector units were referred to the 
The government had taken a Board of Industrial and Financial 
decision to withdraw from the Reconst ruc t ion  to  dec ide 
industrial sector and reduce whether a sick unit was to be 
its equity in all undertakings. restructured or closed down. The 
It was expected that this would Board has reconsidered revival 
lead to improving managerial and rehabilitation schemes for 
performance and ensuring some cases and winding up 
financial discipline. But there for a number of units. There 
remains a lot to be done in is a lot of resentment amongst 
this area. workers of the units which are 

The primary objectives of privatising to be closed down. A National 
public sector enterprises are: Renewal Fund was set up by the 
•	 Releasing the large amount government to retrain or redeploy 

of public resources locked up retrenched labour and to provide 
in non-strategic Public Sector compensation to public sector 
Enterprises (PSEs), so that they employees seeking voluntary 
may be utilised on other social retirement.
priority areas such as basic 			   There are many enterprises 
health, family welfare and primary which are sick and not capable 
education. of being revived as they have 

•	 Reducing the huge amount of accumulated huge losses. With 
public debt and interest burden;

•	 Transferring the commercial public finances under intense 
risk to the private sector so that pressure, both central and state 
the funds are invested in able government are just not able 
projects; to sustain them much longer. 

•	 Free ing  these  enterpr ises The only option available to the 
from government control and government in such cases is to 
in t roduct ion  o f  corporate close down these undertakings 
governance; and after providing a safety net for the 

•	 In many areas where the public employees and workers. Resources 
sector had a monopoly, for under the National Renewal Fund 
example, telecom sector the have not been sufficient to meet 
consumers have benefitted by the cost of Voluntary Separation 
more choices, lower prices and Scheme or Voluntary Retirement 
better quality of products and Scheme.
services. 	(d)	 Memorandum of Understanding: 

	(c)	 Policy regarding sick units Improvement of performance 
to be the same as that for through a MoU (Memorandum 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   68 31-12-2020   11:54:46



PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 69

of Understanding) system by Features
which managements are to be These corporations have distinct 
granted greater autonomy but features which distinguish them from 
held accountable for specified other private sector companies, public 
results. Under this system, public sector companies and public sector 
sector units were given clear enterprises. These are as follows:
targets and operational autonomy (i)  Huge capital resources: These 
for achieving those targets. The enterprises are characterised by 
MoU was between the particular possessing huge financial resources 
public sector unit and their and the ability to raise funds from 
administrative ministries defining different sources. They are able to 
their relationship and autonomy. tap funds from various sources. They 

may issue equity shares, debentures 
3.5	 Global Enterprises or bonds to the public. They are also 
At some time you must have come in a position to borrow from financial 
across products produced by Multi institutions and international banks. 
National Corporations (MNCs). In They enjoy credibility in the capital 
the last 2 decades or so. MNCs have market. Even investors and banks of 
played an important role in the Indian the host country are willing to invest 

in them. Because of their financial 
economy. They have become a common strength they are able to survive under 
feature of most developing economies all circumstances.
in the world. MNCs as is evident (ii)  Foreign collaboration: Global 
from what we see around us, are enterprises usually enter into 
gigantic corporations which have their agreements with Indian companies 
operations in a number of countries. pertaining to the sale of technology, 
They are characterised by their huge production of goods, use of brand 
size, large number of products, names for the final products, etc. These 
advanced technology, marketing MNCs may collaborate with companies 
strategies and network of operations in the public and private sector. There 
all over the world. Global enterprises are usually various restrictive clauses 
thus are huge industrial organisations in the agreement relating to transfer 
which extend their industrial and of technology, pricing, dividend 
marketing operations through a payments, tight control by foreign 
network of their branches in several technicians, etc. Big industrial houses 
countries.  These enterprises operate wanting to diversify and expand have 
in several areas producing multiple gained by collaborating with MNCs in 
products with their business strategy terms of patents, resources, foreign 
extending over a number of countries. exchange etc. But at the same time 
They do not aim at maximising profits these foreign collaborations have given 
from one or two products but instead rise to the growth of monopolies and 
spread their branches all over. concentration of power in few hands.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   69 31-12-2020   11:54:46



70 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(iii)  Advanced technology: These image also builds up and their market 
enterprises possess technological territory expands enabling them 
superiorities in their methods of to become international brands. 
production. They are able to conform They operate through a network of 
to international standards and quality subsidiaries, branches and affiliates 
specifications. This leads to industrial in host countries. Due to their giant 
progress of the country in which such size they occupy a dominant position 
corporations operate since they are in the market.
able to optimally exploit local resources (vii) Centralised control: They have 
and raw materials. Computerisation their headquaters in their home 
and other inventions have come due country and exercise control over all 
to the technological advancements branches and subsidiaries. However, 
provided by MNCs. this control is limited to the broad policy 
(iv)  Product innovation: These framework of the parent company. 
enterprises are characterised by There is no interference in day-to-day 
having highly sophisticated research operations.
and development departments 
engaged in the task of developing 3.6	 Joint Ventures
new products and superior designs of 
existing products. Qualitative research Meaning
requires huge investment which only Business organisations as you have 
global enterprises can afford. studied earlier can be of various 
(v)  Marketing strategies:  The types private or government owned or 
marketing strategies of  global global enterprises. Now, any business 
companies are far more effective than organisation if it so desires can 
other companies. They use aggressive join hands with another business 
marketing strategies in order to organisation for mutual benefit. 
increase their sales in a short period. These two organisations may be 
They posses a more reliable and up- private, government-owned or a foreign 
to-date market information system. company. When two businesses 
Their advertising and sales promotion agree to join together for a common 
techniques are normally very effective. purpose and mutual benefit, it gives 
Since they already have carved out rise to a joint venture. Businesses 
a place for themselves in the global of any size can use joint ventures to 
market, and their brands are well- strengthen long-term relationships or 
known, selling their products is not a to collaborate on short term projects. A 
problem. joint venture can be flexible depending 
(vi) Expansion of market territory: upon the party’s requirements. These 
Their operations and activities extend need to be clearly stated in a joint 
beyond the physical boundaries of their venture agreement to avoid conflict at 
own countries. Their international a later stage. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   70 31-12-2020   11:54:46



PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 71

A joint venture may also be the channels, technology or finance. In 
result of an agreement between two this kind of a joint venture, two or more 
businesses in different countries. In (parent) companies agree to share 
this case, there are certain provisions capital, technology, human resources, 
provided by the governments of the risks and rewards in the formation of 
two countries, which will have to be a new entity, under shared control.
adhered to. In India, joint venture companies 

Thus, we see that joint ventures are the best way of doing business. 
may mean many things, depending There are no separate laws for 
upon the context we are using it these joint ventures. The companies 
in. But in a broader sense, a joint incorporated in India are treated the 
venture is the pooling of resources and same as domestic companies.
expertise by two or more businesses, 
to achieve a particular goal. The risks Joint Ventures are of two types —
and rewards of the business are Contractual joint venture
also shared. The reasons behind the Equity-based joint venture
joint venture often include business 
expansion, development of new 3.6.1 Types of Joint Ventures
products or moving into new markets, (i) Contractual Joint Venture (CJV):
particularly in another country. It is In a contractual joint venture, a new 
becoming increasingly common for jointly-owned entity is not created. 
companies to create joint ventures There is only an agreement to work 
with other businesses/companies together. The parties do not share 
and form strategic alliances with ownership of the business but exercise 
them. The reasons for these alliances some elements of control in the 
may be complementary capabilities joint venture. A typical example 
and resources such as distribution of a contractual joint venture is a 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   71 31-12-2020   11:54:46



72 BUSINESS  STUDIES

franchisee relationship. In such a 	 (e)	 Shared prof i ts and losses 
relationship the key elements are: according to the agreement.
	 (a)	 Two or more parties have a A joint venture must be based on a 

common intention – of running memorandum of understanding signed 
a business venture; by both the parties, highlighting the 

basis of a joint venture agreement. 
	 (b)	 Each party brings some inputs; The terms should be thoroughly 
	 (c)	 Both parties exercise some discussed and negotiated to avoid 

control on the business venture; any legal complications at a later 
and stage. Negotiations and terms must 

	 (d)	 The re lat ionship is  not  a take into account the cultural and 
transact ion-to-transact ion legal background of the parties. The 
relationship but has a character joint venture agreement must also 
of relatively longer duration. state that all necessary governmental 

approvals and licences will be obtained 
(ii) Equity-based Joint Venture (EJV): within a specified period.
An equity joint venture agreement 
is one in which a separate business 3.6.2	 Benefits
entity, jointly owned by two or more 
parties, is formed in accordance with Business can achieve unexpected 
the agreement of the parties. The key gains through joint ventures with a 
operative factor in such case is joint partner. Joint ventures can prove to 
ownership by two or more parties. be extremely beneficial for both parties 
The form of business entity may vary involved. One party may have strong 
— company, partnership firm, trusts, potential for growth and innovative 
limited liability partnership firms, ideas, but is still likely to  benefit from 
venture capital funds, etc. entering into a joint venture because it 
	 (a)	 There is an agreement to either enhances its capacity,  resources and 

create a new entity or for one of technical expertise. The major benefits 
of joint ventures are as follows:

the parties to join into ownership 
of an existing entity; (i)  Increased resources and capacity: 

Joining hands with another or teaming 
	 (b)	 Shared ownership by the parties up adds to existing resources and 

involved; capacity enabling the joint venture 
	 (c)	 Shared management of the jointly company to grow and expand more 

quickly and efficiently. The new 
owned entity; business pools in financial and human 

	 (d)	 Shared responsibilities regarding resources and is able to face market 
capital investment and other challenges and take advantage of new 
financing arrangements; and opportunities.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   72 31-12-2020   11:54:46



PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 73

(ii)  Access to new markets and to get quality products for their global 
distribution networks: When a requirements. India is becoming an 
business enters into a joint venture important global source and extremely 
with a partner from another country, competitive in many products.
it opens up a vast growing market. For There are many reasons for this, 
example, when foreign companies form low cost of raw materials and labour, 
joint venture companies in India they technically qualified workforce; 
gain access to the vast Indian market. management professionals, excellent 
Their products which have reached manpower in different cadres, like 
saturation point in their home markets lawyers, chartered accountants, 
can be easily sold in new markets. 

They can also take advantage of engineers, scientists. The international 
the established distribution channels partner thus, gets the products of 
i.e., the retail outlets in different local required quality and specifications 
markets. Otherwise, establishing their at a much lower cost than what is 
own retail outlets may prove to be prevailing in the home country. 
very expensive. (vi) Established brand name: When 
(iii) Access to technology: Technology two businesses enter into a joint 
is a major factor for most businesses venture, one of the parties benefits from 
to enter into joint ventures. Advanced the other’s goodwill which has already 
techniques of production leading to been established in the market. If the 
superior quality products saves a lot joint venture is in India and with an 
of time, energy and investment as Indian company, the Indian company 
they do not have to develop their own does not have to spend time or money 
technology. Technology also adds in developing a brand name for the 
to efficiency and effectiveness, thus product or even a distribution system. 
leading to reduction in costs. There is a ready market waiting for 
( iv )   Innovation:  The markets the product to be launched. A lot of 
are increasingly becoming more investment is saved in the process.
demanding in terms of new and 
innovative products. Joint ventures 3.7 Public Private Partnership (PPP)
allow business to come up with 
something new and creative for The Public Private Partnership model 
the same market. Specially foreign allocates tasks, obligations and risks 
partners  can come up with innovative among the public and private partners 
products because of new ideas and in an optimal manner. The public 
technology. partners in PPP are Government 
(v)  Low cost of production: When entities, i.e., ministries, government 
international corporations invest in departments, municipalities or 
India, they benefit immensely due to the state-owned enterprises. The private 
lower cost of production. They are able partners can be local or foreign 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   73 13-01-2021   12:30:04



74 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(international) and include businesses investment and transfer of assets that 
or investors with technical or financial support the partnership in addition 
expertise relevant to the project. to social responsibility, environmental 
PPP also includes NGOs and/or awareness and local knowledge. The 
community-based organisations who private sector’s role in the partnership 
are the stakeholders directly affected is to make use of its expertise in 
by the project. PPP is, therefore, operations, managing tasks and 
defined as a relationship between innovation to run the business 
public and private entities in the efficiently.
context of infrastructure and other Sectors in which PPPs have 
services. Under the PPP model, public been completed worldwide include 

power generation and distribution, 
sector plays an important role and water and sanitation, refuse disposal, 
ensures that the social obligations pipelines, hospitals, school buildings 
are fulfilled and sector reforms and and teaching facilities, stadiums, 
public investment are successfully air traffic control, prisons, railways, 
met. The government’s contribution roads, billing and other information 
to PPP is in the form of capital for technology systems, and housing.

PPP Model
Features

•	 Contract with the private party to design and build public facility.
•	 Facility is financed and owned by the public sector.
•	 Key driver is the transfer of design and construction risk.

Application
•	 Suited to capital projects with small operating requirement.
•	 Suited to capital projects where the public sector wishes to retain the operating 

responsibility.
Strengths

•	 Transfer of design and construction risk.
•	 Potential to accelerate project.

Weaknesses
•	 Conflict between parties may arise on environmental considerations
•	 Does not attract private finance easily.

Example
•	 Kundli Manesar Expressway Ltd.: In this 135 km expressway, land has been 

provided by the government and surface has been laid out by the company.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   74 31-12-2020   11:54:46



PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 75

Key Terms

Public sector	 Departmental undertaking	 Globalisation
Public enterprises	 Government companies	 Global enterprises
Statutory corporation	 Disinvestment	 Public Sector Undertakings
Joint ventures	 Public accountability	
Public Private Partnership	 Privatisation	

SUMMARY

Private sector and public sector: There are all kinds of business 
organisations — small or large, industrial or trading, privately owned or 
government owned existing in our country. These organisations affect our 
daily economic life and therefore, become part of the Indian economy. The 
government of India has opted for a mixed economy, where both private and 
government enterprises are allowed to operate. The economy, therefore, may 
be classified into two sectors viz., private sector and public sector. The private 
sector consists of business owned by individuals or a group of individuals. 
Various forms of organisation are sole proprietorship, partnership, joint 
Hindu family, cooperative and company. The public sector consists of various 
organisations owned and managed by the government. These organisations 
may either be partly or wholly owned by the central or state government.
Forms of organising public sector enterprises: Government’s participation 
in business and economic sectors of the country needs some kind of 
organisational framework to function. A public enterprise may take any 
particular form of organisation depending upon the nature of it’s operations 
and their relationship with the government. The suitability of a particular form 
of organisation would depend upon its requirements. The forms of organisation 
which a public enterprise may take are as follows:

	 (i)	 Departmental undertaking
	 (ii) 	 Statutory corporation
	 (iii)	 Government company

Departmental undertakings: These enterprises are established as 
departments of the ministry and are considered part or an extension of the 
ministry itself. The Government functions through these departments and the 
activities performed by them are an integral part of the functioning of the 
government.
Statutory corporations: Statutory corporations are public enterprises 
brought into existence by a Special Act of the Parliament. The Act defines its 
powers and functions, rules and regulations governing its employees and its 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   75 13-01-2021   09:41:21



76 BUSINESS  STUDIES

relationship with Government departments. This is a corporate body created 
by legislature with defined powers and functions and financially independent 
with a clear control over a specified area or a particular type of commercial 
activity.
Government company: A Government company means any company in 
which not less than 51 percent of the paid up capital is held by the central 
government, or by any state governments or government or partly by central 
government and partly by one or more state governments and includes a 
company which is a subsidiary company of such a government company.
Changing role of public sector: At the time of Independence, it was expected 
that the public sector enterprises would play an important role in achieving 
certain objectives of the economy either by direct participation in business 
or by acting as a catalyst. The Indian economy is in a stage of transition. 
In the post 90’s period, the new economic policies emphasised liberalisation, 
privatisation and globalisation. The role of the public sector was redefined. 
It was not supposed to play a passive role but to actively participate 
and compete in the market with other private sector companies in the 
same industry.
Development of infrastructure: The process of industrialisation cannot be 
sustained without adequate transportation and communication facilities, fuel 
and energy, and basic and heavy industries. It is only the government which 
could mobilise huge capital, coordinate industrial construction and train 
technicians and workforce.
Regional balance: The government is responsible for developing all regions 
and states in a balanced way and removing regional disparties. Development 
of backward regions so as to ensure a regional balance in the country is one of 
the major objectives of planned development. Therefore, the government had 
to locate new enterprises in backward areas and at the same time prevent the 
mushrooming growth of private sector unit in already advanced areas.
Economies of scale: Where large scale industries are required to be set up 
with huge capital outlay, the public sector had to step in to take advantage of 
economies of scale.
Check over concentration of economic power: The public sector acts as a 
check over the private sector. In the private sector there are very few industrial 
houses which would be willing to invest in heavy industries with the result 
that wealth gets concentrated in a few hands and monopolostic practices are 
encouraged.
Import substitution: During the second and third Five Year Plan period, 
India was aiming to be self-reliant in many spheres. Public sector companies 
involved in heavy engineering which would help in import substitution were 
established.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   76 31-12-2020   11:54:46



PRIVATE, PUBLIC AND GLOBAL ENTERPRISES 77

Government policy towards public sector since 1991. Its 
main elements are: Restructure and revive potentially viable PSUs, Close 
down PSUs, which cannot be revived. Bring down governments equity in all 
non-strategic PSUs to 26 per cent or lower if necessary; and fully protect the 
interest of workers.
(a)	 Reduction in the number of industries reserved for the public sector from 17 

to 8 (and then to 3): This meant that the private sector could enter all areas 
(except 3) and the public sector would have to compete with them.

(b)	 Disinvestment of shares of a select set of public sector enterprises: 
Disinvestment involves the sale of the equity shares to the private sector 
and the public. The objective was to raise resources and encourage wider 
participation of the general public and workers in the ownership of these 
enterprises. The government had taken a decision to withdraw from the 
industrial sector and reduce its equity in all undertakings.

(c)	 Policy regarding sick units to be the same as that for the private sector: All 
public sector units were referred to the Board of Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction to decide whether a sick unit was to be restructured or 
closed down.

Memorandum of Understanding: Improvement of performance through a 
MoU (Memorandum of Understanding) system by which managements are to 
be granted greater autonomy but held accountable for specified results.
Global enterprises: In the last 2 decades MNCs have played an important 
role in the Indian economy. They are characterised by their huge size, large 
number of products, advanced technology, marketing strategies and network 
of operations all over the world. Global enterprises thus are huge industrial 
organisations which extend their industrial and marketing operations through 
a network of their branches in several countries. These corporations have 
distinct features which distinguishes them from other private sector companies, 
public sector companies and public sector enterprises i.e., (i) Huge capital 
resources, (ii) Foreign collaboration, (iii) Advanced Technology, (iv) Product 
innovation, (v) Marketing strategies, (vi) Expansion of market territory, (vii) 
Centralised control.
Joint ventures: Joint ventures may mean many things, depending upon the 
context we are using it in. But in a broader sense, a joint venture is the pooling 
of resources and expertise by two or more businesses, to achieve a particular 
goal. The risks and rewards of the business are also shared. The reasons 
behind the joint venture often include business expansion, development of 
new products or moving into new markets, particularly in another country.
Public Private Partnership: It is a relationship among public sector and 
private sector for allocation and completion of development projects. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   77 31-12-2020   11:54:46



78 BUSINESS  STUDIES

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1.	 Explain the concept of public sector and private sector.
2.	 State the various types of organisations in the private sector.
3.	 What are the different kinds of organisations that come under the public 

sector?
4.	 List the names of some enterprises under the public sector and classify 

them.
5.	 Why is the government company form of organisation preferred to other 

types in the public sector?
6.	 How does the government maintain a regional balance in the country?
7.	 State the meaning of public private partnership. 

Long Answer Questions
1.	 Describe the Industrial Policy 1991, towards the public sector.
2.	 What was the role of the public sector before 1991?
3.	 Can the public sector companies compete with the private sector in terms 

of profits and efficiency? Give reasons for your answer.
4.	 Why are global enterprises considered superior to other business 

organisations?
5.	 What are the benefits of entering into joint ventures and public private 

partnership?	

Projects/Assignments
1.	 Make a list of Indian companies entering into joint ventures with foreign 

companies. Find out the apparent benefits derived out of such ventures.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 3.indd   78 31-12-2020   11:54:46



Chapter 4

##4##
Business Services

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 state the characteristics of services;

•	 distinguish services from goods;

•	 classify different types of business services;

•	 explain the concept of e-banking;

•	 identify and classify different types of insurance policies; and

•	 describe different types of warehouses.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   79 31-12-2020   11:55:08



80 BUSINESS  STUDIES

All of us have seen a petrol pump. Have your ever thought how a petrol pump 
owner does his business in a village? How he gets the petrol and diesel to the 
villages in the interior? How he gets the money to purchase large quantities of 
petrol and diesel? How he communicates to petrol depots for requirement and 
also to customers? How he safeguards himself from various risks associated with 
this business? The answer to all the above questions lies in the understanding 
of business services. The transportation of petrol and diesel from oil refineries to 
petrol pumps is carried out by train and tankers (transport services).  They are 
then stored at various depots of oil companies situated in all major towns across 
India (warehousing services). Petrol pump owners use postal, mail and telephone 
facilities to be in touch with customers, banks and the depots for the availability 
of their requirements on regular basis (communication services). As oil companies 
always sell the petrol and diesel on advance payment, the owners have to take 
loans and advances from banks to fund their purchases (banking services). Petrol 
and diesel being highly risky products, the owners have to safeguard themselves 
from various risks by getting the business, the products, the life of people working 
there, etc., insure (insurance services). Thus, we see that a single business of 
providing petrol and diesel at a petrol pump is actually a collective outcome of 
various business services. These services are being utilised in the entire process 
of shipment of petrol and diesel from oil refineries to the point of sale at petrol 
pumps, spread across the length and breath of India.

4.1	I ntroduction the item or good and the service 
performed.

You must all have, at some time or the For a layperson, services are 
other experienced the effect of business essentially intangibles. Their purchase 
activities on your lives. Let us examine does not result in the ownership of 
few examples of business activity i.e., anything physical. For example, you 
purchasing ice cream from a store can only seek advice from the doctor, 
and eating ice cream in a restaurant, you cannot purchase him. Services are 
watching a movie in a cinema hall all those economic activities that are 
purchasing a school bus and leasing intangible and imply an interaction to 
it from a transporter. If you analyse be realised between the service provider 
all these activities, you will observe and the consumer.
that there is a difference between Services are those separately 
purchasing and eating, purchasing identifiable, essentially intangible 
and watching and purchasing and activities that provides satisfaction of 
leasing. What is common in all of them wants, and are not necessarily linked to 
is that one is purchasing an item and the sale of a product or another service.
the other is experiencing a service. But A good is a physical product capable 
there is definitely a difference between of being delivered to a purchaser and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   80 31-12-2020   11:55:08



BUSINESS SERVICES 81

involves the transfer of ownership from (iii)  Inseparability:    Another 
seller to customer. Goods are also important characteristic of services 
generally used to refer to commodities is the simultaneous activity of 
or items of all types, except services, production and consumption being 
involved in trade or commerce. performed. This makes the production 

and consumption of services seem 
4.2	N ature of Services to be inseparable. While we can 
There are five basic features of services. manufacture a car today and sell 
These features also distinguish them it after, say, a month; this is often 
from goods and are known as the not possible with services that have 
five Is of services. These are discussed to be consumed as and when they 
as below: are produced. Service providers may 
( i )   Intangibil ity:  Services are design a substitute for the person by 
intangible, i.e., they cannot be touched. using appropriate technology but the 
They are experiential in nature. One interaction with the customer remains 
cannot taste a doctor’s treatment, a key feature of services. Automated 
or touch entertainment. One can Teller Machines (ATMs) may replace 
only experience it. An important the banking clerk for the front office 
implication of this is that quality of activities like cash withdrawal and 
the offer can often not be determined cheque deposit. But, at the same 
before consumption and, therefore, time, the presence of the customer, is 
purchase. It is, therefore, important required and his/her interaction with 
for the service providers that they the process has to be managed.
consciously work on creating a desired (iv)  Inventory (Less): Services have 
service so that the customer undergoes little or no tangible components 
a favourable experience. For example, and, therefore, cannot be stored for 
treatment by a doctor should be a a future use. That is, services are 
favourable experience. perishable and providers can, at best, 
(ii)  Inconsistency: The second store some associated goods but not 
important characteristic of services 
is inconsistency. Since there is no the service itself. This means that 
standard tangible product, services the demand and supply needs to be 
have to be performed exclusively managed as the service has to be 
each time. Different customers have performed as and when the customer 
different demands and expectations. asks for it. They cannot be performed 
Service providers need to have an earlier to be consumed at a later date. 
opportunity to alter their offer to For example, a railway ticket can be 
closely meet the requirements of the stored but the railway journey will be 
customers. This is happening, for experienced only when the railways 
example, in the case of mobile services. provides it.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   81 31-12-2020   11:55:08



82 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(v)  Involvement: One of the most sold at the consumption point, there 
important characteristics of services are no inventories. On the basis of 
is the participation of the customer above features, we can have following 
in the service delivery process. A points of distinction between goods 
customer has the opportunity to get and services.
the services modified according to 
specific requirements. 4.3	T ypes of Services

When speaking of the service sector, 
4.2.1	 Difference between Services services can be classified into three 

and Goods broad categories, viz., business 
From the above, it is clear that the two services, social services and personal 
main differentiating characteristics services. These have been explained in 
of services and goods are non- the following pages.
transferability of ownership and (i)  Business Services: Business 
presence of both provider as well as services are those services which are 
consumer. While goods are produced, used by business enterprises for the 
services are performed. A service is conduct of their activities. For example, 
an act which cannot be taken home. banking, insurance, transportation, 
What we can take home is the effect warehousing  and communication 
of the services. And as the services are services.

Difference between Services and Goods
Basis Services Goods

Nature An activity or process. e.g., A physical object. e.g., 
watching a movie in a cinema hall video cassette of movie

Type Heterogeneous Homogenous
Intangibility Intangible e.g., doctor treatment Tangible e.g., medicine

Different customers having Different customers getting 
Inconsistency different demands e.g., mobile standardised demands 

services fulfilled. e.g., mobile phones
Simultaneous production and Separation of production and 

Inseparability consumption. e.g., eating  consumption. e.g., purchasing 
ice-cream in a restaurant ice cream from a store

Inventory Cannot be kept in stock. e.g., Can be kept in stock. e.g., 
experience of a train journey train journey ticket

Participation of customers at the Involvement at the time of 
Involvement time of service delivery. e.g.,  delivery not possible. e.g., 

self-service in a fast food joint manufacturing a vehicle

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   82 31-12-2020   11:55:08



BUSINESS SERVICES 83

(ii)  Social Services: Social services and more dependant on specialised 
are those services that are generally business services. Business enterprises 
provided voluntarily in pursuit of look towards banks for availability 
certain social goals. These social goals of funds; insurance companies for 
may be to improve the standard of getting their plant, machinery, goods, 
living for weaker sections of society, etc., insured; transport companies for 
to provide educational services to their transporting raw material; and finished 
children, or to provide health care and goods, and telecom and postal services 
hygienic conditions in slum areas. for being in touch with their vendors, 
These services are usually provided suppliers and customers. Today’s 
voluntarily but for some consideration globalised world has ushered in a 
to cover their costs. For example, rapid change in the service industry in 
health care and education services India. India has been gaining a highly 
provided by certain Non-government competitive edge over other countries 
organisations (NGOs) and government when it comes to providing services to 
agencies. the developed economies of the world. 
(iii)  Personal Services: Personal Many foreign companies are looking to 
services are those services which are India for performing a host of business 
experienced differently by different services. They are even transferring a 
customers. These services cannot part of their business operations to 
be consistent in nature. They will be performed in India. We will discuss 
differ depending upon the service these in detail in the next chapter.
provider. They will also depend upon 
customer’s preferences and demands. 4.4	 Banking
For example, tourism, recreational Commercial banks are an important 
services, restaurants. institution of the economy for providing 

I n  t h e  c o n t e x t  o f  b e t t e r institutional credit to its customers. 
understanding of the business A banking company in India is the 
world, we wil l  be l imiting our one which transacts the business of 
further discussions to the first category banking which means accepting, for 
of the service sector i.e., business the purpose of lending and investment 
services. of deposits of money from the public, 

repayable on demand or otherwise 
4.3.1	 Business Services and withdrawable by cheques, draft, 
Today’s world is of tough competition, order or otherwise. In simple terms, 
where the survival of the fittest is a bank accepts money on deposits, 
the rule. There is no room for non- repayable on demand and also earns 
performance, and hence companies a margin of profit by lending money. A 
tend to stick to what they can do best. bank stimulates economic activity in the 
In order to be competitive, business market by dealing in money. It mobilises 
enterprises, are becoming more the savings of people and makes funds 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   83 31-12-2020   11:55:08



84 BUSINESS  STUDIES

available to business financing their Public sectors banks are those in 
capital and revenue expenditure. It which the government has a major 
also deals in financial instruments and stake and they usually need to 
provides financial services for a price, emphasise on social objectives than 
i.e., interest, discount, commission, etc. on profitability. Private sector banks 

Banking and Social Objectives
In the recent past there has been a concerted effort by the policy makers in 
reorienting banking towards achieving social objectives. There has been a major 
shift in the banking policy of the country:
		       from				    to
	   (i)	 Urban orientation	 —	 Rural orientation
	  (ii)	 Class banking		  —	 Mass banking
	(iii)	 Traditional		  —	 Innovative practices
	 (iv)	 Short term objectives	 —	 Development objectives

4.4.1	 Type of Banks are owned, managed and controlled 
by private promoters and they are free 

The focus of banking is varied, the to operate as per market forces. There 
needs diverse and methods different. are a number of public sector banks 
Thus, we need distinctive kinds of like SBI, PNB, IOB etc., and other 
banks to cater to the above mentioned private sector banks represented 
complexities. by HDFC Bank, ICICI Bank, Kotak 
	 Banks can be classified into the Mahindra Bank and Jammu and 
following: Kashmir Bank.

1.	 Commercial banks (ii) Cooperative Banks: Cooperative 
2.	 Cooperative banks Banks are governed by the provisions 
3.	 Specialised banks of State Cooperative Societies Act 
4.	 Central bank and meant essentially for providing 

cheap credit to their members. It is an 
(i)   	Commercial Banks: Commercial important source of rural credit, i.e., 
banks are institutions dealing in agricultural financing in India.
money. These are governed by Indian (iii)  Specialised Banks: Specialised 
Banking Regulation Act 1949 and banks are foreign exchange banks, 
according to it banking means industrial banks, development banks, 
accepting deposits of money from the export-import banks catering to 
public for the purpose of lending or specific needs of these unique activities. 
investment. There are two types of These banks provide financial aid to 
commercial banks, public sector and industries, heavy  turnkey projects 
private sector banks. and foreign trade.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   84 31-12-2020   11:55:09



BUSINESS SERVICES 85

(iv) Central Bank: The Central bank premature withdrawal is permissible 
of any country supervises, controls with a percentage of interest being 
and regulates the activities of all the forfeited.
commercial banks of that country. It ( ii )   Lending of funds:  Second 
also acts as a government  banker. major activity of commercial banks 
It controls and coordinates currency is to provide loans and advances 
and credit policies of any country. The out of the money received through 
Reserve Bank of India is the central deposits. These advances can be 
bank of our country. made in the form of overdrafts, cash 

credits, discounting trade bills, term 
4.4.2	 Functions of Commercial 	 loans, consumer credits and other 

Banks miscellaneous advances. The funds 
Banks perform a variety of functions. lent out by banks contribute a great 
Some of them are the basic or primary deal to trade, industry, transport and 

other business activities.
functions of a bank while others are (iii)  Cheque facility: Banks render 
agency or general utility services in a very important service to their 
nature. The important functions are customers by collecting their cheques 
briefly discussed below: drawn on other banks. The cheque is 
(i)  Acceptance of deposits: Deposits the most developed credit instrument, 
are the basis of the loan operations a unique feature and function of banks 
since banks are both borrowers and for the withdrawal of deposits. It is the 
lenders of money. As borrowers they most convenient and an inexpensive 
pay interest and as lenders they grant medium of exchange. There are two 
loans and get interest. These deposits types of cheques mainly (a) bearer 
are generally taken through current cheques, which are encashable 
account, savings account and fixed immediately at bank counters and 
deposits. Current account deposits (b) crossed cheques which are to be 
can be withdrawn to the extent of the deposited only in the payees account.
balance at any time without any prior (iv)  Remittance of funds: Another 
notice. salient function of commercial banks is 

Sav ings  a c coun t s  a r e  f o r of providing the facility of fund transfer 
encouraging savings by individuals. from one place to another, on account 
Banks pay rate of interest as decided of the interconnectivity of branches. 
by RBI on these deposits. Withdrawal The transfer of funds is administered 
from these accounts has some by using bank drafts, pay orders or 
restrictions in relation to the amount mail transfers, on nominal commission 
as well as number of times in a given charges. The bank issues a draft for 
period. Fixed accounts are time the amount on its own branches at 
deposits with higher rate of interest as other places or other banks at those 
compared to the savings accounts. A places. The payee can present the draft 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   85 31-12-2020   11:55:09



86 BUSINESS  STUDIES

on the drawee bank at his place and internet. These type of services provided 
collect the amount. by the banks on the internet, called 
(v)  Allied services: In addition to e-banking, lowers the transaction cost, 
above functions, banks also provide adds value to the banking relationship 
allied services such as bill payments, and empowers customers. e-banking 
locker facilities, underwriting services. is electronic banking or banking using 
They also perform other services electronic media. Thus, e-banking is a 
like buying and selling of shares service provided by many banks, that 
and debentures on instructions and allows, a customer to conduct banking 
other personal services like payment transactions, such as managing 
of insurance premium, collection of savings, checking accounts, applying 
dividend etc. for loans or paying bills over the 

internet using a personal computer, 
4.4.3	 e-Banking mobile te lephone or handheld 
The growth of Internet and e-commerce computer (personal digital assistant) 
is dramatically changing everyday The range of services offered by 
life, with the world wide web and e-banking are: Automated Teller 
e-commerce transforming the world Machines (ATM) and Point of Sales 
into a digital global village. The latest (PoS), Electronic Data Interchange 
wave in information technology is (EDI) and Credit Cards Electronic or 
internet banking. It is a part of virtual Digital cash and Electronic bank 
banking and another delivery channel transfer (EFT). The two ways in which 
for customers. EFT can be done are: NEFT (National 

In simple terms, Internet banking Electronic Fund Transfer) and RTGS 
means any user with a PC and a (Real Time Gross Settlement).
browser can get connected to the 
banks website to perform any of the Benefits
virtual banking functions and avail There are various benefits of e-banking 
of any of the bank’s services. There provided to customers which are:
is no human operator to respond to 	 (i)	 E-banking facilitates digital 
the needs of the customer. The bank p a y m e n t s  a n d  p r o m o t e s 
has a centralised data base that is t ransparency  in  f inanc ia l 
web-enabled. All the services that the statements. 
bank has permitted on the internet are  	 (ii) e-banking provides 24 hours, 
displayed on a menu. Any service can 365 days a year services to the 
be selected and further interaction is customers of the bank;
dictated by the nature of service. 	(iii)	 Customers can make some of the 

In this new digital market place permitted transactions from office 
banks and financial institutions have or house or while travelling  via 
started providing services over the mobile telephone;

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   86 31-12-2020   11:55:09



BUSINESS SERVICES 87

Types of Digital Payments

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   87 31-12-2020   11:55:09



88 BUSINESS  STUDIES

	(iv)	 It inculcates a sense of financial buildings or heavy equipments or other 
discipline by recording each and assets is not possible unless there is 
every transaction; arrangement for covering the risks, 

	 (v)	 Greater customer satisfaction by with the help of insurance. Keeping 
offering unlimited access to the this in mind, people facing common 
bank, not limited by the walls risks come together and make small 
of the branch and less risk and contributions to a common fund, 
greater security to the customer which helps to spread the loss caused 
as they can avoid travelling with to an individual by a particular risk 
cash. over a number of persons who are 

The banks also stand to gain by exposed to it.
e-banking. The benefits are: Insurance is thus a device by 
	 (i)	 e-banking provides competitive which the loss likely to be caused by 

advantage to the bank;
	 (ii)	 e-banking provides unlimited an uncertain event is spread over a 

network to the bank and is not number of persons who are exposed 
limited to the number of branches, to it and who prepare to insure 
Any PC connected to a modem and themselves against such an event. 
a telephone having an internet It is a contract or agreement under 
connection can provide cash which one party agrees in return for a 
withdrawl needs of the customer; consideration to pay an agreed amount 

	(iii)	 Load on branches can be of money to another party to make a 
c ons i d e rab l y  r educed  by loss, damage or injury to something 
establishing centralised data of value in which the insured has a 
base and by taking over some of pecuniary interest as a result of some 
the accounting functions. uncertain event. The agreement/

contract is put in writing and is known 
4.5	I nsurance as ‘policy’. The person whose risk is 
Life is full of uncertainties. The chances insured is called ‘insured’ and the firm 
of occurrence of an event causing losses which insures the risk of loss is known 
are quite uncertain. There are risks of as insurer/assurance underwriter.
death and disability for human life; fire 4.5.1	 Fundamental principle of 
and burglary risk for property; perils 
of the sea for shipment of goods and, Insurance
so on. If any of these takes place, the The basic principle of insurance is that 
individuals and/or, organisations may an individual or a business concern 
suffer a great loss, sometimes beyond chooses to spend a definitely known 
their capacities to bear the same. It sum in place of a possible huge amount 
is to minimise the impact of such involved in an indefinite future loss. 
uncertainties that there is a need Thus insurance is the substitution of 
for insurance. Investment in factory a small periodic payment (premium) 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   88 31-12-2020   11:55:09



BUSINESS SERVICES 89

for a risk of large possible loss. The risk of loss. There are uncertainties 
loss of risk still remains but the loss of happenings of time and amount 
is spread over a large number of of loss. Insurance removes these 
policyholders exposed to the same risk. uncertainties and the assured receives 
The premium paid by them are pooled payment of loss. The insurer charges 
out of which the loss sustained by any premium for providing the certainity.
policy holder is compensated. Thus, (ii)  Protection: The second main 
risks are shared with others. From the function of insurance is to provide 
analysis of past events the insurer (an protection from probable chances 
insurance company or an underwriter) of loss. Insurance cannot stop the 
knows the probable losses caused by happening of a risk or event but can 
each type of risk covered by insurance. compensate for losses arising out of it.

Insurance, therefore, is a form of (iii) Risk sharing: On the happening 
risk management primarily used to of a risk event, the loss is shared by all 
safe guard against the risk of potential the persons exposed to it. The share is 
financial loss. Ideally, insurance is obtained from every insured member 
defined as the equitable transfer of the by way of premiums.
risk of a potential loss, from one entity (iv) Assist in capital formation: The 
to another, in exchange for a reasonable accumulated funds of the insurer 
fee. Insurance company, therefore, is received by way of premium payments 
an association, corporation or an made by the insured are invested in 
organisation engaged in the business various income generating schemes. 
of paying all legitimate claims that may 
arise, in exchange for a fee (known as 4.5.3	 Principles of Insurance
premium).

Insurance is a social device in The principles of insurance are the 
which a group of individuals (insured) rules of action or conduct adopted 
transfers risk to another party (insurer) by the stakeholders involved in the 
in order to combine loss experience, insurance business. The specific 
which provides for payment of losses principles of utmost significance to a 
from funds contributed (premium) valid insurance contract consists of 
by all members. Insurance is meant to the following:
protect the insured, against uncertain (i) Utmost good faith: A contract of 
events, which may cause disadvantage insurance is a contract of uberrimae 
to him. fidei i.e., a contract found on utmost 

good faith. Both the insurer and the 
4.5.2	 Functions of Insurance insured should display good faith 
The various functions of insurance are towards each other in regard to the 
as follows: contract. It is the duty of the insured 
(i)  Providing certainty: Insurance to voluntarily make full, accurate 
provides certainity of payment for the disclosure of all facts, material to the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   89 31-12-2020   11:55:09



90 BUSINESS  STUDIES

risk being proposed and the insurer to ( i i i )   Indemnity:  All  insurance 
make clear all the terms and conditions contracts of fire or marine insurance 
in the insurance contract. Thus, it is are contracts of indemnity. According 
binding on the proposer to disclose all to it, the insurer undertakes to put 
material facts about the subject matter the insured, in the event of loss, in 
of the proposed insurance. Any fact, the same position that he occupied 
which is likely to affect the mind of  a immediately before the happening of 
prudent insurer in deciding to accept the event insured against. In other 
the proposal of insurance or in fixing words the insurer undertakes to 
the rate of premium is material for this compensate the insured for the loss 
purpose. Failure to make disclosure of caused to him/her due to damage or 
material facts by the insured makes destruction of property insured. The 
the contract of insurance voidable at compensation payable and the loss 
the discretion of the insurer.  suffered are to be measured in terms 
(ii)  Insurable Interest: The insured of money. The principle of indemnity is 
must have an insurable interest in not applicable to life insurance. 
the subject matter of insurance. One (iv)  Proximate Cause: According to 
fundamental fact of this principle this principle, an insurance policy is 
is that ‘it is not the house, ship, designed to provide compensation only 
machinery, potential liability of life for such losses as are caused by the 
that is insured, but it is the pecuniary perils which are stated in the policy. 
interest of the insured in them, When the loss is the result of two or 
which is insured.’ Insurable interest more causes, the proximate cause 
means some pecuniary interest in means the direct, the most dominant 
the subject matter of the insurance and most effective cause of which 
contract. The insured must have an the loss is the natural consequence. 
interest in the preservation of the In case of loss arising out of any 
thing or life insured, so that he/she mishap, the most proximate cause 
will suffer financially on the happening of the mishap should be taken into 
of the event against which he/she consideration.
is insured. In case of insurance of (v)  Subrogation: It refers to the right 
property, insurable interest of the of the insurer to stand in the place 
insured in the subject matter of the of the insured, after settlement of a 
insurance must exist at the time of claim,  as far as the right of insured in 
happening of the event. In order to respect of recovery from an alternative 
name insurable interest however, it is source is involved. After the insured is 
not necessary that one should be the compensated for the loss or damage to 
owner of the property. For example, the property insured by him/her the 
a trustee holding property on behalf right of ownership of such property 
of others has an insurable interest in passes on to the insurer. This is 
the property. because the insured should not be 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   90 31-12-2020   11:55:09



BUSINESS SERVICES 91

allowed to make any profit, by selling business. Broadly speaking, insurance 
the damaged property or in the case of may be classified as follows: 
lost property being recovered.
(vi) Contribution: As per this principle Life Insurance
it is the right of an insurer who has paid Since life itself is uncertain, all 
claim under an insurance, to call upon individuals try to assure themselves 
other liable insurers to contribute for of a certain sum of money in the future 
the loss of payment. It implies, that in to take care of unforeseen events or 
case of double insurance, the insurers happenings. Individuals in the course 
are to share the losses in proportion to of their life are always exposed to some 
the amount assured by each of them. kind of risks.
In case there is a loss, when there The risk may be of an event which 
is more than one policy on the same is certain that is death. In that case, 
property, the insured will have no right what will happen to the other members 
to recover more than the full amount of the family who are dependent on 
of his actual loss. If the full amount is a particular individuals income. The 
recovered from one insurer the right to other risk may be living too long in 
obtain further payment from the other which an individual may become too 
insurer will cease. old to earn i.e., retirement. In this case 
(vii) Mitigation: This principle states also, the earnings will decline or end. 
that it is the duty of the insured to take Under such circumstances, individuals 
reasonable steps to minimise the loss seek protection against these risks 
or damage to the insured property. and life insurance companies offer 
Suppose goods kept in a store house protection against such risks. 
catch fire then the owner of the goods A li fe insurance policy was 
should try to recover the goods and introduced as a protection against 
save them from fire to minimise the the uncertainity of life. But gradually 
loss or damage. The insured must its scope has widened and there are 
behave  with great prudence and not various types of insurance policies 
be careless just because there is an available to suit the requirements of 
insurance cover. If reasonable care is an individual. For example, disability 
not taken like any prudent person then insurance, health/medical insurance, 
the claim from the insurance company annuity insurance and life insurance 
may be lost. proper.

Life insurance may be defined as 
4.5.4	 Types of Insurance a contract in which the insurer in 

consideration of a certain premium, 
Various types of insurance exist either in a lump sum or by other 
by virtue of practice of insurance periodical payments, agrees to pay to 
companies and the influence of legal the assured, or to the person for whose 
enactments controlling the insurance benefit the policy is taken, the assured 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   91 31-12-2020   11:55:09



92 BUSINESS  STUDIES

sum of money, on the happening of a sort of investment because a certain 
a specified event contingent on the sum is returnable to the insured at 
human life or at the expiry of certain the time of death or at the expiry of a 
period. Thus, the insurance company certain period.
undertakes to insure the life of a Life insurance also encourages 
person in exchange for a sum of money savings as the amount of premium has 
called premium. This premium may be to be paid regularly. It thus, provides 
paid in one lump sum, or periodically a sense of security to the insured and 
i.e., monthly, quarterly, half yearly or his dependents.
yearly. At the same time, the company The general principles of insurance 
promises to pay a certain sum of money discussed in the previous section 
either on the death of the person or on apply to life insurance also with a few 
his attaining a certain age (i.e., the exceptions. The main elements of a life 
expiry of certain period). Thus, the insurance contract are:
person is sure that a specified amount 	 (i)	 The life insurance contract 
will be given to him when he attains a must have all the essentials of a 
certain age or that his dependents will valid contract. Certain elements 
get that sum in the event of his death. like offer and acceptance, free 
	 This agreement or contract which consent, capacity to enter into 
contains all the terms and conditions a contract, lawful consideration 
is put in writing and such document is and lawful object must be present 
called the policy. The person whose life for the contract to be valid;
is insured is called the assured. The 	 (ii)	 The contract of life insurance is a 
insurance company is the insurer and contract of utmost good faith. The 
the consideration paid by the assured assured should be honest and 
is the premium. The premium can be truthful in giving information to 
paid periodically in instalments. the insurance company. He must 

This insurance provides protection disclose all material facts about 
to the family at the premature death or his health to the insurer. It is his 
gives adequate amount at old age when duty to disclose accurately all 
earning capacities are reduced. The material facts known to him even 
insurance is not only a protection but is if the insurer does not ask him;

Examples of facts to be disclosed
Fire insurance: Construction of building, fire detection and fire fighting equipment; 
nature of its use.
Motor insurance: Type of vehicle; driver details.
Personal Accident insurance: Age, height, weight, occupation, previous medical 
history.
Life insurance: Age, previous medical history, smoking/drinking habits.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   92 31-12-2020   11:55:09



BUSINESS SERVICES 93

	(iii)	 In life insurance, the insured an insurable interest in the life of 
must have insurable interest his debtor,  and a proprietor of a 
in the life assured. Without drama company has an insurable 
insurable interest the contract interest in the lives of the actors;
of insurance is void. In case of 	(iv)	 Life insurance contract is not a 
life insurance, insurable interest contract of indemnity. The life 
must be present at the time when of a human being cannot be 
the insurance is affected. It is compensated and only a specified 
not necessary that the assured sum of money is paid. That is 
should have insurable interest why the amount payable in life 
at the time of maturity also. For insurance on the happening of the 
example, a person is presumed event is fixed in advance. The sum 
to have an interest in his own life of money payable is fixed, at the 
and every part of it, a creditor has time of entering into the contract. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   93 31-12-2020   11:55:09



94 BUSINESS  STUDIES

A contract of life insurance, (ii)  Endowment Life Assurance 
therefore, is not a contract of Policy: The insurer (Insurance 
indemnity. Company) undertakes to pay a 

specified sum when the insured 
Types of life insurance policies attains a particular age or on his 

death which ever is earlier. The sum is 
The document containing the written payable to his legal heir/s or nominee 
contract between the insurer and named therein in case of death of the 
the insured alongwith the terms and assured. Otherwise, the sum will be 
conditions of insurance is called the paid to the assured after a fixed period 
Policy. After the proposal form is i.e., till he/she attains a particular age. 
filled by the insured (or the proposer) Thus, the endowment policy matures 
and the insurer (insurance company) after a limted number of years.
accepts the form and the premium, a (iii)  Joint Life Policy: This policy is 
policy is issued to the insurer. taken up by two or more persons. The 

People have different requirements premium is paid jointly or by either 
and therefore they would like a policy of them in instalments or lump sum. 
to fulfill all their needs. The needs of The assured sum or policy money 
people for life insurance can be family is payable upon the death of any 
needs, children’s needs, old age and one person to the other survivor or 
special needs. To meet the needs of survivors. Usually this policy is taken 
people the insurers have developed up by husband and wife jointly or by 
different types of products such as two partners in a partnership firm 
Whole Life Assurance, Endowment where the amount is payable to the 
type plans, combination of Whole survivor on the death of either of the 
Life and Endowment type plans, two.
Children’s Assurance plans and (iv) Annuity Policy: Under this policy, 
Annuity plans. Some of these are the assured sum or policy money is 
explained below: payable after the assured attains a 
(i)  Whole Life Policy: In this kind certain age in monthly, quarterly, 
of policy, the amount payable to half yearly or annual instalments. The 
the insured will not be paid before premium is paid in instalments over a 
the death of the assured. The sum certain period or single premium may 
then becomes payable only to the be paid by the assured. This is useful 
beneficiaries or heir of the deceased. to those who prefer a regular income 

The premium will be payable for after a certain age.
a fixed period (20 or 30 years) or for (v)  Children’s Endowment Policy: 
the whole life of the assured. If the This policy is taken by a person for 
premium is payable for a fixed period, his/her children to meet the expenses 
the policy will continue till the death of of their education or marriage. The 
the assured. agreement states that a certain sum 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   94 31-12-2020   11:55:09



BUSINESS SERVICES 95

will be paid by the insurer when subject matter of the insurance. 
the children attain a particular age. Without insurable interest the 
The premium is paid by the person contract of insurance is void. 
entering into the contract. However, no In case of fire insurance, unlike 
premium wil be paid, if he dies before life insurance insurable interest 
the maturity of the policy. must be present both at the time 

of insurance and at the time of 
Fire Insurance loss. For example, a person has 
Fire insurance is a contract whereby insurable interest in the property 
the insurer, in consideration of the he owns, a businessman has 
premium paid, undertakes to make insurable interest in his stock, 
good any loss or damage caused by plant, machinery and building, 

an agent has an insurable interest 
fire during a specified period upto in the property of his principal, a 
the amount specified in the policy. partner has insurable interest in 
Normally, the fire insurance policy is the property of a partnership firm, 
for a period of one year after which it and  a mortgagee has insurable 
is to be renewed from time to time. The interest in the property, which is 
premium may be paid either in lump mortgaged.
sum or instalments. A claim for loss 
by fire must satisfy the two following 	 (ii)	 Similar to the life insurance 
conditions: contract, the contract of fire 
	 (i)	 There must be actual loss; and insurance is a contract of utmost 
	 (ii)	 Fire must be accidental and non- good faith i.e., uberrimae fidei. 

The insured should be truthful 
intentional. and honest in giving information 
The risk covered by a fire insurance to the insurance company 

contract is the loss resulting from regarding the subject matter of 
fire or some other cause, and which the insurance. He is duty-bound 
is the proximate cause of the loss. If to disclose accurately all facts 
overheating without ignition causes regarding the nature of property 
damage, it will not be regarded as a and risks attached to it. The 
fire loss within the meaning of fire insurance company should also 
insurance and the loss will not be disclose the facts of the policy to 
recoverable from the insurer. the proposer. 

A fire insurance contract is based 	(iii)	 The contract of fire insurance is a 
on certain fundamental principles contract of strict indemnity. The 
which have been discussed in general insured can, in the event of loss, 
principles. The main elements of a fire recover the actual amount of loss 
insurance contract are: from the insurer. This is subject to 
	 (i)	 In fire insurance, the insured must the maximum amount for which 

have insurable interest in the the subject matter is insured. For 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   95 31-12-2020   11:55:09



96 BUSINESS  STUDIES

example, if a person has insured a certain sum of money  is paid by 
his house for  ` 4,00,000 the the insured in consideration for the 
insurer is not necessarily liable guarantee/protection he gets. Marine 
to pay that amount, although insurance is slightly different from 
the house may have been totally other types. There are three things 
destroyed by fire; but he will pay involved i.e., ship or hull, cargo or 
the actual loss after deducting goods, and freight.
depreciation within the maximum 	(a)	Ship or hull insurance: Since the 
limit of ` 4,00,000. The purpose ship is exposed to many dangers 
being that a person should not be at sea, the insurance policy is for 
allowed to gain by insurance. indemnifying the insured for losses 

	(iv)	 The insurer is liable to compensate caused by damage to the ship.
only when fire is the proximate 	(b)	Cargo insurance: The cargo while 
cause of damage or loss. being transported by ship is subject 

to many risks. These may be at 
Marine Insurance port i.e., risk of theft, lost goods or 

on voyage etc. Thus, an insurance 
A marine insurance contract is an policy can be issued to cover 
agreement whereby the insurer against such risks to cargo.
undertakes to indemnify the insured in 	(c)	Freight insurance: If the cargo 
the manner and to the extent thereby does not reach the destination 
agreed against marine losses. Marine due to damage or loss in transit, 
insurance provides protection against the shipping company is not paid 
loss by marine perils or perils of the freight charges. Freight insurance 
sea.  Marine perils are collision of ship is for reimbursing the loss of freight 
with the rock, or ship attacked by the to the shipping company i.e., the 
enemies, fire and captured by pirates insured.
and actions of the captains and crew The fundamental principles of 
of the ship. These perils cause damage, marine insurance are the same as the 
destruction or disappearance of the general principles. The main elements 
ship and cargo and non-payment of of a marine insurance contract are:
freight. So, marine insurance insures 	 (i)	 Unlike life insurance, the contract 
ship hull, cargo and freight. Thus, it is a of marine insurance is a contract 
device wherein the insurer undertakes of indemnity. The insured can, 
to compensate the owner of a ship or in the event of loss recover the 
cargo for complete or partial loss at sea. actual amount of loss from the 
The insurer gurantees to make good the insurer. Under no circumstances, 
losses due to damage to the ship or the insured is allowed to make 
cargo arising out of the risks incidental profit out of the marine insurance 
to sea voyages. The insurer in this contract. But cargo policies 
case is known as the underwriter and provide commercial indemnity 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   96 31-12-2020   11:55:09



BUSINESS SERVICES 97

Difference between Life, Fire and Marine Insurance

Basis of 
difference Life Insurance Fire Insurance Marine Insurance

1. Subject The subject matter of The subject matter The subject matter 
Matter insurance is human is any physical is a ship, cargo  or 

life. property or assets. freight.

Life Insurance has the Fire insurance has Marine insurance 
2. Element elements of protection only the element 

and investment or of protection and has only the 

both. not the element of element of 
investment. protection.

Insurable interest Insurable interest 
must be present at on the subject Insurable interest 
the time of effecting matter must be must be present 

3. Insurable present both at the time when 
interest the policy but need 

not be necessary at at the time of claim falls due or 
the time when the effecting policy as at the time of loss 

claim falls due. well as when the only.
claim falls due.

Life insurance policy 
usually exceeds a 

4. Duration year and is taken for Fire insurance Marine insurance 

longer periods ranging policy usually does policy is for one or 
not exceed a year. period of voyage or 

from 5 to 30 years or mixed.
whole life.

Fire insurance 
is a contract of Marine insurance 

Life insurance is  not indemnity. The is a contract of 
based on the principle insured can claim indemnity. The 

of  indemnity. The only the actual insured can claim 
5. Indemnity sum assured is amount of loss the market value 

paid either on the from the insurer. of the ship and 
happening of certain The loss due to the cost of goods 
event or on maturity fire is indemnified destroyed at sea 

of the policy. subject to the and the loss will 
maximum limit of be indemnified.
the policy amount.

6. Loss Loss is not Loss is Loss is 
measurement measurable. measurable. measurable.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   97 31-12-2020   11:55:09



98 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Surrender Life insurance policy Fire insurance Marine insurance 
7. value or paid has a surrender value does not have any does not have any 

up value or paid up value. surrender value or surrender value or 
paid up value. paid up value.

In fire insurance, In marine 
One can insure for the amount of insurance the 

8. Policy amount any amount in life the policy cannot amount of the 
insurance. be more than policy can be the 

the value of the market value of the 
subject matter. ship or cargo.
The event i.e., 

There is an element of destruction by The event i.e., 
certainity. The event fire may not loss at sea may 

9. Contingency i.e., death of maturity happen. There not occur and 
of risk or policy is bound to is an element of there may be no 

happen. Therefore a uncertainity and claim. There is 
claim will be present. there may be no an element of 

claim. uncertainty.

rather than strict indemnity. The 	(iv)	 The principle of causa proxima 
insurers promise to indemnify the will apply to it. The insurance 
insured “in the manner and to the company will be liable to pay 
extent agreed.” In case of ‘Hull only if that particular or nearest 
Policy’, the amount insured is cause is covered by the policy. 
fixed at a level  above the current For example, if a loss is caused 
market value; by several reasons then nearest 

	 (ii)	 Similar to life and fire insurance, cause of loss will be considered. 
the contract of marine insurance Refer to page 105 for types of 
is a contract of utmost good faith. insurance and social secuirty 
Both the insured and insurer scheme.
must disclose everything, which 
is in their knowledge and can 4.6	C ommunication Services
affect the insurance contract. 
The insured is duty-bound to Communication services are helpful 
accurately disclose  all facts to the business for establishing 
which include the nature of links with the outside world viz., 
shipment and the risk of damage suppliers, customers, competitors etc. 
it is exposed to; Business does not exist in isolation, 

	(iii)	 Insurable interest must exist at it has to communicate with others for 
the time of loss but not necessary transmission of ideas and information. 
at the time when the policy was Communication services need to 
taken; be very efficient, accurate and fast 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   98 13-01-2021   09:41:44



BUSINESS SERVICES 99

for them to be effective. In this fast Postal department also offers allied 
moving and competitive world it is facilities of the following types:
essential to have advanced technology 	 1.	 Greeting post — A range of 
for quick exchange of information. The delightful greeting cards for every 
electronic media is mainly responsible occasion.
for this transformation. The main 	 2.	 Media post — An innovative 
services which help business can be and  e f f e c t i v e  v eh i c l e  f o r 
classified into postal and telecom.   Indian corporates to advertise 

their brand through postcards, 
Postal Services envelopes, aerograms, tele-grams, 
Indian post and telegraph department and also through letterboxes.
provides various postal services across 	 3.	 Direct post is for direct advertising. 
India. For providing these services the It can be both addressed as well 
whole country has been divided into 22 as unaddressed. 
postal circles. These circles manage the 	 4.	 International Money Transfer 
day-to-day functioning of the various through collaboration with 
head post offices, sub-post offices Western Union financial services, 
and branch post offices. Through USA, which enables remittance 
their regional and divisional level of money from 185 countries to 
arrangements the various facilities India.
provided by postal department are 	 5.	 Passport facilities — A unique 
broadly categorised into: partnership with the ministry 
(i)  Financial facilities: These of external affairs for facilitating 
facilities are provided through the passport application.
post office’s savings schemes like 	 6.	 Speed Post: It has over 1000 
Public Provident Fund (PPF), Kisan destinations in India and links 
Vikas Patra, and National Saving with 97 major countries across 
Certificates in addition to normal the globe.
retail banking functions of monthly 	 7.	 e-bill post is the latest offering 
income schemes, recurring deposits, of the department to collect bill 
savings account, time deposits and payment across the counter for 
money order facility. BSNL and Bharti Airtel.
(ii)  Mail facilities: Mail services 
consist of parcel facilities that is Telecom Services
transmission of articles from one World class telecommunications 
place to another; registration facility infrastructure is the key to rapid 
to provide security of the transmitted economic and social development of 
articles and insurance facility to the country. It is in fact the backbone 
provide insurance cover for all risks of every business activity. In today’s 
in the course of transmission by post. world  the dream of doing business 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   99 31-12-2020   11:55:09



100 BUSINESS  STUDIES

across continents will remain a (iii) Cable services: These are linkages 
dream in the absence of telecom and switched services within a licensed 
infrastructure. There have been area of operation to operate media 
far reaching developments in the services, which are essentially one-
convergence of telecom, IT, consumer way entertainment related services. 
electronics and media industries The two-way communication including 
worldwide. Recognising the potential voice, data and information services 
in enhancing quality of life and to through cable network would emerge 
facilitate India’s vision of becoming IT significantly in the future. Offering 
super power by the year 2025, new services through the cable network 
Telecom Policy Framework 1999 and would be similar to providing fixed 
Broadband Policy 2004 were developed services.
by the Government of India. Through (iv) VSAT services: VSAT (Very Small 
this framework the government intends Aperture Terminal) is a satellite-
to provide both universal services to based communications service. It 
all uncovered areas and high-level offers businesses and government 
services for meeting the needs of the agencies a highly flexible and reliable 
country’s economy. communication solution in both 

The various types of telecom urban and rural areas. Compared 
services are: to land-based services, VSAT offers 
(i)  Cellular mobile services: These the assurance of  rel iable and 
are all types of mobile telecom uninterrupted service that is equal 
services including voice and non- to or better than land-based services. 
voice messages, data services and PCO It can be used to provide innovative 
services utilising any type of network applications such as tele-medicine, 
equipment within their service area. newspapers-on-line, market rates and 
They can also provide direct inter tele-education even in the most remote 
connectivity with any other type of areas of our country.
telecom service provider. (v)  DTH services: DTH (Direct to 
(ii)  Fixed line services: These are Home) is again a satellite-based 
all types of fixed services including media services provided by cellular 
voice and non-voice messages and companies. One can receive media 
data services to establish linkages for services directly through a satellite 
long distance traffic. These utilise any with the help of a small dish antenna 
type of network equipment primarily and a set top box. The service provider 
connected through fiber optic cables of DTH services provides a bouquet of 
laid across  the length and breadth multiple channels. It can be viewed on 
of the country. The also provide our television without being dependent 
inter connectivity with other types of on the services provided by the cable 
telecom services. network services provider.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   100 31-12-2020   11:55:09



BUSINESS SERVICES 101

4.7	T ransportation of place, i.e., it makes goods available 
to the consumer from the place of 

Transportation comprises freight production. We need to develop our 
services together with supporting transportation system to keep pace 
and auxiliary services by all modes with the requirements of our economy. 
of transportation i.e., rail, road, We need better infrastructure of roads 
air and sea for the movement of with sufficient width and high quality. 
goods and international carriage of We have few ports and they too are 
passengers. You have already studied congested. Both government and 
the comparative advantages and industry needs to be proactive and 
disadvantages of different modes of view the effective functioning of this 
transportation in earlier classes. Their service as a necessity for providing 
services are considered to be important a lifeline to a business services. In 
for business since speed is of essence sectors like agriculture and food, there 
in any business transaction. Also are massive losses of product in the 
transportation removes the hindrance process of transportation and storage.

Different Types of Insurance 
1. Health Insurance
Health Insurance is a safeguard against rising medical costs. A health insurance 
policy is a contract between an insurer and an individual or group, in which the 
insurer agrees to provide specified health insurance at an agreed-upon price (the 
premium). Depending upon the policy, premium may be payable either in a lump 
sum or in instalments. Health insurance usually provides either direct payment 
or reimbursement for expenses associated with illness and injuries. The cost and 
range of protection provided by health insurance depends on the provider and the 
policy purchased. In India, presently the health insurance exists primarily in the 
form of Mediclaim policy offered to an individual or to any group, association or 
corporate bodies.

2. Motor Vehicle Insurance
Motor Vehicle Insurance falls under the classification of General Insurance. This 
insurance is becoming very popular and its importance increasing day-by-day. 
In motor insurance the owner’s liability to compensate people who were killed or 
insured through negligence of the motorists or drivers is passed on to the insurance 
company. The rate of premium under motor insurance is standardised.

3. Burglary Insurance
Burglary insurance falls under the classification of insurance of property. In case 
of burglary policy, the loss of damages of household goods and properties and 
personal effects due to theft, larceny, burglary, house-breaking and acts of such 
nature are covered. The actual loss is compensated.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   101 31-12-2020   11:55:09



102 BUSINESS  STUDIES

   (i) 	  Insurable interest must exist at the time of loss but not necessarily at the 
time when the policy was taken.

	 (ii)	 The principle of causa proxima will apply to it. The insurance company will 
be liable to pay only that particular or nearest cause that is covered by the 
policy. For example, if a loss is caused by several reasons then the nearest 
cause of loss will be considered.

4. Cattle Insurance
A contract of cattle insurance is a contract whereby a sum of money is secured 
to the assured in the event of death of animals like bulls, buffaloes, cows and 
heifers. It is a contract against death resulting from accident, disease, or pregnant 
condition as the case may be. The insurer usually undertakes to pay the excess 
in the event of loss.

5. Crop Insurance
A contract of crop insurance is a contract to provide a measure of financial support 
to farmers in the event of a crop failure due to drought or flood. This insurance 
covers against all risks of loss or damages relating to production of rice, wheat, 
millets, oil seeds and pulses etc.

6. Sports Insurance
This policy assures a comprehensive cover available to amateur sportsmen covering 
their sporting equipment, personal effects, legal liability and personal accident risks. 
If desired the cover can also be made available in respect of the named member 
of insured’s family residing with him. This cover is not available to professional 
sportsmen. The cover is available in respect of any one or more of the following 
sports: angling, badminton, cricket, golf, lawn tennis, squash, use of sporting guns.

7. Amartya Sen Siksha Yojana
This policy offered by the General Insurance Company secures the education of 
dependent children. If the insured parent/legal guardian sustains any bodily injury 
resulting solely and directly from an accident, caused by external, violent and visible 
means and if such injury shall within twelve calendar months of its occurrence 
be the sole and direct cause of his/her death or permanent total disablement, the 
insurer shall indemnify the insured student, in respect of all covered expenses 
to be incurred from the date of occurrence of such accident till the expiry date of 
policy or completion of the duration of covered course whichever occurs first and 
such indemnity shall not exceed the sum insured as stated in the policy schedule.

8. Rajeswari Mahila Kalyan Bima Yojana
This policy has been designed to provide relief to the family members of insured 
women in case of their death or disablement arising due to all kinds of accidents 
and/or death and/or disablement arising out of problems incidental to women only.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   102 31-12-2020   11:55:09



BUSINESS SERVICES 103

Social Security Schemes
1.  		 Atal Pension Yojana : This scheme is offered to individuals in the age group 

of 18 to 40 years. The individual is expected to contribute in the scheme until 
he/she attains the age of 60 years. The scheme acts as an investment for 
availing old-age pension.

2.  		 Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana : This scheme offers accidental and 
disability cover of Rs. 2 lakh at a premium of Rs. 12 per year. Any individual 
holding a savings account can be enrolled under this scheme.

3.  		 Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana : The scheme offers savings account with 
no minimum balance. The Rupay ATM-cum-Debit card has in-built accident 
and life cover of Rs. 1,00,000 and Rs. 30,000, respectively. The scheme, 
suitable for economically weaker sections of society.

4.  		 Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana : The scheme offers a protection 
term insurance cover of Rs 2,00,000 to the dependents of the policy holder in 
the event of his/her death at a premium of Rs. 330 per year. Any individual in 
the age group of 18-70 years having a savings account can opt for this scheme.

Warehousing right time, in the right physical form at 
the right cost. Modern warehouses are 

Storage has always been an important 
aspect of economic development. The automated with automatic conveyors, 
warehouse was initially viewed as a computer operated cranes and forklifts 
static unit for keeping and storing for moving goods and also usage of 
goods in a scientific and systematic logistics automation software’s for 
manner so as to maintain their warehouse management.
original quality, value and usefulness. Types of Warehouses
The typical warehouse received 
merchandise by rail, truck or bullock (i) 	 Private warehouses: Private 
cart. The items were moved manually warehouses are operated, owned or 
to a storage within the warehouse and leased by a company handling their 
hand piled in stacks on the floor. They own goods, such as retail chain 
are used by manufacturers, importers, stores or multi-brand multi-product 
exporters, wholesalers, transport companies. As a general rule an 
business, customs etc., in India. efficient warehouse is planned around 

Today’s warehouses have ceased a material handling system in order 
to be a mere storage service providers to encourage maximum efficiency of 
and have really become logistical product movement. The benefit of 
service providers in a cost efficient private warehousing includes control, 
manner. That is making available the flexibility, and other benefits like 
right quantity, at the right place, in the improved dealer relations.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   103 31-12-2020   11:55:09



104 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Infrastructure in Transportation
In the first 50 years of independence, India saw the construction of around 13, 000 
kilometers of national highways. The ambitious NHAI, Government of India’s project 
consisting of Golden Quadrilateral connecting Delhi-Kolkata-Chennai-Mumbai and 
the North-South, East-West corridors linking Srinagar to Kanyakumari and Silchar 
to Porbandar will see the construction of 13,151 kms of National Highways within 
a span of eight years. This project will not only change the face of road transport 
in India, but it will also have a lasting impact on our economy. The Ministry of 
Railways have also done massive innovations in their movement and monitoring 
of goods trains to facilitate the needs of the business community.

The Government of India is also serious in ensuring better and more facilities 
at the seaports and airports to provide an impetus to business activities. The 
government plans not only to enhance capacities of existing ports but also to develop 
modern and new ports at strategic locations.

(ii)  Public warehouses:  Public prior to payment of tax and customs 
warehouses can be used for storage duty. These are goods which are imported 
of goods by traders, manufacturers from other countries. Importers are not 
or any member of the public after the permitted to remove goods from the 
payment of a storage fee or charges. The docks or the airport till customs duty 
government regulates the operation of is paid.
these warehouses by issuing licences At times, importers are not in 
for them to private parties. a position to pay the duty in full 

The owner of the warehouse stands or does not require all the goods 
as an agent of the owner of the goods immediately. The goods are kept in 
and is expected to take appropriate bonded warehouses by the customs 
care of the goods. authorities till the customs duty is paid. 

These warehouses provide other These goods are said to be in bond.
facilities also, like transportation by rail These warehouses have facilities 
and road. They are responsible for the for branding, packaging, grading and 
safety of the goods. Small manufacturers blending. Importers may bring their 
find it convenient as they cannot afford buyers for inspection of goods and 
to construct their own warehouses. repackage them according to their 

requirements. Thus, it facilitates 
The other benefits include flexibility marketing of goods.

in the number of locations, no fixed Goods can be removed in part as 
cost and capability of offering value and when required by the importers 
added services, like packaging and and buyers, and import duty can be 
labelling. paid in instalments.
(iii)  Bonded warehouses: Bonded The importer need not block funds 
warehouses are licensed by the for payment of import duties before 
government to accept imported goods the goods are sold or used. Even if 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   104 31-12-2020   11:55:09



BUSINESS SERVICES 105

he wishes to export the goods kept the  bulk quantity of goods received 
in the bonded warehouse he may do from the production plants into 
so without payment of customs duty. smaller quantities. These smaller 
Thus, bonded warehouses facilitate quantities are then transported 
entrepot trade. according to the requirements of 
(iv) Government warehouses: These clients to their places of business.
warehouses are fully owned and 
managed by the government. The Customer A
government manages them through 
organisations set up in the public Break-Bulk

PLANT A Customer B
sector. For example, Food Corporation Warehouse

of India, State Trading Corporation, Customer C
and Central Warehousing Corporation.
(v)  Cooperative warehouses: Some 	(c)	Stock piling:  The next function of 
marketing cooperative societies or warehousing is the seasonal storage 
agricultural cooperative socities have of goods to select businesses. 
set up their own warehouses for Goods or raw materials, which 
members of their cooperative society. are not required immediately for 

sale or manufacturing, are stored 
Functions of Warehousing in warehouses. They are made 

available to business depending on 
The functions of warehousing are customers’ demand. Agricultural 
discussed as follows: products which are harvested at 
(	a)	Consolidation: In this function specific times with subsequent 

the warehouse receives and consumption throughout the year 
consolidates, materials/goods also need to be stored and released 
from different production plants in lots.
and dispatches the same to a (d)	Value added services: Certain 
particular customer on a single value added services are also 
transportation shipment. provided by the warehouses, such 

Plant A as in transit mixing, packaging 
and labelling. Goods sometimes 
need to be opened and repackaged 

Consolidation
Plant B A / B / C and labelled again at the time of 

Warehouses inspection by prospective buyers. 
Grading according to quantity and 

Plant C dividing goods in smaller lots is 
another function.

	(b)	Break the bulk: The warehouse 	(e)	Price stablisation: By adjusting the 
performs the function of dividing supply of goods with the demand 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   105 31-12-2020   11:55:10



106 BUSINESS  STUDIES

situation, warehousing performs 	 (f)	 Financing: Warehouse owners 
the function of stabilising prices. advance money to the owners 
Thus, prices are controlled when on security of goods and further 
supply is increasing and demand supply goods on credit terms to 
is slack and vice versa. customers.

Key Terms

Business services	 Insurance	 Subrogation	 Fire insurance
Banking	 Insurable interest	 Contribution	 Marine insurance
e-Banking	 Indemnity	 Mitigation	 Telecom services
Commercial banks	 Proximate cause	 Life insurance	 Warehousing

SUMMARY

Nature of services: Services are those separately identifiable, essentially 
intangible activities that provide satisfaction of wants, and are not necessarily 
linked to the sale of a product or another service. There are five basic features 
of services. These features also distinguish them from goods and are known as 
the five Is of services i.e., Intangibility, Inconsistency, Inseparability, Inventory 
(less), Involvement.
Difference between services and goods: While goods are produced, services 
are performed. A service is an act which cannot be taken home. What we can 
take home is the effect of the services. And as the services are sold at the 
consumption point, there are no inventories.
Types of services: Business Services, Social Services, Personal Services.
Business services: In order to be competitive, business enterprises are 
becoming more and more dependent on specialised business services. 
Business enterprises look towards banks for availability of funds; insurance 
companies for getting their plant, machinery, goods, etc., insured; transport 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   106 31-12-2020   11:55:10



BUSINESS SERVICES 107

companies for transporting raw material and finished goods; and telecom and 
postal services for being in touch with their vendors, suppliers and customers.
Banking: A banking company in India is one which transacts the business of  
banking which means accepting, for the purpose of lending and investment 
of deposits of money from the public, repayable on demand or otherwise and 
withdrawable by cheques, draft, order or otherwise.
Type of banks: Banks can be classified into the following i.e., commercial 
banks, cooperative banks, specialised banks, central bank.
Functions of commercial bank: Some of them are the basic or primary 
functions of a bank while others are agency services or general utility services 
in nature. Acceptance of deposits, lending of funds, cheque facility, remittance 
of funds, allied services.
e-Banking: The latest wave in information technology is internet banking. 
It is a part of virtual banking and another delivery channel for customers. 
e-banking is electronic banking or banking using the electronic media. Thus, 
e-banking is a service provided by many banks, that allows a customer to 
conduct banking transactions, such as managing savings, checking accounts, 
applying for loans or paying bills over the internet using a personal computer, 
mobile telephone or handheld computer (personal digital assistant)
Insurance: Insurance is thus a device by which the loss likely to be caused 
by an uncertain event is spread over a number of persons who are exposed 
to it and who are prepared to insure themselves against such an event. It 
is a contract or agreement under which one party agrees in return for a 
consideration to pay an agreed amount of money to another party to make 
good a loss, damage or injury to something of value in which the insured has 
a pecuniary interest as a result of some uncertain event.
Fundamental principle of insurance: The basic principle of insurance is 
that an individual or a business concern chooses to spend a definitely known 
sum in place of a possible huge amount involved in an indefinite future loss. 
Insurance, therefore, is a form of risk management primarily used to safe 
guard against the risk of potential financial loss.
Functions of insurance: Providing certainty, Protection, Risk sharing, Assist 
in capital formation.

Principles of Insurance
Utmost good faith: A contract of insurance is a contract of uberrimae fidei 
i.e., a contract found on utmost good faith. Both the insurer and the insured 
display good faith towards each other in regard to the contract.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   107 31-12-2020   11:55:10



108 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Insurable interest: The insured must have an insurable interest in the subject 
matter of insurance.
Insurable interest means some pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the 
insurance contract.
Indemnity: According to it, the insurer undertakes to put the insured, in the 
event of loss, in the same position that he occupied immediately before the 
happening of the event insured against.
Proximate cause: When the loss is the result of two or more causes, the 
proximate cause means the direct, the most dominant and most effective 
cause of which the loss is a natural consequence.
Subrogation: It refers to the right of the insurer to stand in the place of the 
insured, after settlement of a claim, as far as the right of the insured in respect 
of recovery from an alternative source is involved.
Contribution: As per this principle it is the right of an insurer who has paid 
claim under an insurance, to call upon other liable insurers to contribute for 
the loss payment.
Mitigation: This principles states that it is the duty of the insured to take 
reasonable steps to minimise the loss or damage to the insured property.
Types of Insurance
Life insurance: Life insurance may be defined as a contract in which the 
insurer, in consideration of a certain premium, either in a lump sum or by 
other periodical payments, agrees to pay to the assured, or to the person for 
whose benefit the policy is taken, the assured sum of money, on the happening 
of a specified event contingent on the human life or at the expiry of a certain 
period.
This insurance provides protection to the family at premature death of an 
individual or gives adequate amount at an old age when earning capacities 
are reduced. The insurance is not only a protection but is a sort of investment 
because a certain sum is returnable to the insured at the time of death or at the 
expiry of a certain period.
The main elements of a life insurance contract are:  

	 (i)	 The life insurance contract must have all the essentials of a valid contract.
	 (ii)	 The contract of life insurance is a contract of utmost good faith.
	 (iii)	 In life insurance, the insured must have insurable interest in the life 

assured.
	 (iv)	 Life insurance contract is not a contract of indemnity.

Types of life insurance policies: People have different requirements and 
therefore they would like a policy to fulfill all their needs. The needs of people 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   108 31-12-2020   11:55:10



BUSINESS SERVICES 109

for life insurance can be family needs, children’s needs, old age and  special 
needs. To meet the needs of people the insurer’s have developed different 
types of products such as Whole Life Assurance, Endowment type plans, 
combination of Whole Life and Endowment type plans, Children’s Assurance 
plans and Annuity plans.
Fire insurance: Fire insurance is a contract whereby the insurer, in 
consideration of the premium paid, undertakes to make good any loss or 
damage caused by a fire during a specified period upto the amount specified in 
the policy.
The main elements of a fire insurance contract are:

	 (i)	 In fire insurance, the insured must have insurable interest in the subject 
matter of the insurance.

	 (ii)	 Similar to the life insurance contract, the contract of fire insurance is a 
contract of utmost good faith i.e., uberrimae fidei.

	 (iii)	 The contract of fire insurance is a contract of strict indemnity.
	 (iv)	 The insurer is liable to compensate only when fire is the proximate cause 

of damage or loss.
Marine insurance: A marine insurance contract is an agreement whereby the 
insurer undertakes to indemnify the insured in the manner and to the extent 
thereby agreed against marine losses. Marine insurance provides protection 
against loss by marine perils or perils of the sea. Marine insurance is slightly 
different from other types. There are three things involved i.e., ship or hull, 
cargo or goods and freight.
The main elements of a marine insurance contract are:

	 (i)	 Unlike life insurance, the contract of marine insurance is a contract of 
indemnity.

	 (ii)	 Similar to life and fire insurance, the contract of marine insurance is a 
contract of utmost good faith.

	 (iii)	 Insurable interest must exist at the time of loss.
	 (iv)	 The principle of causa proxima will apply to it.

Communication services: Communication services are helpful to business 
for establishing links with the outside world viz., suppliers, customers, 
competitors etc. The main services which help business can be classified into 
postal and telecom.
Postal services: Various facilities provided by postal department are broadly 
categorised into financial facilities, mail facilities.
Telecom services: The various types of telecom services are of the following 
types: Cellular Mobile Services, Radio Paging Services, Fixed line services, Cable 
Services, VSAT Services, DTH services.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   109 31-12-2020   11:55:10



110 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Transportation: Transportation comprises freight services together with 
supporting and auxiliary services by all modes of transportation i.e., rail, 
road, air and sea for the movement of goods and international carriage of 
passengers.
Warehousing: The warehouse was initially viewed as a static unit for keeping 
and storing goods in a scientific and systematic manner so as to maintain 
their original quality, value and usefulness.
Today’s warehouses have ceased to be mere storage service providers and have 
really become logistical service providers in a cost efficient manner.
Types of warehouses: private warehouses, public warehouses,bonded 
warehouses, government warehouses, cooperative warehouses.
Functions of warehousing: The functions of warehousing are normally 
discussed as follows : consolidation, break the bulk, stock piling, value added 
services, price stablisation, financing.

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1.	 Define services and goods.
2.	 What is e-banking. What are the advantages of e-banking?
3.	 Write a note on various telecom services available for enhancing business.
4.	 Explain briefly the principles of insurance with suitable examples.
5.	 Explain warehousing and its functions.

Long Answer Questions
1.	 What are services? Explain their distinct characteristics.
2.	 Explain the functions of commercial banks with an example of each. 
3.	 Write a detailed note on various facilities offered by Indian Postal Department.
4.	 Describe various types of insurance and examine the nature of risks 

protected by each type of insurance.
5.	 Explain in detail the warehousing services.

Projects/Assignments
1.	 Identify a list of various services you use on a regular basis and identify 

their distinct characteristics. 
2.	 Do a project on banking services. Approach a nearby bank and collect 

information about various services offered by them and also collect leaflets 
about salient features of different schemes. Compile and suggest what extra 
services you may like to propose.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   110 31-12-2020   11:55:10



BUSINESS SERVICES 111

3.	 Visit a nearby bank branch in your locality and collect information about 
various types of account available for customers to open as per their 
requirement.

	In the second part of the activity match the information given in column A with 
the information given in Column B.

S. No. Column A Column B

1. Multiple Option It is a temporary pass through account held by a third 
Deposit party during the process of a transaction between two 

parties unless the transaction is completed.

2. Savings Account A kind of deposit scheme introduced by different 
banks, where the excess amount in the savings bank 
account is transferred to fixed deposit account and the 
account holder earns more rate of interest. If the bank 
receives a cheque for this account and the balance 
is not sufficient, the amount will be transferred from 
fixed deposit account to savings bank account to clear 
the cheque. In short, it gives the account holder the 
interest of a term deposit with the flexibility of partial 
withdrawal, whereas, the remaining cash will get better 
interest. 

3. Current Account It is also called cumulative deposit scheme. Any 
resident, individual, association, club, institution/
agency is eligible to open this account in single/joint 
names. The account can be opened for any period 
ranging from 6 months to 120 months, in multiple of 
1 month for monthly installment. The amount selected 
for installment at the start of the scheme is payable 
every month and the number of installments once fixed, 
cannot be changed. The rate of interest is compounded 
quarterly and the final amount is paid on maturity. 

4. Fixed Deposit Any resident, individual, association, club, etc., is 
Account eligible for this account. It is a kind of modest credit 

option available to the depositor. Two free cheque 
books will be issued each year. Internet banking 
facility will be provided without any charge. Balance 
enquiry, NEFT, bill payment, mobile recharge, etc., 
are provided through mobile phones. Students can 
open this account with zero balance by providing the 
required documents.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   111 31-12-2020   11:55:10



112 BUSINESS  STUDIES

5. Demat Account This account can be opened by any resident, individual, 
association, limited company, religious institution, 
educational institution, charitable institution, club, 
etc. Payments can be done unlimited number of times. 
Funds can be remitted from any part of the country 
to the corresponding account. Overdraft facility and 
Internet banking facility are available.

6. Escrow Account It is classified as short deposit receipt and fixed deposit 
receipt
a.	 Short Deposit Receipt
 	 (i)	 Banks accept deposits from customers 
		  varying from 7 days to a maximum of 10 years.
	  (ii)	 The period for ‘short deposits’ can vary from 7 

days to 179 days.
	 (iii)	 The minimum amount that can be deposited 

under this scheme is Rs. 5 lakh for a period of 
7-14 days.

b.   Fixed Deposit Receipt	
  	  (i)	 Any resident, individual, association, minor, 

society, club, etc., is eligible for this account.
	  (ii)	 The minimum FDR in metro and Urban 

branches is Rs. 10,000 and in rural and semi-
urban and for senior citizens is Rs. 5000.

	 (iii)	 Interest rate differs from bank to bank 
depending upon the tenure of the deposits and 
as bank changes the rate.

	 (iv)	 Additional interest of 0.50% is offered to senior 
citizens on deposits placed for a year and above.

7. Recurring 	 (i)	 This account offers stress-free transactions on 
Deposit the shares.
Account 	 (ii)	 An individual, Non-Resident Indian, foreign 

institutional investor, foreign national, 
corporate, trusts, clearing houses, financial 
institution, clearing member, mutual funds, 
banks and other depository account.

	 (iii)	 For opening this account, an applicant requires 
to fill a form, submit his/her photo  along with a 
photocopy of Voter ID/Passport /Aadhar Card/
Driving Licence and a Demat account number 
will be provided to the applicant immediately 
after the completion of processing of the 
application.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4.indd   112 31-12-2020   11:55:10



Chapter 5

##5##
Emerging Modes of Business

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 state the meaning of e-business;

•	 explain the process of online buying and selling as a part of 
e-business;

•	 distinguish e-business from traditional business;

•	 state benefits of switching over to electronic mode;

•	 explain requirements for a firm’s initiation into e-business;

•	 identify major security concerns of electronic mode of doing business;

•	 discuss the need for business process outsourcing; and

•	 appreciate the scope of business process outsourcing.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   113 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



114 BUSINESS  STUDIES

“Let us do some shopping,” Rita woke up Rekha, her friend from the home-village 
who had come to Delhi during the vacations. “At this hour well past midnight,” 
said Rekha rubbing her eyes, “Who would be sitting with his shop open for 
you?” “Oh! Perhaps I could not convey it properly. We are not going anywhere! 
I am talking about online shopping over the internet!” told Rita. “Oh yes! I have 
heard of online shopping, but have never done any,” Rekha said, “What would 
they be selling over the internet, how will they deliver, What about payment… 
and why is it that internet has not yet become as popular in the villages? As 
Rekha was grappling with these questions, Rita had already logged on to one 
of India’s largest online shopping mall.

5.1	I ntroduction responsible for these two new modes 
of business would be in order.                   

The way business is done has The newer modes of business are 
undergone fundamental changes not new business. These are rather 
during the last decade or so. The simply the new ways of doing business 
manner of conducting business is attributable to a number of factors. 
referred to as the ‘mode of business,’ 
and, the prefix ‘emerging’ underlines You are aware that business as an 
the fact, that these changes are activity is aimed at creating utilities 
happening here and now, and, that or value in the form of goods and 
these trends are likely to continue. services which the household and 
In fact, if one were to list the industrial buyers purchase for meeting 
three strongest trends that are their needs and wants. In an effort to 
shaping   business, these would be: improve the business processes — be it 
(i) digitisation — the conversion of purchase and production, marketing, 
text, sound, images, video, and other finance or human resources business 
content into a series of ones and zeroes managers and business thinkers 
that can be transmitted electronically, keep evolving newer and better ways 
(ii) outsourcing, and, (iii) inter- of doing things. Business firms have 
nationalisation and globalisation. You to strengthen their capabilities of 
will read about international business creating utilities and delivering value 
in Chapter 11. In this chapter, we will to successfully meet the competitive 
be familiarising you with the first two pressures and ever-growing demands 
developments, i.e., digitisation (a term of consumers for better quality, lower 
from electronics) of business — also prices, speedier deliveries and better 
referred to as electronic business customer care.  Besides, the quest for 
(e-business), and Business Process benefitting from emerging technologies 
Outsourcing (BPO).  Before we do so, means that business as an activity 
a brief discussion about the factors keeps evolving. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   114 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 115

5.2	 e-Business transactions and functions conducted 
If the term business is taken to mean electronically, including the more 
a wide range of activities comprising popular gamut of transactions called 
industry, trade and commerce; ‘e-commerce.’ e-commerce covers a 
e-business may be defined as the firm’s interactions with its customers 
conduct of industry, trade and and suppliers over the internet. 
commerce using the computer e -bus iness  inc ludes  not  only 
networks. The network you are most e - c ommerc e ,  bu t  a l s o  o the r 
familiar with as a student or consumer electronically conducted business 
is the internet. Whereas internet functions such as production, 
is a public thorough way, firms inventory management, product 
use more private, and, hence more development, accounting and finance 
secure networks for more effective and and human resource  management. 
efficient management of their internal e-business is, therefore, clearly much 
functions.  more than buying and selling over the 
e-business versus e-commerce: Internet, i.e., e-commerce.
Though, many a times, the terms 
e-business and e-commerce are used 5.2.1	 Scope of e-Business
interchangeably, yet more precise 
definitions would distinguish between We have mentioned above that the 
the two. Just as the term ‘business’ scope of e-business is quite vast. 
is a broader term than ‘commerce’, Almost all types of business functions 
e-business is a more elaborate term such as production, finance, marketing 
and comprises various business and personnel administration as well 

Figure 5.1 Business to Business e-Commerce

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   115 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



116 BUSINESS  STUDIES

as managerial activities like planning, A network of computers is used for 
organising and controlling can be placing orders, monitoring production 
carried out over computer networks. and delivery of components, and 
The other way of looking at the scope making payments. Likewise, a firm may 
of e-business is to examine it in strengthen and improve its distribution 
terms of people or parties involved in system by exercising a real time (as it 
electronic transactions. Viewed from happens) control over its stock-in-
this perspective, a firm’s electronic transit as well as that with different 
transactions and networks can be middlemen in different locations. 
visualised as extending into three For example, each consignment of 
directions viz., (i) B2B which is a firm’s goods from a warehouse and the 
interactions with other businesses, stock-at-hand can be monitored and 
(ii) B2C i.e., a firm’s interactions with replenishments and reinforcements 
its customers and (iii) intra-B or a can be set  in  mot ion as and 
firm’s internal processes. when needed. Or else, a customer’s 

A brief discussion of various specifications may be routed through 
constituents of e-business and inter- the dealers to the factory and fed 
and intra-transactions among them is into the manufacturing system 
given as below: for customised production. Use of 
(i)  B2B Commerce: Here, both e-commerce expedites the movement of 
the parties involved in e-commerce the information and documents; and of 
transactions are business firms, and, late, money transfers as well.
hence the name B2B, i.e., business- Historically, the term e-commerce 
to-business (see Figure 5.1). Creation originally meant facilitation of B2B 
of uti l i t ies or del ivering value transactions using Electronic Data 
requires a business to interact with Interchange (EDI) technology to send 
a number of other business firms and receive commercial documents 
which may be suppliers or vendors like purchase orders or invoices.  
of diverse inputs; or else they may be 
a part of the channel through which (ii) 	 B2C Commerce: As the name 
a firm distributes its products to implies, B2C (business-to-customers) 
the consumers. For example, the transactions have business firms at 
manufacture of an automobile one end and its customers on the 
requires assembly of a large number other end. Although, what comes to 
of components which in turn are being one’s mind instantaneously is online 
manufactured elsewhere — within the shopping, it must be appreciated 
vicinity of the automobile factory or that ‘selling’ is the outcome of the 
even overseas. To reduce dependence marketing process. And, marketing 
on a single supplier, the automobile begins well before a product is offered 
factory has to cultivate more than one for sale and continues even after the 
vendor for each of the components. product has been sold. B2C commerce, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   116 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 117

Benefits of e-Commerce
	 1.	 Business Organisation:
	 (i)	 Expands the marketplace to national and international markets,
      	  (ii)		 Gradual decline in the cost of operations,
	 (iii)	 	Facilitates ‘pull’ supply chain management,
	 (iv)	 Competitive advantage over competitors,
	 (v)	  Proper time management and support business processes, and
	   (vi)	 Small firms co-exist with big firms (win-win).
	 2.	 Benefits to Consumers and Society
	     (i)	 Flexibility,
	    (ii)	 Competitive price/discounts/waive offs,
	   (iii)	 More options and choices and Customised products,
	   (iv)	 Quick and Timely delivery (digitised products),
	    (v)	 Employment potential,
	   (vi)	 Facilitate e-Auctions and e-Tenders,
	  (vii)	 Interaction with consumers,
	 (viii)	 Wider outreach.

therefore, entails a wide gamut of product features to be tailor-made to 
marketing activities such as identifying suit their requirements, but also the 
activities, promotion and sometimes convenience of delivery and payment 
even delivery of products (e.g., music at their pleasure. With the onset of 
or films) that are carried out online. e-commerce, all this has become a 
e-Commerce permits conduct of these reality. 
activities at a much lower cost but high Further, B2C variant of e-commerce 
speed. For example, ATM speeds up enables a business to be in touch with 
withdrawal of money. its customers on round-the-clock 

Customers  these  days  are basis. Companies can conduct online 
becoming very choosy and desire surveys to ascertain as to who is 
individual attention to be given to buying what and what the customer 
them. Not only do they require the satisfaction level is. 

ATM speeds up Withdrawal of Money
e-Commerce greatly facilitates and speeds up the entire B2C process.  Withdrawal 
of one’s own money from banks was, for example, a tedious process in the past. 
One had to go through a series of procedural formalities before he or she was able 
to get the payment. After the introduction of ATMs, all that is fast becoming  a 
history now. The first thing that occurs is that the customer is able to withdraw 
his money, and the rest of the back-end processes take place later.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   117 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



118 BUSINESS  STUDIES

By now, you might have formed the p r o d u c t s  m a d e  a s  p e r  t h e 
opinion that B2C is a one-way traffic, requirements of the individual 
i.e., from business-to-customers. customer. In a similar vein, closer 
But do remember that its corollary, computer-based interactions among 
C2B commerce is very much a reality the other departments makes it 
which provides the consumers with possib le  for  the f i rm to  reap 
the freedom of shopping-at-will. advantages of efficient inventory 
Customers can also make use of call and cash management, greater 
centres set up by companies to make utilisation of plant and machinery, 
toll free calls to make queries and lodge effective handling of customers’ 
complaints round the clock at no extra orders, and effective human resource 
cost to them. The beauty of the process management.
is that one need not set up these call Just as intercom facilitated voice 
centres or help lines; they may be communication within the office, 
outsourced. We shall discuss this intranet facilitates multimedia and 
aspect later in the section devoted to even 3-D graphic communication 
Business Process Outsourcing (BPO). among  organisational units for well- 
(iii)  Intra-B Commerce: Here, parties informed decisions, permitting better 
involved in the electronic transactions coordination, faster decisions and 
are from within a given business firm, speedier workflows. Take for example, 
hence, the name intra-B commerce. As a firm’s interactions with its employees, 
noted earlier too, one critical difference sometimes referred to as B2E 
between e-commerce and e-business commerce.  Companies are resorting 
is that, e-commerce comprises a to personnel recruitment, interviewing 
business firm’s interaction with its and selection, training, development 
suppliers, and distributors/other and education via e-commerce 
business firms (hence, the name B2B) (captured in a catch-all phrase 
and customers (B2C) over the internet.   ‘e-learning’). Employees can use 
While e-business is a much wider electronic catalogues and ordering 

forms and access inventory information 
term and also includes the use of for better interaction with the 
intranet for managing interactions and customers. They can send field reports 
dealings among various departments via e-mail and the management can 
and persons within a firm. It is largely have them on real time basis. In 
due to use of intra-B commerce that fact, Virtual Private Network (VPN) 
today it has become possible for technology would mean that employees 
the f irms to go in for f lexible do not have to come to office. Instead, 
manufacturing. Use of computer in a way the office goes to them and 
networks makes it possible for the they can work from wherever they 
marketing department to interact are, and at their own speed and time 
constantly with the production convenience. Meetings can be held 
department and get the customised online via tele/ video conferencing.  

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   118 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 119

(iv)  C2C Commerce: Here, the to Pay Pal. From there, PayPal notifies 
business originates from the consumer the seller that they will hold the money 
and the ultimate destination is also for them until the goods have been 
consumers, thus the name C2C shipped and accepted by the buyer.
commerce (see Figure 5.2). This An important  C2C area o f 
type of commerce is best suited for interactive commerce can be the 
dealing in goods for which there is formation of consumers’ forum and 
no established market mechanism, pressure groups. You might have 
for example, selling used books or heard of Yahoo groups. Like a vehicle 
clothes either on cash or barter basis. owner in a traffic jam can alert others 
The vast space of the internet allows via message on radio (you must have 
persons to globally search for potential heard traffic alerts on FM) about the 
buyers. Additionally, e-commerce traffic situation of the area he is stuck 
technology provides market system in; an aggrieved customer can share 
security to such transactions which his experience with a product/service/
otherwise would have been missing if vendor and warn others by writing just 
the buyers and sellers were to a message and making it known to the 
interact  in anonymity of one-to-one entire group. And, it is quite possible 
transactions? An excellent example of that the group pressure might result 
this is found at eBay where consumers in a solution of this problem.   
sell their goods and services to other From the foregoing discussion 
consumers. To make this activity concerning scope of e-business, it is 
more secure and robust, several clear that e-business applications are 
technologies have emerged. Firstly, varied and many. 
eBay allows all the sellers and buyers 
to rate one another. In this manner, e-Business versus Traditional 
future prospective purchasers may see Business
that a particular seller has sold to more 
than 2,000 customers — all of whom By now, you must have formed 
rate the seller as excellent. In another an idea as to how e-enabling has 
example, a prospective purchaser may radically transformed the mode of 
see a seller who has previously sold doing business. Table 5.1 (page 124) 
only four times and all four rate the provides a feature on comparison 
seller poorly. This type of information between traditional business and 
is helpful. Another technology that e-business. 
has emerged to support C2C activities A comparative assessment of the 
is that of the payment intermediary. features of traditional and e-business 
PayPal is a good example of this kind. as listed in Table 5.1 points towards 
Instead of purchasing items directly the distinct benefits and limitations of 
from an unknown, untrusted seller; e-business that we shall discuss in the 
the buyer can instead send the money following paragraphs.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   119 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



120 BUSINESS  STUDIES

e-commerce makes flexible Manufacturing and 
Mass Customisation possible

Customised products have traditionally been made to order by craftsmen and 
have, therefore, been expensive and delivery times have been long. Industrial 
revolution meant that organisations could engage in mass production and could 
sell homogeneous products rolled out of the factory at a lower cost due to the 
economies of scale. Thanks to e-commerce, now organisations can offer customised 
products/ services at lower costs, that previously were only associated with mass 
produced commodity items. Here are a few examples:
401(k) Forum (US)	 Customises educational content and investment advice based 

on individual interviews.
Acumin Corp. (US)	 Customises vitamin pills specified by using the Internet. 

Customers fill in lifestyle and health questionnaire.
Dell (US) 	 Build your own PC.
Green Mountain	 Electricity supplier (but not generator). Customers could select
Energy Resources	 sources for their electricity, e.g., hydro, solar, etc.
(US)
Levi Jeans	 Tailored jeans service. Web service suspended after complaints 
(Original Spin)	 by retailers but service now offered through retailers. Offers
(US)	 49,500 different sizes and 30 styles for a total of nearly 1.5 

million options for a cost of just $55. Orders are sent by net 
and jeans are produced and shipped in 2-3 weeks.

N.V. Nutsbedrijf	 Westland supplies natural gas to many tulip growers in the 
Westland	 Netherlands. Computers in the greenhouse help greenhouse
(Newzealand) 	 owners maintain temperature, CO2 output, humidity, light and 

other factors in the most cost-efficient manner.
National Bicycle	 Custom built bicycles within 2/3 days of taking the order.
(Japan)
Simon and	 Teachers can order customised books specifically matched to
Schuster (US)	 individual course and student needs. Xerox DocuTech printers 

are generating in excess of 125,000 customised books a month.
Skyway (US) 	 Skyway is a logistics company offering whole order delivery. 

Shipments from multiple origins with different modes of 
transport can be merged in transit and delivered as a single 
order with one set of paperwork to the store or consumer.

SmithKline	 Creates customised stop smoking programme for customers.
Beecham (US)	 Uses call centre questionnaire to generate a series of  

personalised communications.
Source: Adapted from http://www.managingchange.com

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   120 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 121

Place advertisement

Website

Want to sell products Want to buy products
Receives products

Customer Receives money Customer

Figure 5.2  Consumer to Consumer e-Commerce (C2C)

5.3	 Benefits of e-Business located closest to his location. The food 
(i)  Ease of formation and lower is delivered and the payment collected 
investment requirements: Unlike a by the restaurant staff and the amount 
host of procedural requirements for due to you as a client solicitor is 
setting up an industry, e-business is credited to your account through an 
relatively easy to start. The benefits of electronic clearing system.
internet technology accrue to big or (ii) Convenience: Internet offers the 
small business alike. In fact, Internet convenience of ‘24 hours × 7 days 
is responsible for the popularity of a week × 365 days’ a year business 
the phrase: ‘networked individuals that allowed Rita and Rekha to go for 
and firms are more efficient than shopping well after midnight. Such 
networthed individuals.’ This means flexibility is available even to the 
that even if you do not have much organisational personnel whereby they 
of the investment (networth) but can do work from wherever they are, 
have contacts (network), you can do and whenever they may want to do it. 
fabulous business. Yes, e-business is truly a business as 

Imagine a restaurant that does not enabled and enhanced by electronics 
have any requirement of a physical and offers the advantage of accessing 
space. Yes, you may have an online anything, anywhere, anytime.
‘menu’ representing the best of cuisines (iii)  Speed: As already noted, much of 
from the best of restaurants the world- the buying or selling involves exchange 
over that you have networked with. of information that Internet allows 
The customer visits your website, at the click of a mouse. This benefit 
decides the menu, places the order becomes all the more attractive in the 
that in turn is routed to the restaurant case of information-intensive products 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   121 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



122 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Box A 
Some e-Business Applications

e-Procurement: It involves internet-based sales transactions between business 
firms, including both, “reverse auctions” that facilitate online trade between a single 
business purchaser and many sellers, and, digital marketplaces that facilitate 
online trading between multiple buyers and sellers.
e-Bidding/e-Auction: Most shopping sites have ‘Quote your price’ whereby 
you can bid for the goods and services (such as airline tickets!). It also includes 
e-tendering whereby one may submit tender quotations online.
e-Communication/e-Promotion: Right from e-mail, it includes publication of 
online catalogues displaying images of goods, advertisement through banners, 
pop-ups, opinion poles and customer surveys, etc. Meetings and conferences may 
be held by the means of video conferencing.
e-Delivery: It includes electronic delivery of computer software, photographs, 
videos, books (e-books) and journals (e-journals) and other multimedia content to 
the user’s computer. It also includes rendering of legal, accounting, medical, and 
other consulting services electronically. In fact, internet provides the firms with the 
opportunities for outsourcing of a host of Information Technology Enabled Services 
(ITES) that we will be discussing under business process outsourcing.  Now, you 
can even print the airlines and railway tickets at home!
e-Trading: It involves securities trading, that is online buying and selling of shares 
and other financial instruments. For example, sharekhan.com is India’s largest 
online trading firm.

such as softwares, movies, music, the global market; on the other hand, 
e-books and journals that can even be it affords to the buyer a freedom to 
delivered online. Cycle time, i.e., the choose products from almost any 
time taken to complete a cycle from part of the world. It would not be an 
the origin of demand to its fulfilment, exaggeration to say that in the absence 
is substantially reduced due to of internet, globalisation would have 
transformation of the business been considerably restricted in scope 
processes from being sequential to and speed.
becoming parallel or simultaneous. (v) Movement towards a paperless 
You know that in the digital era, money society: Use of Internet has considerably 
is defined as electronic pulses at reduced dependence on paperwork 
the speed of light, thanks to the and the attendant ‘red tape.’ You know 
electronic funds transfer technology that Maruti Udyog does bulk of its 
of e-commerce.      sourcing of supplies of materials and 
(iv) Global reach/access: Internet is components in a paper less fashion. 
truly without boundaries. On the one Even the government departments and 
hand, it allows the seller an access to regulatory authorities are increasingly 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   122 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 123

moving in this direction whereby they And, this requirement is responsible 
allow electronic filing of returns and for what is known as digital divide, that 
reports. In fact, e-commerce tools are is the division of society on the basis 
effecting the administrative reforms of familiarity and non-familiarity with 
aimed at speeding up the process of digital technology.
granting permissions, approvals and (iv)  Increased risk due to anonymity 
licences. In this respect, the provisions and non-traceability of parties: 
of Information Technology Act 2000 Internet transactions occur between 
are quite noteworthy. cyber personalities. As such, it becomes 

difficult to establish the identity of the 
5.4	 L parties. Moreover, one does not know 

imitations of e-Business even the location from where the 
e-business is not all that rosy. Doing parties may be operating. It is riskier, 
business in the electronic mode suffers therefore, transacting through internet. 
from certain limitations. It is advisable e-business is riskier also in the sense 
to be aware of these limitations as well.   that there are additional hazards of 
(i)  Low personal touch: High-tech it impersonation (someone else may 
may be, e-business, however, lacks transact in your name) and leakage 
warmth of interpersonal interactions. of confidential information such as 
To this extent, it is relatively less credit card details.  Then, there also 
suitable mode of business in respect are problems of ‘virus,’ and ‘hacking,’ 
of product categories requiring high that you must have heard of. If not, we 
personal touch such as garments, will be dealing with security and safety 
toiletries, etc. concerns of online business.      
(ii)  Incongruence between order (v)  People resistance: The process 
taking/giving and order fulfilment of adjustment to new technology and 

new way of doing things causes stress 
speed: Information can flow at the and a sense of insecurity. As a result, 
click of a mouse, but the physical people may resist an organisation’s 
delivery of the product takes time. plans of entry into e-business.   
This incongruence may play on the (vi)  Ethical fallouts: “So, you are 
patience of the customers. At times, planning to quit, you may as well 
due to technical reasons, web sites quit right now”, said the HR manager 
take unusually long time to open. This showing her a copy of the e-mail that 
may further frustrate the user.  she had written to her friend. Sabeena 
(iii) Need for technology capability was both shocked and stunned as to 
and competence of parties to how her boss got through to her e-mail 
e-business: Apart from the traditional account. Nowadays, companies use 
3R ’s  (Read ing ,  WR i t ing ,  and an ‘electronic eye’ to keep track of the 
ARithmetic), e-business requires a computer files you use, your e-mail 
fairly high degree of familiarity of the account, the websites you visit etc. 
parties with the world of computers. Is it ethical?

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   123 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



124 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Table 5.1    Difference between Traditional and e-Business
Basis of distinction Traditional business e-business

Ease of formation Difficult Simple
Physical presence Required Not required

Proximity to the source of raw 
Locational requirements materials or the market for None

the products

Cost of setting up High Low as no requirement 
of physical facilities

High due to fixed charges Low as a result of 
associated with investment reliance on network of 

Operating cost in procurement and storage, relationships rather 
production, marketing and than ownership of 

distribution facilities resources
Nature of contact with 
the suppliers and the Indirect through 

customers intermediaries Direct

Hierarchical - from top level Non-hierarchical, 
Nature of internal management to middle level allowing direct vertical, 
communication management to lower level horizontal and diagonal 

management to operatives communication
Response time for meeting 

customers’/internal Long Instantaneous
requirements

Shape of the Vertical/tall, due to hierarchy Horizontal/flat due to 
organisational structure or chain of command directness of command 

and communication.
Sequential precedence-
succession relationship, Simultaneous 

Business processes and i.e., purchase - production/ (concurrence) different 
length of the cycle operation - marketing - sales. processes. Business 

The, business process cycle process cycle is, 
is, therefore, longer therefore, shorter

Opportunity for inter-
personal touch Much more Less

Less. However, for 
digitable products 

Opportunity for physical such an opportunity 
pre-sampling of the Much more is tremendous. You 

products can pre-sample music, 
books, journals, 

software, videos, etc.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   124 9/2/2022   2:12:15 PM



EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 125

Ease of going global Less Much, as cyber space is 
truly without boundaries
Much, as IT sector is 

Government patronage Shrinking among the topmost 
priorities of the  
government

Nature of human capital Semi-skilled and even  Technically and 
unskilled manpower needed. professionally qualified 

personnel needed
Low due to arm’s length High due to the  

Transaction risk transactions and face-to-face distance and anonymity 
contact. of the parties

Despite limitations, e-commerce is 5.5	O nline Transactions
the way Operationally, one may visualise three 
It may be pointed out that most of the stages involved in online transactions. 
limitations of e-business discussed Firstly, the pre-purchase/sale stage 
above are in the process of being including advertising and information-
overcome. Websites are becoming more seeking; secondly, the purchase/
and more interactive to overcome the sale stage comprised of steps such as 
problem of ‘low touch.’ Communication price negotiation, closing of purchase/
technology is continually evolving sales deal and payment; and thirdly, 
to increase the speed and quality of the delivery stage (see Figure 5.2).  
communication through internet. It may be observed from Figure 5.2 
Efforts are on to overcome the digital that, except the stage relating to 
divide, for example, by resorting delivery, all other stages involve flow 
to such strategies as setting up of of information. The information is 
community telecentres in villages exchanged in the traditional business 
and rural areas in India with the mode too, but at severe time and cost 
involvement of government agencies, constraints. In face-to-face interaction 
NGOs and international institutions. in traditional business mode, for 
In order to diffuse e-commerce in example, one needs to travel to be able 
all nooks and corners, India has to talk to the other party, requiring 
undertaken about 150 such projects. travel effort, greater time and costs. 

In view of the above discussion, Exchange of information through 
it is clear that e-business is here to the telephone is also cumbersome. 
stay and is poised to reshape the It requires simultaneous presence of 
businesses, governance and the both the parties for verbal exchange 
economies. It is, therefore, appropriate of information. Information can be 
that we familiarise ourselves with how transmitted by post too, but this 
e-business is conducted. again is quite a time consuming and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   125 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM



126 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Information Technology Act 2000 paves way for Paperless Society
Below are given some of the provisions of Information Technology Act 2000 that 
have made it possible to have paper less dealings in the business world as well as 
in the government domain. 
Legal recognition of electronic records (Section 4): Where any law provides that 
information or any other matter shall be in writing or in the typewritten or printed 
form, then, notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such requirement 
shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such information or matter is rendered 
or made available in an electronic form; and accessible so as to be usable for a 
subsequent reference.
Legal recognition of digital signatures (Section 5): Where any law provides that 
information or any other matter shall be authenticated by affixing the signature 
or any document shall be signed or bear the signature of any person, hence 
notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such requirement shall be 
deemed to have been satisfied, if such information or matter is authenticated by 
means of digital signature affixed in such a manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.
Use of electronic records and digital signatures in Government and its agencies 
(Section 6-1): Where any law provides for the filing of any form, application or any 
other document with any office, authority, body or agency owned or controlled by the 
appropriate Government in a particular manner; the issue or grant of any licence, 
permit, sanction or approval by whatever name called in a particular manner; the 
receipt or payment of money in a particular manner, then, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, such requirement shall be 
deemed to have been satisfied if such filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment, as 
the case may be, is effected by means of such electronic form as may be prescribed 
by the appropriate Government.
Retention of electronic records (Section 7-1): Where any law provides that 
documents, records or information shall be retained for any specific period, then, 
that requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such documents, records 
or information are retained in the electronic form.
Source: Information Technology Act, 2000

expensive process. Internet comes in as customer’s standpoint. We will be 
the fourth channel which is free from discussing the seller’s perspective in the 
most of the problems referred to above. paragraphs on resource requirements 
In the case of information-intensive for e-business. So, are you ready with 
products and services such as software the shopping list or would you like 
and music, even delivery can take to rely on your instincts as you take 
place online. a tour of the shopping mall? Let 

What is described here is the us follow Rita and Rekha browsing 
process of online trading from a indiatimes.com.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   126 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM



EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 127

(i )  Registration:  Before online of funds over the Internet using 
shopping, one has to register with Immediate Payment Services 
the online vendor by filling-up a (IMPS), NEFT and RTGS. In 
registration form. Registration means this case, therefore, the buyer 
that you have an ‘account’ with may transfer the amount for the 
the online vendor.   Among various agreed price of the transaction 
details that need to be filled in is a to the account of the online 
‘password’ as the sections relating to vendor who may, then, proceed to 
your ‘account’, and ‘shopping cart’ arrange for the delivery of goods.
are password protected. Otherwise, 	 •	 Credit or Debit Cards: Popularly 
anyone can login using your name and referred to as ‘plastic money,’ these 
shop in your name. This can put you cards are the most widely used 
in trouble. medium for online transactions. 
(ii)  Placing an order: You can pick In fact, about 95 per cent of 
and drop the items in the shopping online consumer transactions 
cart. Shopping cart is an online record are executed with a credit card. 
of what you have picked up while Credit card allows its holder to 
browsing the online store. Just as in a make purchase on credit. The 
physical store you can put in and take amount due from the card holder 
items out of your cart, likewise, you to the online seller is assumed by 
can do so even while shopping online. the card issuing bank, who later 
After being sure of what you want to transfers the amount involved in 
buy, you can ‘checkout’ and choose the transaction to the credit of the 
your payment options.  seller. Buyer’s account is debited, 
(iii)  Payment mechanism: Payment who often enjoys the freedom to 
for the purchases through online deposit the amount in instalments 
shopping may be done in a number and at his convenience.  Debit 
of ways: card allows its holder to make 
	 •	 Cash-on Delivery (CoD): As is purchases through it to the 

clear from the name, payment extent of the amount lying in 
for the goods ordered online may the corresponding account. The 
be made in cash at the time of moment any transaction is made, 
physical delivery of goods. the amount due as payment 

	 •	 Cheque: Alternatively, the online is deducted electronically from 
vendor may arrange for the pickup the card.
of the cheque from the customer’s 			   To accept credit card as an 
end. Upon realisation, the delivery online payment type, the seller first 
of goods may be made. needs a secure means of collecting 

	 •	 Net-banking Transfer: Modern credit card information from its 
banks provide to their customers customer. Payments through 
the facility of electronic transfer credit cards can be processed 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   127 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM



128 BUSINESS  STUDIES

either manually, or through an 5.6	S ecurity and Safety of  
online authorisation system, such e-Transactions: e-Business Risks
as SSL Certificate (see box on, 
History of e-commerce). Online transactions, unlike arm’s 

	 •	Digital Cash: This is a form of length transactions in physical 
electronic currency that exists exchange, are prone to a number of 
only in cyberspace. This type of risks. Risk refers to the probability of 
currency has no real physical any mishappening that can result 
properties, but offers the ability to into f inancial,  reputational or 

psychological losses to the parties 
use real currency in an electronic involved in a transaction. Because 
format. First you need to pay to of greater probability of such risks 
a bank (vide cheque, draft, etc.) in the case of online transactions, 
an amount equivalent to the security and safety issues becomes 
digital cash that you want to get the  mos t  c ruc ia l  concern  in 
issued in your favour. Then the e-business. One may broadly discuss 
bank dealing in e-cash will send these issues under three headings: 
you a special software (you can transaction risks, data storage 
download on your hard disk) that and t ransmiss ion  r i sks ,  and 
will allow you to draw digital cash threat to intellectual property and 
from your account with the bank.   privacy risks.
You may then use the digital ( i )   Transaction risks:  Online 
funds to make purchases over  transactions are vulnerable to the 
the web.   following types of transaction risks:

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   128 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM



EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 129

	 •	 Seller denies that the customer ever locations and service records. Sites 
placed the order or the customer such as eBay even provide for rating 
denies that he ever placed the of the sellers. These sites provide 
order. This may be referred to as protection to the customers against 
‘default on order taking/giving.’ default on delivery and reimburse the 

	 •	 The intended delivery does not payments made up to some extent.     
take place, goods are delivered As for the payments, we have 
at wrong address, or goods other already seen that in almost 95 per cent 
than ordered may be delivered. of the cases people use credit cards 
This may be regarded as ‘default for their online purchases. At the time 
on delivery’.   of confirming the order, the buyer is 

	 •	 Seller does not get the payment for required to furnish the details such 
the goods supplied whereas the as the card number, card issuer and 
customer claims that the payment card validity online. These details may 
was made. This may be referred be processed offline; and only after 
to as ‘default on payment’. satisfying himself or herself about 

Thus, in e-business  risk may arise the availability of the credit limits, 
for the seller or the buyer on account etc., the seller may go ahead with 
of default on order taking/giving, the delivery of goods. Alternatively, 
delivery as well as payment. Such e-commerce technology today permits 
situations can be averted by providing even online processing of the credit 
for identity and location/address card information.  For protecting 
verification at the time of registration, the credit card details from being 
and obtaining authorisation as to misused, shopping malls these days 
the order confirmation and payment use the encryption technology such 
realisation. For example, in order to as Netscape’s Secure Sockets Layer 
confirm that the customer has correctly (SSL). You can gain some information 
entered his details in the registration about SSL from box on history of 
form, the seller may verify the same e-commerce. In the succeeding 
from the ‘cookies’. Cookies are very section, we will familiarise you with 
similar to the caller id in telephones the encryption or cryptography — an 
that provide telemarketers with such important tool used for safeguarding 
relevant information as: the consumer’s against data transmission risks in 
name, address and previous purchase online transactions.
payment record. As for customer’s (ii) Data storage and transmission 
protection from anonymous sellers, risks: Information is power indeed. 
it is always advisable to shop from But think for a moment if the power 
well-established shopping sites. While goes into the wrong hands. Data stored 
allowing advertisers to sell their in the systems and en-route is exposed 
products online, these sites assure to a number of risks. Vital information 
customers of the sellers’ identities, may be stolen or modified to pursue 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   129 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM



130 BUSINESS  STUDIES

some selfish motives or simply for (iii) Risks of threat to intellectual 
fun/adventure. You must have heard property and privacy: Internet is an 
of ‘virus’ and ‘hacking’. Do you know open space. Once the information is 
the full form of the acronym ‘VIRUS?’ available over the internet, it moves 
It means Vital Information Under out of the private domain. It then 
Siege. Actually, virus is a program (a becomes difficult to protect it from 
series of commands) which replicates being copied. Data furnished in the 
itself on the other computer systems. course of online transactions may 
The effect of computer viruses can be supplied to others who may start 
range from mere annoyance in terms dumping a host of advertising and 
of some on-screen display (Level-1 promotional literature into your e-mail 
virus), disruption of functioning box. You are then at the receiving  
(Level-2 virus) damage to target data end, with little respite from receiving 
files (Level-3 virus), to complete junk mails.    
destruction of the system (Level-4 
virus). Installing and timely updating 5.7	R esources Required for 
anti-virus programmes and scanning Successful e-business 
the files and disks with them provides Implementation
protection to your data files, folders Setting up of any business requires 
and systems from virus attacks.   money, men and machines (hardware). 

Data may be intercepted in the For e-business, you require additional 
course of transmission. For this, one resources for developing, operating, 
may use cryptography. It refers to maintaining and enhancing a website 
the art of protecting information by where ‘site’ means location and ‘web’ 
transforming it (encrypting it) into an means world wide web (www). Simply 
unreadable format called ‘cyphertext’. speaking, a website is a firm’s location 
Only those who possess a secret key on the world wide web. Obviously, 
can decipher (or decrypt) the message website is not a physical location. 
into ‘plaintext’. This is similar to using Rather, it is an online embodiment of 
‘code words’ with some one so that others all the content that a firm may like to 
do not understand your conversation. provide to others.

Key Terms

e-Business	 e-Commerce	 	 Browser
Virus	 Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)	 Online trading
e-Trading	 e-Procurement		  e-Bidding
e-Cash	 Business Process Outsourcing	 Call Centres
Verticals	 Horizontals	 	 Captive BPO units
Sweat-shopping

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   130 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM



EMERGING MODES OF BUSINESS 131

SUMMARY

The world of business is changing. e-business and outsourcing are the two 
most obvious expressions of this change. The trigger for the change owes its 
origin to both internal and external forces. Internally, it is the business firm’s 
own quest for improvement and efficiency that has propelled it into e-business 
and outsourcing. Externally, the ever mounting competitive pressures and 
ever demanding customers have been the force behind the change.
Electronic mode of doing business, or e-business as it is referred to, presents 
the firm with promising opportunities for anything, anywhere and anytime to 
its customers, thereby, dismantling the time and space/locational constraints 
on its performance. Though e-business is high-tech, it suffers from the 
limitation of being low in personal touch. The customers as a result do not 
get attended to on an interpersonal basis. Besides, there are concerns over 
security of e-transactions and privacy of those who transact business over 
the internet. The benefits of e-commerce also seem to have accrued unevenly 
across countries and across regions within a country.   
Apart from becoming digital, the firms are also resorting to a departure 
from the erstwhile ‘do it all by yourself’ mindset. They are increasingly 
contracting out manufacturing, R and D as well as of business processes 
irrespective of whether these are IT enabled or not. India is riding high on 
the global outsourcing business and has gained considerably in terms 
of employment generation, capability building and contribution to exports  
and GDP.  
Together, the two trends of e-business and outsourcing are reshaping the 
way business is and will be conducted. Interestingly, both e-business and 
outsourcing are continuing to evolve, and that is why these are referred to as 
the emerging modes of business.

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions 
1.	 State any three differences between e-business and traditional business. 
2.	 Describe briefly any two applications of e-business.
3.	 Describe briefly the data storage and transmission risks in e-business. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   131 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM



132 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Long Answer Questions
1.	 Why are e-business and outsourcing referred to as the emerging modes of 

business? Discuss the factors responsible for the growing importance of 
these trends.

2.	 Elaborate the steps involved in on-line trading.
3.	 Evaluate the need for outsourcing and discuss its limitations.
4.	 Discuss the salient aspects of B2C commerce.  
5.	 Discuss the limitations of electronic mode of doing business. Are these 

limitations severe enough to restrict its scope? Give reasons for your  
answer.

Projects/Assignments
1.	 Compare and contrast the products and their prices available on the 

internet and in retail shops. Is the quality, customer satisfaction and other 
factors the same?

2.	 Study any business unit/company which is using e-commerce, 
e-business as a way of doing business. Interview some people working  
there and find out the advantages in practical business in terms of its  
costs also. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 5.indd   132 9/2/2022   2:12:16 PM



Chapter 6

Social Responsibilities of Business and 
Business Ethics

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 explain the concept of social responsibility;

•	 discuss the need for social responsibility;

•	 identify the social responsibility towards different interest groups;

•	 analyse the relationship between business and environmental 
protection; and

•	 define the concept of business ethics and state the elements of 
business ethics.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   133 9/2/2022   2:11:36 PM



134 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Mani is a young newspaper reporter and has been writing for almost six months 
on malpractices by business enterprises including such issues as misleading 
advertisements, supply of adulterated products, poor working conditions, 
environmental pollution, bribing government officials, and so on. He has started 
believing that business people tend to do anything to mint money. He happens 
to take an interview of Mr. Raman Jhunjhunwala, chairman of a leading truck 
manufacturing company which is known for its fair dealing with customers, 
employees, investors as well as other social groups. Through this interview, Mani 
develops the understanding that it is possible for a business enterprise to be socially 
responsible and ethically upright and, at the same time, be highly profitable. He 
then gets busy with studying more about the social responsibility of business and 
business ethics.

6.1	I ntroduction working conditions, honestly paying 
A business enterprise should do taxes prevention/installing pollution 
business and earn money in ways that devices in the factory, and sincerely 

fulfill the expectations of the society. attending to customer complaints are 

Every individual living in society has examples of socially desirable practices 
which improve the image of enterprises 

certain obligations towards society. 
and also make them profitable. In 

He has to respect social values and fact, it is through socially responsible 
norms of behaviour. A business and ethically upright behaviour that 
enterprise is permitted by society to business enterprises can get durable 
carry on industrial or commercial success.
activities and thereby earn profits. But 
it is obligatory on part of the business 6.2	C oncept of Social Responsibility
enterprise not to do anything, that 
is undesirable from society’s point Social responsibility of business refers 
of view. Manufacture and sale of to its obligation to take those decisions 
adulterated goods, making deceptive and perform those actions which are 
advertisements, not paying taxes which desirable in terms of the objectives and 

values of our society. The assumption 
are due, polluting the environment and of social responsibilities by business 
exploiting workers are some examples enterprises implies that they respect 
of socially undesirable practices which the aspirations of society and would 
may increase the profit of enterprises try their best to contribute to the 
but which have adverse effect on society achievement of these aspirations along 
at large. On the other hand, supplying with their profit interests. This idea is 
good quality goods, creating healthy in contrast to the common notion that 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   134 9/2/2022   2:11:36 PM



##6##
SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS 135

business exists only for maximising run for the benefit of its owners who 
profits for its owners and it is irrelevant may desire to get as much profit 
to talk of public good. It follows that a as is possible or else, it needs to be 
responsible business, and indeed any responsible for serving the interest 
responsible member of society, must of other sections of society such as 
act with due concern for the effects on customers, employees, suppliers, 
the lives of other people. government and community? The 

In this sense, social responsibility very concept of social responsibility 
is broader than legal responsibility implies that it is essentially an ethical 
of business. Legal responsibility may issue, since it involves the question 
be fulfilled by mere compliance with of what is morally right or wrong in 
the law. Social responsibility is more relation to the firm’s responsibilities. 
than that. It is a firm’s recognition Social responsibility also has an 
of social obligations even though element of voluntary action on the 
not covered by law, along with the part of the business person who may 
obligations laid down by law. In other feel free to perform or not to perform 
words, social responsibility involves such responsibilities. They may also 
an element of voluntary action on the exercise their freedom for deciding 
part of business people for the benefit the extent to which they would like 

to serve various sections of society. 
of society. In fact, all business people do not feel 
6.3	N eed for S equally responsible towards society. 

ocial Responsibility There has been a debate, for some time 
What is the right thing to do when now whether business should assume 
it comes to social responsibility? social responsibilities or not. Some 
Should a business enterprise be people strongly believe that a firm’s 

Corporate Social Responsibility
Corporate sustainability refers to the role that companies can play in meeting the 
agenda of sustainable development and entails a balanced approach to economic 
progress, social progress and environmental protection.
There is no single universally accepted definition of CSR, each definition that 
currently exists underpins the impact that businesses have on society at large and 
the societal expectations of them.
	 i.	 The European Commission defines CSR as “the responsibility of enterprises 

for their impacts on society”.
	 ii.	 The World Business Council for Sustainable Development defines CSR as “the 

continuing commitment by business to contribute to economic development 
while improving the quality of life of the workforce and their families, as well 
as, of the community and society at large”.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   135 9/2/2022   2:11:36 PM



136 BUSINESS  STUDIES

In India, the concept of CSR is governed by Clause 135 of the Companies Act, 
2013, which was passed by both the Houses of the Parliament, and had received 
the assent of the President of India on 23 August 2013.
The CSR provisions within the Act is applicable to companies with an annual 
turnover of 1,000 crore and more, or a net worth of Rs. 500 crore and more, or a 
net profit of Rs. 5 crore and more.
	 1.	 The new rules, which are applicable from the fiscal year 2014-15 onwards, 

also require companies to setup a CSR committee consisting of their board 
members, including at least one independent director.

	 2.	 The Act encourages companies to spend at 2% of their average net profit in 
the previous three years on CSR activities.

	 3.	 The indicative activities, which can be undertaken by a company under CSR, 
have been specified under Schedule VII of the Act.

	 4.	 Only CSR activities undertaken in India will be taken into consideration.
	 5.	 Activities meant exclusively for employees and their families will not qualify 

under CSR.

only social responsibility is towards its only through continuous service to 
owners. Some others, however, hold an society. Thus, assumption of social 
opposite view and argue that the firm responsibility by business provides 
has a social responsibility to serve all justifications for its existence and 
sections of society who are affected by growth.
its decisions and actions. It would be (ii)  Long-term interest of the firm: 
useful to understand the arguments A firm and its image stands to gain 
offered both in favour of and against the maximum profits in the long run when 
assumption of social responsibilities it has its highest goal as ‘service to 
by business. society’. When increasing number 
6.3.1	 Arguments for Social of members of society — including 

Responsibility workers, consumers, shareholders, 
government officials, feel that business 

(i)  Justification for existence and enterprise is not serving its best 
growth: Business exists for providing 
goods and services to satisfy human interest, they will tend to withdraw 
needs. Though, profit motive is an their cooperation to the enterprise 
important justification for undertaking concerned. Therefore, it is in its own 
business activity, it should be looked interest if a firm fulfills its social 
upon as an outcome of service to responsibility. The public image of any 
the people. In fact, the prosperity firm would also be improved when it 
and growth of business is possible supports social goals.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   136 9/2/2022   2:11:36 PM



SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS 137

(iii)  Avoidance of government (vii) Better environment for doing 
regulation: From the point of view of business: If business is to operate in 
a business, government regulations a society which is full of diverse and 
are undesirable because they limit complicated problems, it may have 
freedom. Therefore, it is believed that little chance of success. Therefore, it 
businessmen can avoid the problem of is argued that the business system 
government regulations by voluntarily should do something to meet needs 
assuming social responsibilities, which before it is confronted with a situation 
helps to reduce the need for new laws. when its own survival is endangered 
(iv)  Maintenance of society: The due to enormous social illnesses. A 
argument here is that laws cannot be 
passed for all possible circumstances. society with fewer problems provides 
People who feel that they are not better environment for a firm to 
getting their due from the business conduct its business.
may resort to anti-social activities, (viii) Holding business responsible 
not necessarily governed by law. This for social problems: It is argued that 
may harm the interest of business some of the social problems have 
itself. Therefore, it is desirable that either been created or perpetuated 
business enterprises should assume by business enterprises themselves. 
social responsibilities. Environmental pollution, unsafe 
(v)  Availability of resources with workplaces, corruption in public 
business: This argument holds that institutions, and discriminatory 
business institutions have valuable practices in employment are some of 
financial and human resources which these problems. Therefore, it is the 
can be effectively used for solving moral obligation of business to get 
problems. For example, business involved in solving these problems, 
has a pool of managerial talent and instead of merely expecting that other 
capital resources, supported by years social agencies will deal with them on 
of experience in organising business their own.
activities. It can help society to tackle 
its problems better, given the huge 6.3.2	 Arguments against Social 
financial and human resources at its Responsibility
disposal.
(vi)  Converting problems into Major arguments against social 
opportunities: Related with the responsibility are:
preceding argument is the argument (i)  Violation of profit maximisation 
that business with its glorious history objective: According to this argument, 
of converting risky situations into business exists only for profit 
profitable deals, can not only solve maximisation. Therefore, any talk of 
social problems but it can also make social responsibility is against this 
them effectively useful by accepting objective. In fact, business can best 
the challenge. fulfill its social responsibility if it 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   137 9/2/2022   2:11:36 PM



138 BUSINESS  STUDIES

maximises profits through increased changes in the attitude of business 
efficiency and reduced costs. people has been the realisation that 
(ii)  Burden on consumers: It is they have social obligations to fulfill 
argued that social responsibilities like besides ensuring their own existence 
pollution control and environmental through profitable activity. Of course, 
protection are very costly and often part of this realisation is not genuine 
require huge financial investments. and takes the form of lip service, which 
In such circumstances, businessmen is thought necessary to ensure the 
are likely to simply shift this burden of survival of private enterprise. But at 
social responsibility by charging higher the same time it cannot be denied that 
prices from the consumers instead of private business does partly realise 
bearing it themselves. Therefore, it and recognise the hard reality that a 
is unfair to tax the consumers in the privately owned firm has to meet the 
name of social responsibility. challenge of a democratic society, where 
(iii)  Lack of social skills: All social all people have certain human rights 
problems cannot be solved the way and therefore, can demand responsible 
business problems are solved. In conduct from business. Unless the 
fact, businessmen do not have the business sets its house in order, 
necessary understanding and training changes its outlook and is prepared to 
to solve social problems. Therefore, play its legitimate role as an organ of 
according to this argument, social society, it has little chance of success. 
problems should be solved by other It will be useful here to go into some 
specialised agencies. of the reasons and factors, which have 
(iv)  Lack of broad public support: forced and persuaded businessmen to 

consider their responsibilities and the 
Here the argument is that the public conditions which were favourable to 
in general does not like business the development of business concern 
involvement or interference in social with social responsibility. Some of the 
programmes. Therefore, business more important among them are:
cannot operate successfully because (i)  Threat of public regulation: 
of lack of public confidence and Democratically elected governments 
cooperation in solving social problems. of today are expected to act as welfare 

states whereby they have to take care 
6.3.3	 Reality of Social Responsibility of all sections of society. Thus, where 
On the basis of the above arguments for business institutions operate in a 
and against social responsibility, one socially irresponsible manner, action is 
may wonder what the businessmen taken to regulate them for safeguarding 
do in reality. Do they concentrate people’s interest. This threat of public 
on profit maximisation? Or, do they regulation is one important reason 
support social goals? The fact is that due to which business enterprise feels 
one of the most important recent concerned with social responsibility.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   138 9/2/2022   2:11:36 PM



SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS 139

(ii)  Pressure of labour movement: (v)   Development of business 
Over the last century or so, labour education: Development of business 
has become far more educated education with its rich content of social 
and organised. Accordingly, labour responsibility has made more and 
movement for extracting gains for the more people aware of the social purpose 
working class throughout the world of business. Educated persons as 
has become very powerful. This has consumers, investors, employees, or 
forced business enterprises to pay owners have become more sensitive 
due regard to the welfare of workers towards social issues than was the 
instead of following a policy of ‘hire case earlier, when such education was 
and fire’ under which they could deal not available.
with workers at their will. (vi)  Relationship between social 
( i i i )   Impact   of   consumer interest and business interest: 
consciousness: Development of Business enterprises have started 
education and mass media and realising the fact that social interest and 
increasing competition in the market business interest are not contradictory. 
have made the consumer conscious Instead, these are complementary to 
of his right and power in determining each other. The feeling that business 

can grow only through exploitation 
market forces. The principle of caveat of society has given way to the belief 
emptor (or let the buyer beware) has that long-term benefit of business lies 
been substituted by the principle in serving the society well. So also, 
of ‘customer is king’. Business a useful institution like business is 
enterprises have started following recognised as an essential element of 
customer-oriented policies. a modern civilised society.
(iv) Development of social standard (vii)  Development of professional, 
for business: Businesses are no managerial class: Professional 
longer considered merely money crazy management education in universities 
entities, which can be allowed to mint and specialised management institutes 
money at any cost and get away with have created a separate class of 
any kind of business practices. New professional managers who have got 
social standards consider economic an altogether different attitude towards 
activity of business enterprises as social responsibility as compared to 
legitimate but with the condition that the earlier class of owner manager. 
they must also serve social needs. No Professional managers are more 
business can be done in isolation from interested in satisfying a multiplicity of 
society. It is the society that permits interest groups in society for running 
business to exist and grow and it their enterprises successfully than 
is on the basis of social standards merely following profit goals.
that business functioning is to be These and a number of other social 
ultimately judged. and economic forces have combined 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   139 9/2/2022   2:11:36 PM



140 BUSINESS  STUDIES

together to make business a socio- that is expected by society but 
economic activity. Business is no not codified in law. For example, 
longer a mere occupation; it is an respecting the religious sentiments 
economic institution that has to and dignity of people while 
reconcile its short-term and long advertising for a product. There is 
range economic interests with the an element of voluntary action in 
demands of the society in which it performing this responsibility.
functions. Essentially, it is this which 	(d)	Discretionary responsibility: 
gives rise to the general and specific This refers to purely voluntary 
social responsibilities of business. obligation that an enterprise 
While there is no denial of the fact that assumes, for instance, providing 
business is essentially an economic c h a r i t a b l e  c o n t r i b u t i o n s 
enterprise and that it must ultimately to educational institutions or 
justify itself on economic performance, helping the affected people during 
it is also true that business is an organ floods or earthquakes. It is the 
of society and as such it must justify responsibility of the company 
its continuance by fulfilling its roles management  t o  sa f e guard 
and responsibilities of society. the  cap i ta l  inves tment  by 

6.4	 Kinds of S avoiding speculative activity and 
ocial Responsibility undertaking only healthy business 

Social responsibility of business can ventures which give good returns 
broadly be divided into four categories, on investment.
which are as follows:
	(a)	Economic responsibility: A 6.5	 Social Responsibility Towards 

business enterprise is basically Different Interest Groups
an economic entity and, therefore, 
its primary social responsibility Once the social objective of business 
is economic i.e., produce goods is recognised, it is important to know 
and services that society wants to whom and for what the business 
and sell them at a profit. There is and its management are responsible. 
little discretion in performing this Obviously, a business unit has to 
responsibility. decide in which areas it should carry 

	(b)	Legal responsibility:  Every out social goals. Some of the specific 
business has a responsibility to responsibilities and enterprise may be 
operate within the laws of the land. outlined as under:
Since these laws are meant for the (i)  Responsibility towards the 
good of the society, a law abiding shareholders or owners: A business 
enterprise is a socially responsible enterprise has the responsibility to 
enterprise as well. provide a fair return to the shareholders 

	(c)	Ethical responsibility: This or owners on their capital investment 
includes the behaviour of the firm and to ensure the safety of such 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   140 9/2/2022   2:11:36 PM



SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS 141

investment. The corporate enterprise and should avoid bad, effluent, smoky 
on a company form of organisation chimneys, ugly buildings dirty working 
must also provide the shareholders conditions. It must also develop a 
with regular, accurate and full proper image in society through 
information about its working as well continuous interaction with various 
as schemes of future growth. groups of people.
(ii)  Responsibility towards the 
workers: Management of an enterprise 6.6	B usiness and Environmental 
is also responsible for providing Protection
opportunities to the workers for 
meaningful work. It should try to create Protection of the environment is a 
the right kind of working conditions serious issue that confronts business 
so that it can win the cooperation of managers and decision makers. The 
workers. The enterprise must respect environment is defined as the totality 
the democratic rights of the workers to of man’s surroundings — both natural 
form unions. The worker must also be and man-made. These surroundings 
ensured of a fair wage and a fair deal are also in the nature of resources, 
from the management. that are useful for human life. The 
(iii)  Responsibility towards the resources may also be called natural 

resources like land, water, air, fauna 
consumers: Supply of right quality and flora and raw materials; or man-
and quantity of goods and services made resources such as cultural 
to consumers at reasonable prices heritage, socio-economic institutions 
constitutes the responsibility of an and the people. It is widely recognised 
enterprise toward its customers. that the quality of the environment is 
The enterprise must take proper fast deteriorating particularly due to 
precaution against adulteration, poor industrial activity. This is a common 
quality, lack of desired service and sight around major cities like Kanpur, 
courtesy to customers, misleading and Jaipur, Delhi, Panipat, Kolkata, 
dishonest advertising, and so on. They and others, in various states of our 
must also have the right of information country. Their emissions are seriously 
about the product, the company and affecting the health of the people. 
other matters having a bearing on their Pollution — the injection of harmful 
purchasing decision. substances into the environment is, 
(iv)  Responsibility towards the in fact, largely the result of industrial 
government and community: An production. Since some waste is 
enterprise must respect the laws of inevitable in the use of materials 
the country and pay taxes regularly and energy, the manufacturers face 
and honestly. It must behave as a a great challenge in minimising the 
good citizen and act according to the adverse impact of this waste by using 
well accepted values of the society. It proper technologies. Protection of the 
must protect the natural environment environment is good for all of us.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   141 9/2/2022   2:11:37 PM



142 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Pollution changes the physical, Wastes contain pollutants which are 
chemical and biological characteristics the materials of chemicals that have 
of air, land and water. Pollution been discarded during the process of 
harms human life and the life of production or consumption. Pollution 
other species. It also degrades living is caused by these pollutants which are 
conditions while wasting or depleting released into the environment beyond 
raw material resources. The country’s its assimilation capacity. Among 
cultural heritage is also affected and the various sources of pollution, 
it is becoming increasingly difficult industry is a major generator of waste 
to protect all historical monuments. in terms of both its quantity and 
Po l lu t i on  ex i s ts  because  the toxicity. Business activities such as 
environment can absorb only a limited production, distribution, transport, 
amount of pollutants and wastes. storage, consumption of goods and 
Some hazardous wastes or toxic services are known to be the most 
by-products and chemicals are termed critical sources of environmental 
as hazardous pollutants because pollution problems. Many business 
they have toxic characteristics that enterprises have been responsible for 
the environment can not assimilate. causing (i) air, (ii) water (iii) land, and 
Pollution thus causes risks to (iv) noise pollution.
environmental quality, human health These types of pollution are 
and damage to natural and man- discussed as follows:
made resources. Protection of the (i)  Air pollution: Air pollution is the 

result of a combination of factors which 
environment is directly related to the lowers the air quality. It is mainly 
control of pollution. due to carbon monoxide emitted by 
6.6.1	 Causes of Pollution automobiles which contributes to air 

pollution. Similarly, smoke and other 
It must be recognised that all chemicals from manufacturing plants 
sectors of our society viz., industry, pollute the air. Resultant air pollution 
government, agriculture, mining, has created a hole in the ozone layer 
energy, transportation, construction, leading to dangerous warming of 
and consumers generate waste. the earth.

Environmental Problems
The United Nations has identified eight problems that cause damage to the natural 
environment. These are:
	   (i)	 Ozone depletion	  		      (v)    Freshwater quality and quantity
	  (ii)	 Global warming	   	 	   (vi)    Deforestation
	(iii)	 Solid and hazardous wastes	  (vii)    Land degradation
	 (iv)	 Water pollution	 	 	 (viii)    Danger to biological diversity

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   142 9/2/2022   2:11:37 PM



SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS 143

(ii) Water pollution: Water becomes environment and render it, to some 
polluted primarily from chemical and degree, unfit to preserve normal life. 
waste dumping. For years, business People are now raising their voice 
enterprises have been dumping waste loudly against pollution generating 
into rivers, streams and lakes with activities. Business enterprises cannot 
little regard for the consequences. remain unaffected by environmental 
Water pollution has led to the death destruction. They need to take suitable 
of several animals and posed a serious measures for pollution control not 
threat to human life. merely to avoid criticisms against 
(iii)  Land pollution: Dumping of them but also to enjoy other benefits of 
toxic wastes on land causes land such measures. Some of the important 
pollution. This damages the quality of reasons which make a case for pollution 
land making it unfit for agriculture or control are as follows:
plantation. Restoring the quality of the (i)  Reduction of health hazards: 
land that has already been damaged There is increasing evidence that many 
is a big problem. diseases like cancer, heart attacks 
(iv) Noise pollution: Noise caused by 
the running of factories and vehicles and lung complications are caused 
is not merely a source of annoyance by pollutants in the environment. 
but is also a serious health hazard. Pollution control measures can not 
Noise pollution can be responsible only check the seriousness of such 
for many diseases like loss of hearing, diseases but can also be supportive of 
malfunctioning of the heart and a healthy life on earth.
mental disorder. (ii)  Reduced risk of liability: It is 

possible that an enterprise is held liable 
6.6.2	 Need for Pollution Control to pay compensation to people affected 

by the toxicity of gaseous, liquid and 
Pollution prevention or control is solid wastes it has released into the 
needed  to  p rese rve  p rec i ous environment. Therefore, it is sound 
environmental resources and to business policy to install pollution 
improve the environmental quality control devices in its premises to 
so that the preserved resources can 
be utilised for the benefit of mankind reduce the risk of liability.
and the improvement of health and (iii) Cost savings: An effective pollution 
well-being of the people. The amount control programme is also needed to 
of damage to a particular medium save costs of operating business. Cost 
(air, water, land) varies according to savings are particularly noticeable 
the type of pollutant, the amount of when improper production technology 
pollutant disposed of, and the distance results in greater wastes which leads to 
from the source of pollution. But all higher cost of waste disposal and cost 
pollutants alter the quality of the of cleaning the plants.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   143 9/2/2022   2:11:37 PM



144 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(iv)  Improved public image: As creators of wealth, employment, trade 
society becomes increasingly conscious and technology. They also command 
of environmental quality, a firm’s huge financial, physical and human 
policies and practices for controlling resources. They also have the know-
wastes will increasingly influence how to solve environmental pollution 
people’s attitude towards its working. problems with a preventive approach 
A firm that promotes the cause for by controlling pollutants at the source. 
environment will be able to enjoy a In most cases, a modification or 
good reputation and will be perceived change in the process of production, 
as a socially responsible enterprise. redesign of equipment, substituting 
(v) Other social benefits: Pollution poor quality materials with better 
control results in many other benefits ones or other innovative approaches 
like clearer visibility, cleaner buildings, could greatly reduce or even eliminate 
better quality of life, and the availability pollution entirely. Some of the specific 
of natural products in a purer form. steps which can be taken by business 

enterprises for environmental protection 
6.6.3	 Role of Business in are as stated below:

Environmental Protection 	 (i)	 A definite commitment by top 
management of the enterprise 

Since the quality of the environment to create, maintain and develop 
is important for all of us, we have work culture for environmental 
a collective responsibility to protect protection and pollution prevention.
it from being spoiled. Whether it is 	 (ii)	 Ensuring that commitment to 
government, business enterprises, environmental protection is 
consumers, workers, or other members shared throughout the enterprise 
of society, each one can do something by all divisions and employees.
to stop polluting the environment. 	(iii)	 Developing clear-cut policies 
Government can enact laws to ban and programmes for purchasing 
hazardous products. Consumers, good quality raw materials, 
workers and the members of society employing superior technology, 
can avoid using certain products using scientific techniques of 
and doing things that are not disposal and treatment of wastes 
environment friendly. and developing employee skills for 

The business enterprises should, the purpose of pollution control.
however, take the lead in providing 	(iv)	 Complying with the laws and 
their own solutions to environmental regulations enacted by the 
problems. It is the social responsibility Government for prevention of 
of every business to take steps not only pollution.
to check all sorts of pollution but also 	 (v)	 Participation in government 
to protect environmental resources. p r o g r a m m e s  r e l a t i n g  t o 
Business enterprises are leading management of  hazardous 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   144 9/2/2022   2:11:37 PM



SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS 145

substances, clearing up of and customers to get them actively 
polluted rivers, plantation of involved in pollution control 
trees, and checking deforestation. programmes.

	(vi)	 Periodical assessment of pollution 
control programmes in terms 6.7	B usiness Ethics

of costs and benefits so as to From the social point of view, business 
increase the progress with respect exists to supply goods and services 
to environmental protection. to the people. From the individual 

	(vii)	 Arranging educational workshops point of view, the primary objective of 
and training materials to share a business firm is to earn profit. One 
technical  information and may expect that the individual goals 
experience with suppliers, dealers of the firm would not be in conflict 

Environmental Protection in India 
(Steps by the Government)

	 1.	 Laws: The directive principles of state policy in the Constitution of India lay 
emphasis on protection of environment. Some of the laws enacted are as 
under:

	 i.	 The Wildlife Protection Act, 1972
	 ii.	 The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 amended in 

1974 and 1988
	 iii.	 The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 amended in 1974 

and 1988
	 iv.	 The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
	 v.	 The Forests (Conservation Act, 1980 amended in 1988
	 vi.	 The Hazardous Wastes Act, 1989
	 2.	 Regulations: Administrative orders/policy guidelines have been laid down 

by the government. A separate Department of Environment, Government of 
India was created in 1980.

	 3.	 Certain regulatory bodies or quasi-judicial authorities have been established  
such as:
•	 National Afforestation and Eco-development Board, and 
•	 National Wastelands Development Board

	 4.	 Manufacturing units have been closed in cities. High Court of Delhi ordered 
shifting of manufacturing units out of Delhi and closing them. Similarly, 
courts have ordered removal of foundaries from Agra city, and shifting of 
manufacturing factories from Kanpur.

	 5.	 Various programmes on environment education, and seminars on creating 
awareness and resource are being organised regularly.

	 6.	 Government has also laid down Environment Action Plan (EAP).

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   145 9/2/2022   2:11:37 PM



146 BUSINESS  STUDIES

with the objectives of society. However, conduct which goes beyond observing 
business enterprises are run by human laws and government regulations. It 
beings whose decisions and actions means adhering to moral principles, 
may not always be in accordance being guided by particular values, 
with the expectations of society. An and behaving in a way people ought to 
enterprise may be good in terms of act. The set of principles called ethics 
economic performance (like revenue, may be written or unwritten codes or 
costs and profits) but poor in terms principles governing a professional or 
of social performance like supplying human activity.
products of reasonable quality and Business ethics concerns itself 
at reasonable prices. This raises the with the relationship between business 
question of what is right or wrong from objectives, practices, and techniques 
society’s point of view. The answer to and the good of society. Business 
this question is important because ethics refer to the socially determined 
business enterprises are products of moral principles which should govern 
and are influenced by society. They business activities. A few examples of 
have to interpret and adjust to the business ethics are: charging fair prices 
preferences or values of society. The from customers, using fair weights for 
subject matter of ethics is concerned measurement of commodities, giving 
with establishing linkages between fair treatment to workers and earning 
individual good and social good. reasonable profits. A businessperson 

behaves ethically when her or his 
6.7.1		Concept of Business Ethics actions are upright and serve the 

interests of society. This, of course, 
The word ‘ethics’ has its origin in the also applies to those not in business. 
Greek word ‘ethics’ meaning character; The essential difference is perhaps 
norms, ideals or morals prevailing in a that businesspersons by virtue of 
group or society. Ethics is concerned their widespread control over society’s 
with what is right and what is wrong resources have a much greater effect 
in human behaviour judged on the on what happens in a society than 
basis of a standard form of conduct/ persons in other areas of activity do. 
ehaviour of individuals, as approved by Business people and politicians are 
society in a particular field of activity. expected to have higher standards 
Ethics may be viewed as the entire over and above other people. This is 
body of moral values that society perhaps the price they pay for being 
attaches to the actions of human allowed to make decisions on behalf 
beings. Ethics can also refer to codes of society.
or other system for controlling means There is a growing realisation all 
so that they serve human ends. Ethical over the world that ethics is vitally 
standards are often enacted into laws. important for every business and for 
But ethical behaviour is just and fair the progress of any society. Ethical 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   146 9/2/2022   2:11:37 PM



SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS 147

business is good business. Ethical which is referred to as the “code”. 
business behaviour improves public This generally covers areas such as 
image, earns people’s confidence and fundamental honesty and adherence 
trust, and leads to greater success. to laws; product safety and quality; 
Ethics and profits go together in health and safety in the workplace; 
the long run. Ethics alone, and not conflicts of interest; employment 
government or laws, can make a practices; fairness in selling/marketing 
society great. An ethically responsible practices; and financial reporting.
enterprise develops a culture of caring (iii)  Establishment of compliance 
for people and environment and mechanisms: In order to ensure that 
commands a high degree of integrity actual decisions and actions comply 
in dealing with others. Ethical activity with the firm’s ethical standards, 
is indeed valuable in itself, for its own suitable mechanisms should be 
sake, because it enhances the quality established. Some examples of such 
of our lives and that of the work we do. mechanisms are: paying attention to 

values and ethics in recruiting and 
6.7.2	 Elements of Business Ethics hiring; emphasising corporate ethics 

in training; auditing performance 
Since ethical business behaviour is regularly to analyse the degree 
good for both the business enterprise of compliance; and instituting 
and society, it makes sense to discuss communication systems to help 
how the enterprises can foster ethics employees report incidents of unethical 
in their day-to-day working. Some of behaviour.
the basic elements of business ethics (iv)  Involving employees at all 
while running a business enterprise levels: It is the employees at different 
are as follows: levels who implement ethics policies 
(i)  Top management commitment: to make ethical business a reality. 
Top management has a crucial role Therefore, their involvement in ethics 
in guiding the entire organisation programmes becomes a must. For 
towards ethically upright behaviour. example, small groups of employees 
To achieve results, the Chief Executive can be formed to discuss the important 
Officer (CEO) and other higher level ethics policies of firms and examine 
managers need to be openly and attitudes of employees towards these 
strongly committed to ethical conduct. policies.
They must give continuous leadership (v)  Measuring results: Although it 
for developing and upholding the is difficult to accurately measure the 
values of the organisation. end results of ethics programmes, the 
( i i )   Publ ication of  a  ‘Code’ : firms can certainly audit to monitor 
Enterprises with effective ethics compliance with ethical standards. 
programmes do define the principles The top management team and other 
of conduct for the whole organisation employees should then discuss the 
in the form of written documents results for further course of action.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   147 9/2/2022   2:11:37 PM



148 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Ground Rules of Ethics
The following are some of the universal virtues which every human being should 
imbibe, develop and practise to be ethical in life:
	 (a)	 Be trustworthy
	 (b)	 Have respect for others
	 (c)	 Own responsibility
	 (d)	 Be fair in dealings
	 (e)	 Be caring towards the well-being of others
	 (f)	 Prove to be a good citizen — through civil virtues and duties

Key Terms

Social responsibility	 Water pollution	 Business ethics
Environment	 Noise pollution	 Legal responsibility
Environmental protection	 Air pollution	 Ethics
Pollution	 Land pollution	 Code of ethics

SUMMARY

Concept of social responsibility: Social responsibility of business refers to 
its obligation to take those decisions and perform those actions which are 
desirable in terms of the objectives and values of our society.
Need for social responsibility: Need for social responsibility of business 
arises both because of firm’s interest and the interest of society. However, 
there are arguments both for and against social responsibility.
Arguments for social responsibility: Major arguments are: (i) justification 
for existence and growth, (ii) long-term interest and image of the firm, 
(iii) avoidance of government regulation, (iv) maintenance of orderly society, 
(v) availability of resources with business, (vi) converting problems into 
opportunity, (vii) better environment for doing business, and (viii) holding the 
business responsible for social problems.
Arguments against social responsibility: Major arguments against social 
responsibility are: (i) violation of profit maximisation objective, (ii) burden on 
consumers, (iii) lack of social skills and (iv) lack of broad public support.
Reality of social responsibility: Reality of social responsibility is that, despite 
differing arguments relating to social responsibility, business enterprises 
are concerned with social responsibility because of the influence of certain 
external forces. These forces are: (i) threat of public regulation, (ii) pressure 
of labour movement, (iii) impact of consumer consciousness, (vi) development 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   148 9/2/2022   2:11:37 PM



SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS AND BUSINESS ETHICS 149

of social standard for businessmen, (v) development of business education, 
(vi) relationship between social interest and business interest, and  (vii) 
development of professional, managerial class.
Social responsibility towards different interest groups: Business 
enterprises have responsibility towards (i) shareholders or owners, 
(ii) workers, (iii) consumers and (iv) government and community giving fair 
return on and safety of investment to shareholders, providing opportunities 
to workers for meaningful work, supplying right quality and quantity of goods 
and services to consumers and paying to the government, and protecting 
natural environment are some of the social responsibilities of business.
Business and environment protection: Protection of the environment is a 
serious issue that confronts managers and decision makers. The environment 
is defined as the totality of man’s surroundings — both natural and man-made. 
Pollution — the injection of harmful substances into the environment is, in 
fact, largely the result of industrial production. Pollution has harmful effects 
both for human life and the life of other species.
Causes of Pollution: Among the various sources of pollutions, industry is 
a major generator of waste in terms of both its quantity and toxicity. Many 
business enterprises have been responsible for causing air, water, land and 
noise pollution.
Need for pollution control: Important reasons which make a case for 
pollution control are: (i) reduction of health hazards, (ii) reduced risk 
of liability, (iii) cost savings (iv) improved public image, and (v) other 
social benefits.
Role of business in environmental protection: Each member of society can 
do something to protect the environment. The business enterprises should, 
however, take the lead in providing their own solutions to environmental 
problems. Some of the steps that they can take are: top management 
commitment, clear-out policies and programmes, abiding by government 
regulations, participation in government programmes, periodical assessment 
of pollution control programmes, and proper education and training of 
concerned people.
Concept of business ethics: Ethics is concerned with what is right and what 
is wrong in human behaviour judged on the basis of socially determined 
standards of behaviour. Business ethics concerns itself with relationship 
between objectives, practices, and techniques and the good of society. Ethics 
is important for every business.
Elements of business ethics: An enterprise can foster ethics at the workplace 
by following basic elements of business ethics, such as (i) top management’s 
commitment, (ii) publication of a establishment of compliance mechanism, (iv) 
involving employees at all levels and (v) measuring results.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   149 9/2/2022   2:11:37 PM



150 BUSINESS  STUDIES

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1.	 What do you understand by social responsibility of business? How is it 

different from legal responsibility?
2.	 What is environment? What is environmental pollution?
3.	 What is business ethics? Mention the basic elements of business ethics.
4.	 Briefly explain (a) Air Pollution, (b) Water pollution, and (c) Land pollution.
5.	 What are the major areas of social responsibility of business?
6.	 State the meaning of Corporate Social Responsibility as per the Companies 

Act 2013.

Long Answer Questions
1.	 Build up arguments for and against social responsibilities.
2.	 Discuss the forces which are responsible for increasing concern of business 

enterprises toward social responsibility.
3.	 ‘Business is essentially a social institution and not merely a profit making 

activity’. Explain.
4.	 Why do the enterprises need to adopt pollution control measures?
5.	 What steps can an enterprise take to protect the environment from the 

dangers of pollution?
6.	 Explain the various elements of business ethics.
7.	 Discuss the guidelines enumerated by the Companies Act 2013 for Corporate 

Social Responsibility. 

Projects/Assignments
1.	 Develop and put in writing a code of ethics for use in the classroom. 

Your document should include guidelines for students, teachers, and the 
principal.

2.	 Using newspapers, magazines and other business references, identify and 
describe at least three companies that you think are socially responsible 
and three that you think are socially irresponsible.

3.	 Choose a company and prepare a report on Corporate Social Responsibility 
undertaken by it. 

(	Hint : Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, Budding Artists Fund, start-ups, Education, Skill 
India, women and other marginalised groups.) 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 6.indd   150 9/2/2022   2:11:37 PM



Part-II

Corporate Organisation, 
Finance and Trade

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   151 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM



Chapter 7

##7##
Formation of a Company

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 specify the important stages in the formation of a company;

•	 describe the steps involved in each stage of company formation;

•	 specify the documents to be submitted to the registrar of 
companies; and

•	 state the need of certificate of incorporation and certificate to 
commence business.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   152 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM



FORMATION OF A COMPANY 153

Avtar, a brilliant automobile engineer, has recently developed a new carburettor 
in his factory which he is running as a sole proprietor. The new carburettor can 
cut down petrol consumption of a car engine by 40 percent. He is now thinking of 
producing it on a large scale for which he requires a large amount of money. He is 
to evaluate different forms of organisations for doing the business of manufacturing 
and marketing his carburettor. He decides against converting his sole proprietorship 
to partnership as the requirement of funds for the project is large and the product 
being new, there is a lot of risk involved. He is advised to form a company. He wants 
to know about the formalities required for the formation of a company.

7.1	I ntroduction formalities and procedures. To fully 
Modern day business requires understand the process one can divide 
large amount of money. Also, due the formalities into three distinct 
to increasing competition and fast stages, which are: (i) Promotion; (ii) 
changing technological environment, Incorporation and (iii) Subscription 
the element of risk is increasing. of capital.
As a result, the company form of It may, however, be noted that 
organisation is being preferred by more these stages are appropriate from 

the point of view of formation of any 
and more business firms, particularly kind of company. Private company as 
for setting up medium and large sized against the public limited company 
organisations. is prohibited to raise funds from 

The steps which are required from public, it does not need to issue a 
the time a business idea originates to prospectus and complete the formality 
the time, a company is legally ready to of minimum subscription. 
commence business are referred to as In the next section, we shall 
stages in the formation of a company. discuss the stages in the formation of 
Those who are taking these steps and a company in detail.
the associated risks are promoting a 
company and are called its promoters. 7.2.1	 Promotion of a Company

The present chapter describes 
in some details the stages in the Promotion is the first stage in the 
formation of a company and also the formation of a company. It involves 
steps required to be taken in each conceiving a business idea and taking 
stage so that a fair idea about these an initiative to form a company so 
aspects can be made.  that practical shape can be given 

to exploiting the available business 
7.2	 Formation of a Company opportunity. Thus, it begins with 

somebody having discovered a 
Formation of a company is a complex potential business idea. Any person or 
activity involving completion of legal a group of persons or even a company 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   153 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM



154 BUSINESS  STUDIES

may have discovered an opportunity. company to commence business. 
If such a person or a group of persons Thus, the promoters perform various 
or a company proceeds to form a functions to bring a company into 
company, then, they are said to be the existence. 
promoters of the company.

A promoter is said to be the one who Functions of a Promoter
undertakes to form a company with 
reference to a given project and to set The important functions of promoters 
it going and who takes the necessary may be listed as below:
steps to accomplish that purpose. ( i )   Identification of business 
Thus, apart from conceiving a business opportunity: The first and foremost 
opportunity the promoters analyse its activity of a promoter is to identify a 
prospects and bring together the men, business opportunity. The opportunity 
materials, machinery, managerial may be in respect of producing a new 
abilities and financial resources and product or service or making some 
set the organisation going. product available through a different 

As per section 69, a promoter channel or any other opportunity 
means a person having an investment potential. Such 
(a)	Who has been named as such in opportunity is then analysed to see 

a prospectus or is identified by its technical and economic feasibility.
the company in the annual return (ii)  Feasibility studies: It may not 
referred to in section 92; or be feasible or profitable to convert all 

(b)	Who has control over the affairs of identified business opportunities into 
the company, directly or indirectly real projects. The promoters, therefore, 
whether as a shareholder, director undertake detailed feasibility studies to 
or otherwise; or investigate all aspects of the business 

(c)	 In accordance with whose advice, they intend to start. Depending upon 
directions or instructions the the nature of the project, the following 
Board of Directors of the company feasibility studies may be undertaken, 
is accustomed to act. However, it is with the help of the specialists like 
provided that nothing in this sub- engineers, chartered accountants 
clause shall apply to a person who etc., to examine whether the perceived 
is acting merely in a professional business opportunity can be profitably 
capacity. exploited.
After thoroughly examining the (	a)	Technical feasibility: Sometimes 

feasibility of the idea, the promoters an idea may be good but technically 
assemble resources, prepare necessary not possible to execute. It may 
documents, give a name and perform be so because the required raw 
various other activities to get a material or technology is not easily 
company registered and obtain the available. For example, in our 
necessary certificate enabling the earlier story suppose Avtar needs 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   154 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM



FORMATION OF A COMPANY 155

a particular metal to produce arranged by floating a company by 
the carburettor. If that metal the promoters. The idea may be 
is not produced in the country abandoned because of the lack of 
and because of poor political financial feasibility of the project. 
relations, it can not be imported (	c)	Economic feasibility: Sometimes 
from the country which produces it so happens that a project is 
it, the project would be technically technically viable and financially 
unfeasible until arrangements are feasible but the chance of it being 
made to make the metal available profitable is very little. In such 
from alternative sources. cases as well, the idea may have to 

(b)	Financial feasibility: Every be abondoned. Promoters usually 
business activity requires funds. take the help of experts to conduct 
The promoters have to estimate these studies. It may be noted 
the fund requirements for the that these experts do not become 
identified business opportunity. If promoters just because they are 
the required outlay for the project assisting the promoters in these 
is so large that it cannot easily studies.
be arranged within the available Only when these investigations 
means, the project has to be given throw up posit ive results, the 
up. For example, one may think promoters may decide to actually 
that developing townships is very launch a company.
lucrative. It may turn out that (iii) Name approval: Having decided 
the required funds are in several incorporate to a company, the 
crores of rupees, which cannot be promoters have to select a name for 

Name Clause
A name is considered undesirable in the following cases:

	 (a)	 If it is identical with or too closely resembles the name of an existing 
company

	 (b)	 If it is misleading. It is so considered if the name suggests that the company 
is in a particular business or it is an association of a particular type when 
it is not true

	 (c)	 If it is violative of the provisions of ‘The Emblem and Names (Prevention of 
Improper Use) Act 1950, as given in the schedule to this Act. This schedule 
specifies, inter alia, the name, emblem or official seal of the UNO and its 
bodies like WHO, UNESCO etc. Government of India, State Governments, 
President of India or Governer of any State, the Indian National Flag. 
The Act also prohibits use of any name which may suggest patronage of 
Government of India, or any state government or any local authority

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   155 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM



156 BUSINESS  STUDIES

it and submit, an application to the (vi)   Preparation of necessary 
registrar of companies of the state documents: The promoter takes 
in which the registered office of the up steps to prepare certain legal 
company is to be situated, for its documents, which have to be submitted 
approval. The proposed name may under the law, to the Registrar of the 
be approved if it is not considered Companies for getting the company 
undesirable. It may happen that registered. These documents are 
another company exists with the Memorandum of Association, Articles of 
same name or a very similar name Association and Consent of Directors.
or the preferred name is misleading, 
say, to suggest that the company is in Documents Required to be 
a particular business when it is not Submitted
true. In such cases the proposed name 	A.	 Memorandum of Association: 
is not accepted but some alternate Memorandum of Association is 
name may be approved. Therefore, the most important document 
three names, in order of their priority as it defines the objectives of the 
are given in the application to the company. No company can legally 
Registrar of Companies. (Proforma undertake activities that are not 
INC1 is given at the end of the Book). contained in its Memorandum of 
(iv)  Fixing up Signatories to the Association. As per section 2(56) 
Memorandum of Association: of The Companies Act, 2013 
Promoters have to decide about the “memorandum”  means  the 
members who will be signing the memorandum of association of 
Memorandum of Association of the a company as originally framed 
proposed company. Usually the people or as altered from time to time 
signing memorandum are also the in pursuance of any previous 
first Directors of the Company. Their company law or of this Act. The 
written consent to act as Directors and Memorandum of Association 
to take up the qualification shares in contains different clauses, which 
the company is necessary. are given as follows:
(v)  Appointment of professionals: (i)  The name clause: This clause 
Certain professionals such as contains the name of the company 
mercantile bankers, auditors etc., are with which the company will be known, 
appointed by the promoters to assist which has already been approved by 
them in the preparation of necessary the Registrar of Companies.
documents which are required to be (ii)  Registered office clause: This 
with the Registrar of Companies. The clause contains the name of the state, 
names and addresses of shareholders in which the registered office of the 
and the number of shares allotted to company is proposed to be situated. 
each is submitted to the Registrar in a The exact address of the registered 
statement called return of allotment. office is not required at this stage 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   156 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM



FORMATION OF A COMPANY 157

but the same must be notified to the although it may not have been stated 
Registrar within thirty days of the explicitly.
incorporation of the company. (iv)  Liability clause: This clause 
(iii) Objects clause: This is probably limits the liability of the members 
the most important clause of the to the amount unpaid on the shares 
memorandum. It defines the purpose owned by them. 
for which the company is formed. For example, if a shareholder has 
A company is not legally entitled to purchased 1000 shares of `10 each 
undertake an activity, which is beyond and has already paid ` 6 per share, 
the objects stated in this clause. The his/her liability is limited to ` 4 per 
main objects for which the company share. Thus, even in the worst case, 
is formed are listed in this sub-clause. he/she may be called upon to pay 
It must be observed that an act which ` 4, 000 only.
is either essential or incidental for (v)  Capital clause: This clause 
the attainment of the main objects of specifies the maximum capital which 
the company is deemed to be valid, the company will be authorised to 

 Respective forms for Memorandum of Association

1. Table A MOA of a company limited by shares

2. Table B MOA of a company limited by guarantee and not having 
share capital

3. Table C MOA of a company limited by guarantee and not having 
share capital

4. Table D MOA of an unlimited company and not having share capital

5. Table E MOA of an unlimited company and having share capital

Respective forms for Articles of a Company

6. Table F AOA of a company limited by shares 

7. Table G AOA of a company limited by guarantee and having share capital

8. Table H AOA of a company limited by guarantee and not having share 
capital

9. Table I AOA of an unlimited company and having share capital

10. Table J AOA of an unlimited company and not having share capital

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   157 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM



158 BUSINESS  STUDIES

raise through the issue of shares. or as altered from time to time 
The authorised share capital of the or applied in pursuance of any 
proposed company along with its previous company law or of this Act. 
division into the number of shares The articles of a company shall be 
having a fixed face value is specified in in respective forms as specified in 
this clause. For example, the authorised Table F, G, H, I and J in schedule 
share capital of the company may be I as may be applicable to such 
` 25 lakhs with divided into 2.5 lakh company. However, the companies 
shares of ̀  10 each. The said company are free to make their own articles 
cannot issue share capital in excess of of association which may be 
the amount mentioned in this clause. contrary to the clauses of Table 

The signatories to the Memorandum F,G,H,I,J and in that case articles 
of Association state their intention to of association as adopted by the 
be associated with the company and company shall apply. 
give their undertaking to subscribe 	C.	 Consent of Proposed Directors: 
to the shares mentioned against Apart from the Memorandum and 
their names. The memorandum of a Articles of Association, a written 
company shall be in respective forms consent of each person named as a 
specified in Tables A, B, C, D and E director is required confirming that 
in Schedule I as may be applicable to they agree to act in that capacity 
such company. and undertake to buy and pay for 

The Memorandum of Association qualification shares, as mentioned 
must be signed by at least seven in the Articles of Association.
persons in case of a public company 	D.	Agreement: The agreement, if 
and by two persons in case of a private any, which the company proposes 
company. to enter with any individual for 

A copy of a Memorandum of appointment as its Managing 
Association is given at the end of the Director or a whole time Director 
chapter. or Manager is another document 
	B.	 Articles of Association: Articles of which is required to be submitted 

Association are the rules regarding to the registrar for getting the 
internal management of a company. company registered under the Act.
These rules are subsidiary to the 	E.	 Statutory  Dec la rat ion :  A 
Memorandum of Association and declaration stating that all the 
hence, should not contradict or legal requirements pertaining to 
exceed anything stated in the registration have been complied 
Memorandum of Association. with is to be submitted to the 

		  According to section 2(5) of The Registrar with the above mentioned 
Companies Act, 2013, ‘articles’ documents for getting the company 
means the article of association registered under the law. This 
of a company as originally framed statement can be signed by 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   158 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM



FORMATION OF A COMPANY 159

Qualification Shares
To ensure that the directors have some stake in the proposed company, the 
Articles usually have a provision requiring them to buy a certain number of 
shares. They have to pay for these shares before the company obtains Certificate 
of Commencement of Business. These are called Qualification Shares.

The Articles generally contains the following matters: 

	 1.	 Exclusion wholly or in part of Table F.
	 2.	 Adoption of preliminary contracts. 
	 3.	 Number and value of shares. 
	 4.	 Issue of preference shares. 
	 5.	 Allotment of shares. 
	 6.	 Calls on shares. 
	 7.	 Lien on shares. 
	 8.	 Transfer and transmission of shares. 
	 9.	 Nomination. 
	10.	 Forfeiture of shares. 
	11.	 Alteration of capital. 
	12.	 Buy back. 
	13.	 Share certificates. 
	14.	 Dematerialization. 
	15.	 Conversion of shares into stock. Incorporation of Companies and Matters 

Incidental Thereto
	16.	 Voting rights and proxies. 
	17.	 Meetings and rules regarding committees. 
	18.	 Directors, their appointment and delegations of powers. 
	19.	 Nominee directors. 
	20.	 Issue of Debentures and stocks. 
	21.	 Audit committee. 
	22.	 Managing director, Whole-time director, Manager, Secretary.
	23.	 Additional directors.
	24.	 Seal.
	25.	 Remuneration of directors.
	26.	 General meetings.
	27.	 Directors meetings.
	28.	 Borrowing powers.
	29.	 Dividends and reserves. 
	30.	 Accounts and audit.
	31.	 Winding up.
	32.	 Indemnity.
	33.	 Capitalisation of reserves.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   159 9/2/2022   2:13:12 PM



160 BUSINESS  STUDIES

an advocate or by a Chartered for the loss suffered due to the non-
Accountant or a Cost Accountant disclosure of material information.
or a Company Secretary in practice Promoters are not legally entitled 
who is engaged in the formation to claim the expenses incurred in the 
of a company and by a person promotion of the company. However, 
named in the articles as a director the company may choose to reimburse 
or manager or secretary of the them for the pre-incorporation 
company. expenses. The company may also 

	F.	 Receipt of Payment of fee: remunerate the promoters for their 
Along with the above-mentioned efforts by paying a lump sum amount 
documents, necessary fees has to or a commission on the purchase price 
be paid for the registration of the of property purchased through them or 
company. The amount of such fees on the shares sold. The company may 
shall depend on the authorised also allot them shares or debentures 
share capital of the company. or give them an option to purchase the 

securities at a future date.
Position of Promoters
Promoters undertake various activities 7.2.2	 Incorporation
to get a company registered and get After completing the aforesaid 
it to the position of commencement formalities, promoters make an 
of business. But they are neither application for the incorporation of 
the agents nor the trustees of the the company. The application is to be 
company. They can’t be the agents as filed with the Registrar of Companies 
the company is yet to be incorporated. of the state within which they plan 
Therefore, they are personally liable to establish the registered office of 
for all the contracts which are entered the company. The application for 
by them, for the company before its registration must be accompanied 
incorporation, in case the same are with certain documents about which 
not ratified by the company later on. we have already discussed in the 
Also promoters are not the trustees of previous sections. These may be briefly 
the company. mentioned again:

Promoters of a company enjoy a 	 1.	 The Memorandum of Association 
fiduciary position with the company, duly stamped, s igned and 
which they must not misuse. They witnessed. In case of a public 
can make a profit only if it is disclosed company, at least seven members 
but must not make any secret profits. must sign it. For a private 
In the event of a non-disclosure, the company however the signatures 
company can rescind the contract and of two members are sufficient. 
recover the purchase price paid to the The signatories must also give 
promoters. It can also claim damages information about their address, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   160 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM



FORMATION OF A COMPANY 161

occupation and the number of documents. However, if the same 
shares subscribed by them. is not submitted at the time of 

	 2.	 The Articles of Association duly incorporation, it can be submitted 
stamped and witnessed as in case within 30 days of the receipt of the 
of the Memorandum. However, as certificate of incorporation.
stated earlier, a public company 	 8.	 Documentary evidence of payment 
may adopt Table A, which is a of registration fees.
model set of Articles, given in the The Registrar upon submission of 
Companies Act. In that case a the application along with the required 
statement in lieu of the prospectus documents has to be satisfied that the 
is submitted, instead of Articles documents are in order and that all the 
of Association. statutory requirements regarding the 

	 3.	 Written consent of the proposed registration have been complied with. 
directors to act as directors and However, it is not his duty to carry 
an undertaking to purchase out a thorough investigation about the 
qualification shares. authenticity of the facts mentioned in 

	 4.	 The agreement, if any, with the the documents.
proposed Managing Director, When the Registrar is satisfied, 
Manager or whole-time director. about the completion of formalities 

	 5.	 A copy of the Registrar’s letter for registration, a Certificate of 
approving the name of the Incorporation is issued to the company, 
company. which signify the birth of the company. 

	 6.	 A statutory declaration affirming The certificate of incorporation may 
that all legal requirements for therefore be called the birth certificate 
registration have been complied of the company.
with. This must be  duly signed. With effect from November 1, 2000, 

	 7.	 A notice about the exact address the Registrar of Companies allots a 
of the registered office may also CIN (Corporate Identity Number) to 
be submitted along with these the Company.

Preliminary Contracts
During the promotion of the company, promoters enter into certain contracts with 
third parties on behalf of the company. These are called preliminary contracts 
or pre-incorporation contracts. These are not legally binding on the company. A 
company after coming into existence may, if it so chooses, decide to enter into 
fresh contracts with the same terms and conditions to honour the contracts 
made by the promoters. Note that it cannot ratify a preliminary contract. A 
company thus cannot be forced to honour a preliminary contract. Promoters, 
however, remain personally liable to third parties for these contracts.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   161 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM



162 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Effect of the Certificate of January. But the date mentioned 
Incorporation on the Certificate was 6th January. 
A company is legally born on the It was decided that the company 
date printed on the Certificate of was in existence and the contracts 
Incorporation. It becomes a legal signed on 6th January were 
entity with perpetual succession on considered valid.
such date. It becomes entitled to enter (	b)	A person forged the signatures 
into valid contracts. The Certificate of of others on the Memorandum. 
Incorporation is a conclusive evidence The Incorporation was st i l l 
of the regularity of the incorporation considered valid.
of a company. Imagine, what would Thus, whatever be the deficiency 
happen to an unsuspecting party in the formalities, the Certificate 
with which the company enters into of Incorporation once issued, is a 
a contract, if it is later found that the conclusive evidence of the existence of 
incorporation of the company was the company. Even when a company 
improper and hence invalid. Therefore, gets registered with illegal objects, 
the legal situation is that once a the birth of the company cannot be 
Certificate of Incorporation has been questioned. The only remedy available 
issued, the company has become a is to wind it up. Because the Certificate 
legal business entity irrespective of any of Incorporation is so crucial, the 
flaw in its registration. The Certificate Registrar has to go very carefully 
of Incorporation is thus conclusive before issuing it.
evidence of the legal existence of Both public and private companies 
the company. Some interesting are required to obtain the certificate 
examples showing the impact of the for commencement of business within 
conclusiveness of the Certificate of 180 days of its incorporation. Once 
Incorporation are as under: the certificate for commencement 
	(a)	Documents for registration were of business is issued by Registrar 

filed on 6th January. Certificate of of companies it can undertake their 
Incorporation was issued on 8th business operations.

Director Identification Number (DIN)
Every Individual intending to be appointed as director of a company shall make 
an application for allotment of Director Identification Number (DIN) to the Central 
Government in prescribed form along with fees. 
The Central Government shall allot a Director Identification Number to an 
application within one month from the receipt of the application. 
No individual, who has already been allotted a Director Identification Number, 
shall apply for, obtain or possess another Director Identification Number

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   162 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM



FORMATION OF A COMPANY 163

7.2.3	 Capital Subscription debentures etc.) of the company or 
A public company can raise the to make deposits in the company. 
required funds from the public by Investors make up their minds about 
means of issue of securities (shares investment in a company primarily on 
and debentures etc.). For doing the the basis of the information contained 
same, it has to issue a prospectus in this document.  Therefore, there 

must not be a mis-statement in the 
which is an invitation to the public to prospectus and all material significant 
subscribe to the capital of the company information must be fully disclosed.
and undergo various other formalities. (iii)  Appointment of Bankers, 
The following steps are required for Brokers, Underwriters:  Raising funds 
raising funds from the public: from the public is a stupendous task. 
(i) 	 SEBI Approval: SEBI (Securities The application money is to be received 
and Exchange Board of India) which by the bankers of the company. 
is the regulatory authority in our The brokers try to sell the shares 
country has issued guidelines for by distributing the forms and 
the disclosure of information and encouraging the public to apply for 
investor protection. A public company the shares. If the company is not 
inviting funds from the general public reasonably assured of a good public 
must make adequate disclosure of response to the issue, it may appoint 
all relevant information and must underwriters to the issue. Underwriters 
not conceal any material information undertake to buy the shares if these 
from the potential investors. This is are not subscribed by the public. They 
necessary for protecting the interest receive a commission for underwriting 
of the investors. Prior approval from the issue. Appointment of underwriters 
SEBI is, therefore, required before is not necessary.
going ahead with raising funds from (iv)  Minimum Subscription: In 
public. order to prevent companies from 
(ii)  Filing of Prospectus: A copy   of commencing business with inadequate 
the prospectus or statement in lieu of resources, it has been provided that 
prospectus is filed with the Registrar the company must receive applications 
of Companies. A prospectus is ‘any for a certain minimum number of 
document described or  issued as a shares before going ahead with the 
prospectus  including any  notice, allotment of shares. According to 
circular, advertisement  or   other the Companies Act, this is called the 
document  inviting deposits  from the ‘minimum subscription’. As per the 
public or inviting offers from the public SEBI Guidelines the limit of minimum 
for the subscription or purchase of subscription is 90 per cent of the size 
any securities of, a body corporate’. In of the issue. Thus, if applications 
other words, it is an invitation to the received for the shares are for an 
public to apply for securities (shares, amount less than 90 per cent of the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   163 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM



164 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Difference between Memorandum of Association and Articles of Association

Basis of Memorandum of Articles of Association
Difference Association

Objectives Memorandum of Association Articles of Association are rules 
defines the objects for which of internal management of the 
the company is formed. company. They indicate how the 

objectives of the company are to 
be achieved.

Position This is the main document This is a subsidiary document 
of the company and and is subordinate to both the 
is subordinate to the  Memorandum of Association and 
Companies Act. the Companies Act.

Relationship Memorandum of Association Articles define the relationship 
defines the relationship of the of the members and the company.
company with outsiders.

Validity Acts beyond the Memorandum Acts which are beyond Articles 
of Association are invalid can be ratified by the members, 
and cannot be ratified even provided they do not violate the 
by a unanimous vote of the Memorandum.
members.

Necessity Every company has to file a It is not compulsory for a public 
Memorandum of Association. ltd. company to file Articles of 

Association. It may adopt Table F 
of The Companies Act, 2013

issue size, the allotment cannot be of closure of subscription list, the 
made and the application money allotment shall become void and all 
received must be returned to the money received from the applicants 
applicants. will have to be returned to them within 
(v) Application to Stock Exchange: eight days.
An application is made to at least one (vi)  Allotment of Shares: Till the 
stock exchange for permission to deal time shares are alloted, application 
in its shares or debentures. If such money received shoud remain in a 
permission is not granted before the seperate bank account and must not 
expiry of ten weeks from the date be used by the company. In case the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   164 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM



FORMATION OF A COMPANY 165

number of shares allotted is less than due from them. Allotment letters are 
the number applied for, or where no issued to the successful allottees. 
shares are allotted to the applicant, ‘Return of allotment’, signed by a 
the excess application money, if any, director or secretary is filed with 
is to be returned to applicants or the Registrar of  Companies within 
adjusted towards allotment money 30 days of allotment.

One Person Company
With the implementation of The Companies Act, 2013, a single person could 
constitute a company, under the One Person Company (OPC) concept. 
The introduction of OPC in the legal system is a move that would encourage 
corporatisation of micro businesses and entrepreneurship.
In India, in the year 2005, the JJ Irani Expert Committee recommended the formation 
of OPC. It had suggested that such an entity may be provided with a simpler legal 
regime through exemptions so that the small entrepreneur is not compelled to devote 
considerable time, energy and resources on complex legal compliance. 
One Person Company is a company with only one person as a member. That one 
person will be the shareholder of the company. It avails all the benefits of a private 
limited company such as separate legal entity, protecting personal assets from 
business liability and perpetual succession. 

Characteristics
	 (1)	 Only a natural person who is an Indian citizen and resident in India-
		  (a)   Shall be eligible to incorporate a One Person Company;
		  (b)   Shall be a nominee for the sole member of a One Person Company.
			  Explanation – For the purposes of this rule, the term “resident in India” 

means a person who has stayed in India for a period of not less than 
one hundred and eighty two days during the immediately preceding one 
calendar year. 

	 (2)	 No person shall be eligible to incorporate more than a One Person Company 
or become nominee in more than one such company.

	 (3)	 Where a natural person, being member in One Person Company in accordance 
with this rule becomes a member in another such Company by virtue of his 
being a nominee in that One Person Company, such person shall meet the 
eligibility criteria specified in sub rule (2) within a period of one hundred and 
eighty days.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   165 06/09/2024   14:50:11



166 BUSINESS  STUDIES

	 (4)	 No minor shall become member or nominee of the One Person Company or 
can hold share with beneficial interest. 

	 (5)	  Such Company cannot be incorporated or converted into a company under 
section 8 of the Act. 

	 (6)	 Such Company cannot carry out Non-Banking Financial Investment activities 
including investment in securities of anybody corporates. 

	 (7)	 No such company can convert voluntarily into any kind of company unless 
two years have expired from the date of incorporation of One Person Company, 
except threshold limit (paid up share capital) is increased beyond fifty lakh 
rupees or its average annual turnover during the relevant period exceeds two 
crore rupees.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   166 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM



FORMATION OF A COMPANY 167

“SCHEDULE I”
(See sections 4 and 5)

Table A
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION OF A COMPANY LIMITED BY SHARES

1st	 The name of the company is “.......................................... Limited/Private Limited”.
2nd	 The registered office of the company will be situated in the State of ..................
3rd	 (a) The objects to be pursued by the company on its incorporation are:- 

	 .........................................................................................................................

	 .........................................................................................................................
	 (b) Matters which are necessary for furtherance of the objects specified in clause 

3 (a) are:-
	
	 .........................................................................................................................

	 .........................................................................................................................
4th	 The liability of the member(s) is limited and this liability is limited to the amount 

unpaid, if any, 	 on the shares held by them.
5th 	 The share capital of the company is ................................................................... 

rupees, divided into ........................ shares of ........................ rupees each.
6th	 We, the several persons, whose names and addresses are subscribed, are desirous 

of being 	 formed into a company in pursuance of this memorandum of association, 
and we respectively agree to take the number of shares in the capital of the 
company set against our respective names:-

Names, addresses,	 No. of shares	 Signature	 Signature, names 
descriptions and 	 taken by each	 of subscriber	 addresses,
occupations of 			   descriptions and 	
subscribers			   occupations of 
			   witnesses
A.B. of ................ Merchant	 .....................		  Signed before me:
			   Signature ...............
C.D. of ................ Merchant	 .....................		  Signed before me:
			   Signature ...............
E.F. of ................ Merchant	 .....................		  Signed before me:
			   Signature ...............
G.H. of ............... Merchant	 .....................		  Signed before me:
			   Signature ..............

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   167 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM



168 BUSINESS  STUDIES

I.J. of ................ Merchant	 .....................		  Signed before me:
			   Signature ..............
K.L. of ................ Merchant	 .....................		  Signed before me:
			   Signature ..............
M.N. of ............... Merchant	 .....................		  Signed before me:
			   Signature ..............
Total shares taken:

7th 	 I, whose name and address is given below, am desirous of forming a 
company in pursuance of this memorandum of association and agree to 
take all the shares in the capital of the company (Applicable in case of one 
person company):-

__________________________________________________________________
Names, addresses,	 Signature of subscribed	 Signature, name, address,
occupations of		  description and occupation 	
Subscribers		  of witness

__________________________________________________________________
8th 	 Shri/Smt ......................................, son/daughter of ......................................, 

resident of .................................................................... aged ...................... years 
shall be the nominee in the event of death of the sole member (Applicable in case 
of one person company)

Dated ...................................... The day of ......................................

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   168 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM



FORMATION OF A COMPANY 169

Key Terms

Promotion	 Memorandum of Association	 Articles of Association
Prospectus	 Incorporation	 Capital subscription
Commencement of 
Business

SUMMARY

There are two stages in the formation of a private company, promotion and 
incorporation. A public company has to undergo capital subscription stage to 
begin operations.

	 1.	 Promotion: It begins with a potential business idea. Certain feasibility 
studies e.g., technical, financial and economic, are conducted to determine 
whether the idea can be profitably exploited. In case, the investigations 
yield favourable results, promoters may decide to form the company. 
Persons who conceive the business idea, decide to form a company, take 
necessary steps for the same, and assume associated risks, are called 
promoters.

		  Steps in Promotion
	 i.	 Approval of company’s name is taken from the Registrar of Companies
	 ii.	 Signatories to the Memorandum of Association are fixed
	 iii.	 Certain professionals are appropriated to assist the promoters
	 iv.	 Documents necessary for registration are prepared

	 Necessary Documents
	 a.	 Memorandum of Association
	 b.	 Articles of Association
	 c.	 Consent of proposed directors
	 d.	 Agreement, if any, with proposed managing or whole time director
	 e.	 Statutory declaration
	 2.	 Incorporation: An application is made by promoters to the Registrar 

of Companies alongwith necessary documents and registration fee. The 
Registrar, after due scrutiny, issues certificate of incorporation. The 
certificate of incorporation is a conclusive evidence of the legal existence 
of the company. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   169 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM



170 BUSINESS  STUDIES

	 3.	 Capital Subscription: A public company raising funds from the public 
needs to take following steps for fundraising:

	 (i)	 SEBI approval;
	 (ii)	 File a copy of prospectus with the Registrar of Companies;
	 (iii)	 Appointment of brokers, bankers and underwriters etc.;
	 (iv)	 Ensure that minimum subscription is received;
	 (v)	 Application for listing of company’s securities;
	 (vi)	 Refund/adjust excess application money received;
	 (vii)	 Issue allotment letters to successful applicants; and
	 (viii)	 File return of allotment with the Registrar of Companies (ROC).

	A public company, raising funds, raising funds from friends/relatives (not 
public) has to file a statement in lieu of prospectus with the ROC at least three 
days before allotment of shares and returns of allotment after completing the 
allotment. As per the SEBI guidelines, minimum subcription has to be 90% of 
the shares to be issued to be public.
Preliminary Contracts: Contracts signed by promoters with third parties 
before the incorporation of company.
Provisional Contracts: Contracts signed after incorporation but before 
commencement of business.

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1.	 Name the stages in the formation of a company.
2.	 List the documents required for the incorporation of a company.
3.	 What is a prospectus? Is it necessary for every company to file a prospectus?
4.	 Briefly explain the term ‘Return of Allotment’.
5.	 At which stage in the formation of a company does it interact with SEBI.

Long Answer Questions
1.	 What is meant by the term ‘Promotion’. Discuss the legal position of 

promoters with respect to a company promoted by them.
2.	 Explain the steps taken by promoters in the promotion of a company.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   170 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM



FORMATION OF A COMPANY 171

3.	 What is a ‘Memorandum of Association’? Briefly explain its clauses.
4.	 Distinguish between ‘Memorandum of Association’ and ‘Articles of 

Association.’
5.	 What is the meaning of ‘Certificate of Incorporation’?
6.	 Discuss the stages of formation of a company?

Project/Assignment
	Find out from the office of the Registrar of Companies, the actual procedure for 
formation of companies. Does it match with what you have studied. What are the 
obstacles which companies face in getting themselves registered.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 7.indd   171 9/2/2022   2:13:13 PM



Chapter 8

##8##
Sources of Business Finance

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 state the meaning, nature and importance of business finance;

•	 classify the various sources of business finance;

•	 evaluate merits and limitations of various sources of finance;

•	 identify the international sources of finance; and

•	 examine the factors that affect the choice of an appropriate source 
of finance.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   172 9/2/2022   2:14:08 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 173

Mr. Anil Singh has been running a restaurant for the last two years. The excellent 
quality of food has made the restaurant popular in no time. Motivated by the success 
of his business, Mr. Singh is now contemplating the idea of opening a chain of 
similar restaurants at different places. However, the money available with him from 
his personal sources is not sufficient to meet the expansion requirements of his 
business. His father told him that he can enter into a partnership with the owner of 
another restaurant, who will bring in more funds but it would also require sharing 
of profits and control of business. He is also thinking of getting a bank loan. He 
is worried and confused, as he has no idea as to how and from where he should 
obtain additional funds. He discusses the problem with his friend Ramesh, who 
tells him about some other methods like issue of shares and debentures, which 
are available only to a company form of organisation. He further cautions him that 
each method has its own advantages and limitations and his final choice should 
be based on factors like the purpose and period for which funds are required. He 
wants to learn about these methods.

8.1	I ntroduction needs of society. For carrying out 
This chapter provides an overview of various activities, business requires 
the various sources from where funds money. Finance, therefore, is called the 
can be procured for starting as also for life blood of any business. The 
running a business. It also discusses requirements of funds by business to 
the advantages and limitations of carry out its various activities is called 
various sources and points out the business finance. 
factors that determine the choice of a A business cannot function unless 
suitable source of business finance. adequate funds are made available to 

It is important for any person who it. The initial capital contributed by the 
wants to start a business to know entrepreneur is not always sufficient to 
about the different sources from take care of all financial requirements 
where money can be raised. It is also of the business. A business person, 
important to know the relative merits therefore, has to look for different other 
and demerits of different sources so sources from where the need for funds 
that choice of an appropriate source can be met. A clear assessment of the 
can be made. financial needs and the identification 

of various sources of finance, therefore, 
8.2	 M is a significant aspect of running a 

eaning, Nature and Significance 
business organisation. 

of Business Finance The need for funds arises from the 
Business is concerned with the stage when an entrepreneur makes 
production and distribution of goods a decision to start a business. Some 
and services for the satisfaction of funds are needed immediately say for 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   173 9/2/2022   2:14:08 PM



174 BUSINESS  STUDIES

the purchase of plant and machinery, stock of material, bills receivables 
furniture, and other fixed assets. and for meeting current expenses 
Similarly, some funds are required like salaries, wages, taxes, and 
for day-to-day operations, say to rent.
purchase raw materials, pay salaries to The amount of working capital 
employees, etc. Also when the business   required varies from one business 
expands, it needs funds. concern to another depending on 

The financial needs of a business various factors. A business unit selling 
can be categorised as follows: goods on credit, or having a slow sales 
(	a)	Fixed capital requirements: In turnover, for example, would require 

order to start business, funds more working capital as compared to a 
are required to purchase fixed concern selling its goods and services 
assets like land and building, plant on cash basis or having a speedier 
and machinery, and furniture turnover.
and fixtures. This is known as The requirement for fixed and 
fixed capital requirements of the working capital increases with the 
enterprise. The funds required in growth and expansion of business. At 
fixed assets remain invested in times additional funds are required for 
the business for a long period of upgrading the technology employed 
time. Different business units need so that the cost of production or 
varying amount of fixed capital operations can be reduced. Similarly, 
depending on various factors such larger funds may be required for 
as the nature of business, etc. A building higher inventories for the 
trading concern for example, may festive season or to meet current debts 
require small amount of fixed capital or expand the business or to shift to a 
as compared to a manufacturing new location. It is, therefore, important 
concern. Likewise, the need for to evaluate the different sources from 
fixed capital investment would where funds can be raised. 
be greater for a large enterprise, 
as compared to that of a small 8.3	C lassification of Sources of 
enterprise. Funds

	(b)	Working capital requirements: In case of proprietary and partnership 
The financial requirements of concerns, the funds may be raised either 
an enterprise do not end with from personal sources or borrowings 
the procurement of fixed assets. from banks, friends etc. In case of 
No matter how small or large a company form of organisation, the 
business is, it needs funds for different sources of business finance 
its day-to-day operations. This which are available may be categorised 
is known as working capital of as given in Table 8.1
an enterprise, which is used for As shown in the table, the sources 
holding current assets such as of funds can be categorised using 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   174 9/2/2022   2:14:08 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 175

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   175 9/2/2022   2:14:08 PM

Table 8.1    Classification of Sources of Funds



176 BUSINESS  STUDIES

different basis viz., on the basis of often need short-term financing for 
the period, source of generation and the interim period between seasons. 
the ownership. A brief explanation of Wholesalers and manufacturers with 
these classifications and the sources a major portion of their assets tied 
is provided as follows: up in inventories or receivables also 

require large amount of funds for a 
8.3.1	 Period Basis  short period.
On the basis of period, the different 
sources of funds can be categorised 8.3.2	 Ownership Basis
into three parts. These are long-term On the basis of ownership, the sources 
sources, medium-term sources and can be classified into ‘owner’s funds’ 
short-term sources. and ‘borrowed funds’. Owner’s funds 

The long-term sources fulfil the means funds that are provided by the 
financial requirements of an enterprise owners of an enterprise, which may 
for a period exceeding 5 years and be a sole trader or partners or 
include sources such as shares and shareholders of a company. Apart 
debentures, long-term borrowings and from capital, it also includes profits 
loans from financial institutions. Such 
financing is generally required for the reinvested in the business. The 
acquisition of fixed assets such as owner’s capital remains invested in 
equipment, plant, etc. the business for a longer duration 

Where the funds are required for a and is not required to be refunded 
period of more than one year but less during the life period of the business. 
than five years, medium-term sources Such capital forms the basis on which 
of finance are used. These sources owners acquire their right of control of 
include borrowings from commercial management. Issue of equity shares 
banks, public deposits, lease financing and retained earnings are the two 
and loans from financial institutions. important sources from where owner’s 

Short-term funds are those which funds can be obtained. 
are required for a period not exceeding ‘Borrowed funds’ on the other 
one year. Trade credit, loans from hand, refer to the funds raised through 
commercial banks and commercial loans or borrowings. The sources 
papers are some of the examples of the for raising borrowed funds include 
sources that provide funds for short loans from commercial banks, loans 
duration. from financial institutions, issue of 

Short-term financing is most debentures, public deposits and trade 
common for financing of current credit. Such sources provide funds for 
assets such as accounts receivable a specified period, on certain terms 
and inventories. Seasonal businesses and conditions and have to be repaid 
that must build inventories in after the expiry of that period. A fixed 
anticipation of selling requirements rate of interest is paid by the borrowers 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   176 9/2/2022   2:14:08 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 177

on such funds. At times it puts a lot 8.4	 Sources of Finance
of burden on the business as payment 
of interest is to be made even when A business can raise funds from 
the earnings are low or when loss is various sources. Each of the source has 

unique characteristics, which must be 
incurred. Generally, borrowed funds properly understood so that the best 
are provided on the security of some available source of raising funds can 
fixed assets. be identified. There is not a single best 

source of funds for all organisations. 
8.3.3	 Source of Generation Basis Depending on the situation, purpose, 
Another basis of categorising the cost and associated risk, a choice may 
sources of funds can be whether the be made about the source to be used. 
funds are generated from within the For example, if a business wants to 
organisation or from external sources. raise funds for meeting fixed capital 
Internal sources of funds are those requirements, long term funds may 
that are generated from within the be required which can be raised in 
business. A business, for example, the form of owned funds or borrowed 
can generate funds internally by funds. Similarly, if the purpose is to 
accelerating collection of receivables, meet the day-to-day requirements of 
disposing of surplus inventories and business, the short term sources may 
ploughing back its profit. The internal be tapped. A brief description of various 
sources of funds can fulfill only limited sources, along with their advantages 
needs of the business. and limitations is given below.  

External sources of funds include 
those sources that lie outside an 8.4.1	 Retained Earnings
organisation, such as suppliers, A company generally does not 
lenders, and investors. When large distribute all its earnings amongst the 
amount of money is required to be shareholders as dividends. A portion 
raised, it is generally done through of the net earnings may be retained 
the use of external sources. External in the business for use in the future. 
funds may be costly as compared to This is known as retained earnings. It 
those raised through internal sources. is a source of internal financing or self-
In some cases, business is required to financing or ‘ploughing back of profits’. 
mortgage its assets as security while The profit available for ploughing back 
obtaining funds from external sources. in an organisation depends on many 
Issue of debentures, borrowing from factors like net profits, dividend policy 
commercial banks and financial and age of the organisation. 
institutions and accepting public Merits
deposits are some of the examples of 
external sources of funds commonly The merits of retained earning as a 
used by business organisations.   source of finance are as follows:

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   177 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



178 BUSINESS  STUDIES

	 (i)	 Retained earnings is a permanent creditors’ or ‘accounts payable’. Trade 
source of funds available to an credit is commonly used by business 
organisation; organisations as a source of short-

	 (ii)	 It does not involve any explicit cost term financing. It is granted to those 
in the form of interest, dividend or customers who have reasonable 
floatation cost; amount of financial standing and 

	(iii)	 As the funds are generated 
internally, there is a greater goodwill. The volume and period of 
degree of operational freedom and credit extended depends on factors 
flexibility; such as reputation of the purchasing 

	(iv)	 It enhances the capacity of the firm, financial position of the seller, 
business to absorb unexpected volume of purchases, past record of 
losses; payment and degree of competition in 

	 (v)	 It may lead to increase in the the market. Terms of trade credit may 
market price of the equity shares vary from one industry to another and 
of a company. from one person to another. A firm 

may also offer different credit terms to 
Limitations different customers.
Retained earning as a source of funds 
has the following limitations: Merits
	 (i)	 Excessive ploughing back may The important merits of trade credit 

cause dissatisfaction amongst the are as follows:
shareholders as they would get 	 (i)	 Trade credit is a convenient and 
lower dividends; continuous source of funds;

	 (ii)	 It is an uncertain source of funds 
as the profits of business are 	 (ii)	 Trade credit may be readily 
fluctuating; available in case the credit 

	(iii)	 The opportunity cost associated worthiness of the customers is 
with these funds is not recognised known to the seller;
by many firms. This may lead to 	(iii)	 Trade credit needs to promote the 
sub-optimal use of the funds. sales of an organisation;

	(iv)	 If an organisation wants to 
8.4.2	 Trade Credit increase its inventory level in 
Trade credit is the credit extended order to meet expected rise in the 
by one trader to another for the sales volume in the near future, 
purchase of goods and services. Trade it may use trade credit to, finance 
credit facilitates the purchase of the same;
supplies without immediate payment. 	 (v)	 It does not create any charge 
Such credit appears in the records on the assets of the firm while 
of the buyer of goods as ‘sundry providing funds.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   178 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 179

Limitations 	(b)	Providing information about credit 
Trade credit as a source of funds has worthiness of prospective client’s 
certain limitations, which are given etc., Factors hold large amounts 
as follows: of information about the trading 
	 (i)	 Availability of easy and flexible histories of the firms. This can 

trade credit facilities may induce be valuable to those who are 
a firm to indulge in overtrading, using factoring services and can 
which may add to the risks of the thereby avoid doing business with 
firm; customers having poor payment 

	 (ii)	 Only limited amount of funds can record. Factors may also offer 
be generated through trade credit; relevant consultancy services in the 

	(iii)	 It is generally a costly source of areas of finance, marketing, etc.
funds as compared to most other The factor charges fees for 
sources of raising money. the services rendered. Factoring 

appeared on the Indian financial 
8.4.3	 Factoring scene only in the early nineties 

as a result of RBI initiatives. The 
Factoring is a financial service under organisations that provides such 
which the ‘factor’ renders various services include SBI Factors and 
services which includes: Commercial Services Ltd., Canbank 
	(a)	Discounting of bills (with or without Factors Ltd., Foremost Factors Ltd., 

recourse) and collection of the State Bank of India, Canara Bank, 
client’s debts. Under this, the Punjab National Bank, Allahabad 
receivables on account of sale of Bank. In addition, many non-
goods or services are sold to the banking finance companies and 
factor at a certain discount. The other agencies provide factoring 
factor becomes responsible for all service.
credit control and debt collection 
from the buyer and provides Merits
protection against any bad debt The merits of factoring as a source of 
losses to the firm. There are two finance are as follows:
methods of factoring — recourse 	 (i)	 Obtaining funds through factoring 
and non-recourse. Under recourse is cheaper than financing through 
factoring, the client is not protected other means such as bank credit; 
against the risk of bad debts. On 	 (ii)	 With cash flow accelerated by 
the other hand, the factor assumes factoring, the client is able to meet 
the entire credit risk under non- his/her liabilities promptly as and 
recourse factoring i.e., full amount when these arise;
of invoice is paid to the client in the 	(iii)	 Factoring as a source of funds 
event of the debt becoming bad. is flexible and ensures a definite 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   179 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



180 BUSINESS  STUDIES

pattern of cash inflows from credit arrangements are given in the lease 
sales. It provides security for a contract. At the end of the lease period, 
debt that a firm might otherwise the asset goes back to the lessor. Lease 
be unable to obtain; finance provides an important means 

	(iv)	 It does not create any charge on of modernisation and diversification to 
the assets of the firm; the firm. Such type of financing is more 

	 (v)	 The client can concentrate on prevalent in the acquisition of such 
other functional areas of business assets as computers and electronic 
as the responsibility of credit equipment which become obsolete 
control is shouldered by the quicker because of the fast changing 
factor. technological developments. While 

making the leasing decision, the cost 
Limitations of leasing an asset must be compared 

with the cost of owning the same. 
The limitations of factoring  as a source 
of finance are as follows: Merits
	 (i)	 This source is expensive when 

the invoices are numerous and The important merits of lease financing 
smaller in amount; are as follows:

	 (ii)	 The advance finance provided 	 (i)	 It enables the lessee to acquire the 
by the factor firm is generally asset with a lower investment; 
available at a higher interest cost 	 (ii)	 Simple documentation makes it 
than the usual rate of interest; easier to finance assets;

	(iii)	 The factor is a third party to 	(iii)	 Lease rentals paid by the lessee 
the customer who may not feel are deductible for computing 
comfortable while dealing with it. taxable profits;

	(iv)	 It provides finance without 
diluting the ownership or control 

8.4.4	 Lease Financing of business; 
A lease is a contractual agreement 	 (v)	 The lease agreement does not 
whereby one party i.e., the owner of an affect the debt raising capacity of 
asset grants the other party the right an enterprise;
to use the asset in return for a periodic 	(vi)	 The risk of obsolescence is borne 
payment. In other words it is a renting by the lesser. This allows greater 
of an asset for some specified period. flexibility to the lessee to replace 
The owner of the assets is called the the asset.
‘lessor’ while the party that uses the Limitations
assets is known as the ‘lessee’ (see 
Box A). The lessee pays a fixed periodic The limitations of lease financing are 
amount called lease rental to the lessor given as below:
for the use of the asset. The terms 	 (i)	 A lease arrangement may impose 
and conditions regulating the lease certain restrictions on the use 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   180 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 181

of assets. For example, it may 	(iii)	 It may result in higher payout 
not allow the lessee to make any obligation in case the equipment 
alteration or modification in the is not found useful and the lessee 
asset; opts for premature termination of 

the lease agreement; and 
	 (ii)	 The normal business operations 	(iv)	 The lessee never becomes the 

may be affected in case the lease owner of the asset. It deprives him 
is not renewed; of the residual value of the asset. 

Box A
The Lessors
	 1.	 Specialised leasing companies: There are about 400-odd large companies 

which have an organisational focus on leasing, and hence, are known as 
leasing companies.

	 2.	 Banks and bank-subsidiaries: In February 1994, the RBI allowed banks 
to directly enter leasing. Till then, only bank subsidiaries were allowed to 
engage in leasing operations, which was regarded by the RBI as a non-banking 
activity. 

	 3.	 Specialised financial institutions: A number of financial institutions, at 
the Central as well as the State level in India, use the lease instrument along 
with traditional financing instruments. Significantly, the ICICI is one of the 
pioneers in Indian leasing. 

	 4.	 Manufacturer-lessors: As competition forces the manufacturer to add value 
to his sales, he finds the best way to sell the product on lease. Vendor leasing 
is gaining increasing importance. Presently, vendors of automobiles, consumer 
durables, etc., have alliances or joint ventures with leasing companies to offer 
lease finance against their products.

The Lessees
	 1.	 Public sector undertakings: This market has witnessed a good rate of growth 

in the past. There is an increasing number of both centrally as well as State-
owned entities which have resorted to lease financing.  

	 2.	 Mid-market companies: The mid-market companies (i.e., companies with 
reasonably good creditworthiness but with lower public profile) have resorted 
to lease financing basically as an alternative to bank/institutional financing. 

	 3.	 Consumers: Recent bad experience with corporate financing has focussed 
attention towards retail funding of consumer durables. For instance, car 
leasing is a big market in India today.

	 4.	 Government deptts. and authorities: One of the latest entrants in 
leasing markets is the government itself. Recently the Department of 
Telecommunications of the central government took the lead by floating 
tenders for lease finance worth about ` 1000 crores.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   181 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



182 BUSINESS  STUDIES

8.4.5	 Public Deposits 	(iv)	 As the depositors do not have 
The deposits that are raised by voting rights, the control of the 
organisations directly from the public company is not diluted.
are known as public deposits. Rates 
of interest offered on public deposits Limitations
are usually higher than that offered The major limitation of public deposits 
on bank deposits. Any person who is are as follows:
interested in depositing money in an 	 (i)	 New companies generally find it 
organisation can do so by filling up difficult to raise funds through 
a prescribed form. The organisation public deposits; 
in return issues a deposit receipt as 	 (ii)	 It is an unreliable source of finance 
acknowledgment of the debt. Public as the public may not respond 
deposits can take care of both medium when the company needs money;
and short-term financial requirements 	(iii)	 Collection of public deposits may 
of a business. The deposits are prove difficult, particularly when 
beneficial to both the depositor as the size of deposits required is 
well as to the organisation. While the large.
depositors get higher interest rate 
than that offered by banks, the cost of 8.4.6	 Commercial Paper
deposits to the company is less than 
the cost of borrowings from banks. Commercial Paper (CP) is an unsecured 
Companies generally invite public money market instrument issued in 
deposits for a period upto three years. the form of a promissory note. It was 
The acceptance of public deposits is introduced in India in 1990 for enabling 
regulated by the Reserve Bank of India. highly rated corporate borrowers to 

diversify their sources of short-term 
Merits borrowings and to provide an additional 

instrument to investors. Subsequently, 
The merits of public deposits are: primary dealers and all-India financial 
	 (i)	 The procedure of obtaining institutions were also permitted to 

deposits is simple and does not 
contain restrictive conditions issue CP to enable them to meet their 
as are generally there in a loan short-term funding requirements for 
agreement; their operations. Individuals, banking 

	 (ii)	 Cost of  publ ic deposits is companies, other corporate bodies 
generally lower than the cost (registered or incorporated in India) 
of borrowings from banks and and unincorporated bodies, Non-
financial institutions; Resident Indians (NRIs) and Foreign 

	(iii)	 Public deposits do not usually Institutional Investors (FIIs) etc. can 
create any charge on the assets of invest in CPs. CP can be issued for 
the company. The assets can be maturities between a minimum of 7 
used as security for raising loans days and a maximum of up to one year 
from other sources; from the date of issue in denominations 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   182 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 183

of Rs.5 lakh or multiples thereof. 	(iii)	 C o m m e r c i a l  p a p e r  i s  a n 
However, the maturity date of the CP impersonal method of financing. 
should not go beyond the date up to As such if a firm is not in a 
which the credit rating of the issuer position to redeem its paper 
is valid.   due to financial difficulties, 

extending the maturity of a CP is 
Merits not possible.
	 (i)	 A commercial paper is sold on 8.4.7	 Issue of Shares

an unsecured basis and does not 
contain any restrictive conditions; The capital obtained by issue of shares 

	 (ii)	 As it is a freely transferable is known as share capital. The capital 
instrument, it has high liquidity; of a company is divided into small 

	(iii)	 It provides more funds compared units called shares. Each share has 
to other sources. Generally, the its nominal value. For example, a 
cost of CP to the issuing firm is company can issue 1,00,000 shares 
lower than the cost of commercial of Rs. 10 each for a total value of 
bank loans; Rs. 10,00,000. The person holding 

	(iv)	 A commercial paper provides a the share is known as shareholder. 
continuous source of funds. This There are two types of shares  normally 
is because their maturity can be issued by a company. These are 
tailored to suit the requirements equity shares and preference shares. 
of the issuing firm. Further, The money raised by issue of equity 
maturing commercial paper shares is called equity share capital, 
can be repaid by selling new while the money raised by issue of 
commercial paper; preference shares is called preference 

	 (v)	 Companies can park their excess share capital.
funds in commercial paper 	 (a)	 Equity Shares 
thereby earning some good return 		  Equity shares is the most 
on the same. important source of raising long 

term capital by a company. Equity 
Limitations shares represent the ownership of 
	 (i)	 Only financially sound and highly a company and thus the capital 

rated firms can raise money raised by issue of such shares 
through commercial papers. New is known as ownership capital 
and moderately rated firms are or owner’s funds. Equity share 
not in a position to raise funds by capital is a prerequisite to the 
this method; creation of a company. Equity 

	 (ii)	 The size of money that can be shareholders do not get a fixed 
raised through commercial paper dividend but are paid on the 
is limited to the excess liquidity basis of earnings by the company. 
available with the suppliers of They are referred to as ‘residual 
funds at a particular time; owners’ since they receive what 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   183 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



184 BUSINESS  STUDIES

is left after all other claims on 	(vi)	 D emoc r a t i c  c on t r o l  o v e r 
the company’s income and assets management of the company is 
have been settled. They enjoy assured due to voting rights of 
the reward as well as bear the equity shareholders.
risk of ownership. Their liability, 
however, is limited to the extent of Limitations
capital contributed by them in the 
company. Further, through their The major limitations of raising funds 
right to vote, these shareholders through issue of equity shares are as 
have a right to participate in the follows:
management of the company. 	 (i)	 Investors who want steady income 

may not prefer equity shares 
Merits as equity shares get fluctuating 
The important merits of raising funds returns; 
through issuing equity shares are 	 (ii)	 The cost of equity shares is 
given as below: generally more as compared to 
	 (i)	 Equity shares are suitable for the cost of raising funds through 

investors who are willing to other sources; 
assume risk for higher returns; 	(iii)	 Issue of additional equity shares 

	 (ii)	 Payment of dividend to the equity dilutes the voting power, and 
shareholders is not compulsory. earnings of existing equity 
Therefore, there is no burden on shareholders;
the company in this respect; 	(iv)	 More formalities and procedural 

	(iii)	 Equity capital serves as permanent delays are involved while raising 
capital as it is to be repaid only funds through issue of equity 
at the time of liquidation of a share.
company. As it stands last in 	 (b)	 Preference Shares
the list of claims, it provides a 		  The capital raised by issue 
cushion for creditors, in the event of preference shares is called 
of winding up of a company; preference share capital. The 

	(iv)	 Equity capital provides credit preference shareholders enjoy 
worthiness to the company and a preferential position over 
confidence to prospective loan equity shareholders in two ways: 
providers; (i) receiving a fixed rate of dividend, 

	 (v)	 Funds can be raised through out of the net profits of the 
equity issue without creating company, before any dividend is 
any charge on the assets of declared for equity shareholders; 
the company. The assets of a and (ii) receiving their capital 
company are, therefore, free to after the claims of the company’s 
be mortgaged for the purpose of creditors have been settled, at 
borrowings, if the need be; the time of liquidation. In other 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   184 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 185

words, as compared to the equity 	 (v)	 Preference shareholders have a 
shareholders, the preference preferential right of repayment 
shareholders have a preferential over equity shareholders in the 
claim over dividend and repayment event of liquidation of a company;
of capital. Preference shares 	(vi)	 Preference capital does not create 
resemble debentures as they any sort of charge against the 
bear fixed rate of return. Also assets of a company.
as the dividend is payable only 
at the discretion of the directors Limitations
and only out of profit after tax, to The major limitations of preference 
that extent, these resemble equity shares as source of business finance 
shares. Thus, preference shares are as follows:
have some characteristics of both 	 (i)	 Preference shares are not suitable 
equity shares and debentures. for those investors who are willing 
Preference shareholders generally to take risk and are interested in 
do not enjoy any voting rights. A higher returns;
company can issue different types 	 (ii)	 Preference capital dilutes the 
of preference shares (see Box B). claims of equity shareholders over 

assets of the company;
Merits 	(iii)	 The rate of dividend on preference 

shares is generally higher than 
The merits of preference shares are the rate of interest on debentures;
given as follows: 	(iv)	 As the dividend on these shares is 
	 (i)	 Pre ference shares prov ide to be paid only when the company 

reasonably steady income in the earns profit, there is no assured 
form of fixed rate of return and return for the investors. Thus, 
safety of investment; these shares may not be very 

	 (ii)	 Preference shares are useful for attractive to the investors;
those investors who want fixed 	 (v)	 The dividend paid is not deductible 
rate of return with comparatively from profits as expense. Thus, 
low risk; there is no tax saving as in the 

	(iii)	 It does not affect the control case of interest on loans.
of equity shareholders over 
the management as preference 8.4.8	 Debentures
shareholders don’t have voting Debentures  are  an important 
rights; instrument for raising long term debt 

	(iv)	 Payment of fixed rate of dividend capital. A company can raise funds 
to preference shares may enable through issue of debentures, which 
a company to declare higher bear a fixed rate of interest. The 
rates of dividend for the equity debenture issued by a company is an 
shareholders in good times; acknowledgment that the company 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   185 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



186 BUSINESS  STUDIES

has borrowed a certain amount of Merits
money, which it promises to repay at 
a future date. Debenture holders are, The merits of raising funds through 
therefore, termed as creditors of the debentures are given as follows: 
company. Debenture holders are paid 	 (i)	 It is preferred by investors who 
a fixed stated amount of interest at want fixed income at lesser risk;
specified intervals say six months or 	 (ii)	 Debentures are fixed charge funds 
one year. Public issue of debentures and do not participate in profits 
requires that the issue be rated by a of the company; 
credit rating agency like CRISIL (Credit 	(iii)	 The issue of debentures is suitable 
Rating and Information Services of in the situation when the sales 
India Ltd.) on aspects like track record and earnings are relatively stable; 
of the company, its profitability, debt (iv)		 As debentures do not carry 
servicing capacity, credit worthiness voting rights, financing through 
and the perceived risk of lending. A 
company can issue different types of debentures does not dilute 
debentures (see Box C and D). Issue of control of equity shareholders on 
Zero Interest Debentures (ZID) which management;
do not carry any explicit rate of interest (v)	 	 Financing through debentures is 
has also become popular in recent less costly as compared to cost of 
years. The difference between the face preference or equity capital as the 
value of the debenture and its purchase interest payment on debentures is 
price is the return to the investor. tax deductible.

Box B 
Types of Preference Shares

	 1.	 Cumulative and Non-Cumulative: The preference shares which enjoy the 
right to accumulate unpaid dividends in the future years, in case the same 
is not paid during a year are known as cumulative preference shares. On 
the other hand, on non-cumulative shares, dividend is not accumulated if 
it is not paid in a particular year.  

	 2.	 Participating and Non-Participating: Preference shares which have a 
right to participate in the further surplus of a company shares which 
after dividend at a certain rate has been paid on equity shares are called 
participating preference shares. The non-participating preference are such 
which do not enjoy such rights of participation in the profits of the company. 

	 3.	 Convertible and Non-Convertible: Preference shares that can be converted 
into equity shares within a specified period of time are known as convertible 
preference shares. On the other hand, non-convertible shares are such that 
cannot be converted into equity shares.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   186 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 187

Limitations 8.4.9	 Commercial Banks
Debentures as source of funds has Commercial banks occupy a vital 
certain limitations. These are given position as they provide funds for 
as follows: different purposes as well as for 
	 (i)	 As fixed charge instruments, different time periods. Banks extend 

debentures put a permanent loans to firms of all sizes and in many 
burden on the earnings of a ways, like, cash credits, overdrafts, term 
company. There is a greater risk loans, purchase/discounting of bills, 
when earnings of the company and issue of letter of credit. The rate 
fluctuate; 

	 (ii)	 In case of redeemable debentures, of interest charged by banks depends 
the company has to make on various factors such as the 
provisions for repayment on characteristics of the firm and the 
the specified date, even during level of interest rates in the economy. 
periods of financial difficulty; The loan is repaid either in lump sum 

	(iii)	 Each company has certain or in installments.
borrowing capacity. With the Bank credit is not a permanent 
issue of debentures, the capacity source of funds. Though banks have 
of a company to further borrow started extending loans for longer 
funds reduces. periods, generally such loans are 

Box C 
Types of Debentures

	 1.	 Secured and Unsecured: Secured debentures are such which create a charge 
on the assets of the company, thereby mortgaging the assets of the company. 
Unsecured debentures on the other hand do not carry any charge or security 
on the assets of the company.

	 2.	 Registered and Bearer: Registered debentures are those which are duly 
recorded in the register of debenture holders maintained by the company. 
These can be transferred only through a regular instrument of transfer. In 
contrast, the debentures which are transferable by mere delivery are called 
bearer debentures.

	 3.	 Convertible and Non-Convertible: Convertible debentures are those 
debentures that can be converted into equity shares after the expiry of a 
specified period. On the other hand, non-convertible debentures are those 
which cannot be converted into equity shares.

	 4.	 First and Second: Debentures that are repaid before other debentures are 
repaid are known as first debentures. The second debentures are those which 
are paid after the first debentures have been paid back.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   187 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



188 BUSINESS  STUDIES

used for medium to short periods. of obtaining funds slightly 
The borrower is required to provide difficult;
some security or create a charge on 	(iii)	 In some cases, difficult terms and 
the assets of the firm before a loan is conditions are imposed by banks. 
sanctioned by a commercial bank. for the grant of loan. For example, 

restrictions may be imposed on 
Merits the sale of mortgaged goods, thus 
The merits of raising funds from a making normal business working 
commercial bank are as follows: difficult.
	 (i)	 Banks provide timely assistance 

to business by providing funds as 8.4.10	  Financial Institutions
and when needed by it.   The government has established 

	 (ii)	 Secrecy of business can be a number of financial institutions 
maintained as the information all over the country to provide 
supplied to the bank by the finance to business organisations 
borrowers is kept confidential; (see Box E). These institutions are 

	(iii)	 Formalities such as issue of established by the central as well as 
prospectus and underwriting are state governments. They provide both 
not required for raising loans owned capital and loan capital for long 
from a bank. This, therefore, is 
an easier source of funds; and medium term requirements and 

	(iv)	 Loan from a bank is a flexible supplement the traditional financial 
source of finance as the loan agencies like commercial banks. As 
amount  can be  increased these institutions aim at promoting the 
according to business needs and industrial development of a country, 
can be repaid in advance when these are also called ‘development 
funds are not needed. banks’. In addition to providing 

financial assistance, these institutions 
Limitations also conduct market surveys and 

provide technical assistance and 
The major limitations of commercial managerial services to people who 
banks as a source of finance are as run the enterprises. This source of 
follows: financing is considered suitable when 
	 (i)	 Funds are generally available for large funds for longer duration are 

short periods and its extension or required for expansion, reorganisation 
renewal is uncertain and difficult; and modernisation of an enterprise.

	 (ii)	 Banks make detailed investigation 
of the company’s affairs, financial Merits
structure etc., and may also ask 
for security of assets and personal The merits of raising funds through 
sureties. This makes the procedure financial institutions are as follows:

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   188 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 189

BOX D 
Inter Corporate Deposits (ICD)

Inter Corporate Deposits are unsecured short-term deposits made by a company 
with another company. ICD market is used for short-term cash management of a 
large corporate. As per the RBI guidelines, the minimum period of ICDs is 7 days 
which can be extended to one year. 
The three types of Inter Corporate Deposits are:
	 (i)	 Three months deposits;
	 (ii)	 Six months deposits;
	(iii)	 Call deposits.
Interest rate on ICDs may remain fixed or may be floating. The rate of interest on 
these deposits is higher than that of banks. These deposits are usually considered 
by the borrower company to solve problems of short-term funds insufficiency.

	 (i)	 Financial institutions provide 	 (i)	 Financial institutions follow 
long-term finance, which are not rigid criteria for grant of loans. 
provided by commercial banks; Too many formalities make the 

	 (ii)	 Besides providing funds, many procedure time consuming and 
of these institutions provide 
f inancia l ,  manager ia l  and expensive;
technical advice and consultancy 	 (ii)	 Certain restrictions such as 
to business firms; restriction on dividend payment 

	(iii)	 Obtaining loan from financial are imposed on the powers of 
institutions increases the goodwill the borrowing company by the 
of the borrowing company in the financial institutions;
capital market. Consequently, 	(iii)	 Financial institutions may have 
such a company can raise funds their nominees on the Board 
easily from other sources as well; of Directors of the borrowing 

	(iv)	 As repayment of loan can be made 
in easy instalments, it does not company thereby restricting the 
prove to be much of a burden on powers of the company.
the business;

	 (v)	 The funds are made available 8.5	I nternational Financing
even during periods of depression, In addition to the sources discussed 
when other sources of finance are above, there are various avenues 
not available. for organisations to raise funds 

internationally. With the opening up 
Limitations of an economy and the operations of 
The major limitations of raising funds the business organisations becoming 
from financial institutions are as given global, Indian companies have an 
below: access to funds in global capital 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   189 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



190 BUSINESS  STUDIES

market. Various international sources of a company are delivered to the 
from where funds may be generated depository bank. The depository 
include: bank issues depository receipts 
(i) 	 Commercial Banks: Commercial against these shares.  Such 
banks all over the world extend foreign depository receipts denominated 
currency loans for business purposes. in US dollars are known as Global 
They are an important source of Depository Receipts (GDR). GDR is 
financing non-trade international a negotiable instrument and can be 
operations. The types of loans and traded freely like any other security. 
services provided by banks vary from In the Indian context, a GDR is an 
country to country. For example, instrument issued abroad by an 
Standard Chartered emerged as a Indian company to raise funds 
major source of foreign currency loans in some foreign currency and is 
to the Indian industry. listed and traded on a foreign 

stock exchange. A holder of GDR 
(ii)  International Agencies and can at any time convert it into the 
Development Banks: A number number of shares it represents. The 
of  internat ional  agencies and holders of GDRs do not carry any 
development banks have emerged over voting rights but only dividends 
the years to finance international trade and capital appreciation. Many 
and business. These bodies provide Indian companies such as Infosys, 
long and medium term loans and Reliance, Wipro and ICICI have 
grants to promote the development of raised money through issue of 
economically backward areas in the GDRs (see Box F).
world. These bodies were set up by the 	(b)	American Depository Receipts 
Governments of developed countries (ADRs): The depository receipts 
of the world at national, regional and issued by a company in the USA 
international levels for funding various are known as American Depository 
projects. The more notable among Receipts. ADRs are bought and sold 
them include International Finance in American markets, like regular 
Corporation (IFC), EXIM Bank and stocks. It is similar to a GDR 
Asian Development Bank. except that it can be issued only to 
(iii)  International Capital Markets: American citizens and can be listed 
Modern organisations including and traded on a stock exchange 
multinational companies depend of USA.
upon sizeable borrowings in rupees as (c)  Indian Depository Receipt (IDRs): 
well as in foreign currency. Prominent An Indian Depository Receipt is a 
financial instruments used for this financial instrument denominated 
purpose are: in Indian Rupees in the form of a 
	(a) Global Depository Receipts Depository Receipt. It is created 

(GDR’s): The local currency shares by an Indian Depository to enable 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   190 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 191

Box E 
Companies rush to float GDR issues

It’s not the IPO (initial public offer) market alone which is humming with activity. 
Companies — mostly small and medium-sized — are rushing to the overseas 
market to raise funds through Global Depository Receipts (GDRs). Five firms 
have already raised $464 million (around ` 2,040 crore) from the international 
markets through GDR offerings this year. This is almost double of $228.6 mn 
raised by nine companies in 2004 and $63.09 mn mobilised by four companies 
in 2003. Nearly 20 companies are waiting in the wings to launch GDR issues 
worth over $1 bn in the coming months. On the other hand, though the number 
of companies going for FCCB (Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds) issues 
has come down, several companies are still in the FCCB race, thanks to lax 
rules and disclosure norms. For example, Aarti Drugs Ltd. has decided to raise 
$12 mn by issuing FCCBs. 
Significantly, small and medium companies are now taking the GDR route to raise 
funds this time even for a small amount. For example, Opto Circuits has decided to 
go for a GDR issue of $20 mn with a green-shoe option of $5 mn. The share price 
of this company shot up by 370 per cent from ` 34 on May 17, 2004 to around ` 
160 on the BSE recently. Videocon Industries, Lyka Labs, Indian Overseas Bank, 
Jubilant Organosys, Maharashtra Seamless, Moschip Semiconductors, and Crew 
BOS are planning GDR issues. Two banks — UTI Bank ($240 million) and Centurion 
Bank ($70 million) — raised funds from the GDR market recently. Companies now 
prefer GDR over FCCB issues in view of the rise in interest rates abroad.

a foreign company to raise funds issued. The issuer company makes 
from the Indian securities market. a public offer in India, and residents 
The IDR is a specific Indian version can bid in exactly the same format and 
of the similar global depository method as they bid for Indian shares.
receipts. ‘Standard Chartered PLC’ was 
The foreign company issuing the first company that issued Indian 

IDR deposits shares to an Indian Depository Receipt in Indian securities 
Depository (custodian of securities market in June 2010.
registered with the Securities and 	(d)	Foreign Currency Convertible 
Exchange Board of India). In turn, the Bonds (FCCBs): Foreign currency 
depository issues receipts to investors convertible bonds are equity linked 
in India against these shares. The debt securities that are to be 
benefits of the underlying shares (like converted into equity or depository 
bonus, dividends, etc.) accrue to the receipts after a specific period. 
IDR holders in India. Thus, a holder of FCCB has the 

According to SEBI guidelines, option of either converting them into 
IDRs are issued to Indian residents in equity shares at a predetermined 
the same way as domestic shares are price or exchange rate, or retaining 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   191 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



192 BUSINESS  STUDIES

the bonds. The FCCB’s are issued 	(ii)	 Financial strength and stability 
in a foreign currency and carry a of operations: The financial 
fixed interest rate which is lower strength of a business is also a 
than the rate of any other similar key determinant. In the choice of 
non-convertible debt instrument. source of funds business should 
FCCB’s are listed and traded in be in a sound financial position 
foreign stock exchanges. FCCB’s so as to be able to repay the 
are very similar to the convertible principal amount and interest on 
debentures issued in India. the borrowed amount. When the 

earnings of the organisation are 
8.6	F actors Affecting the Choice not stable, fixed charged funds like 

of the Source of Funds preference shares and debentures 
should be carefully selected as 

Financial needs of a business are of these add to the financial burden 
different types — long term, short of the organisation.
term, fixed and fluctuating. Therefore, 	(iii)	 Form of  organisation and legal 
business firms resort to different types status: The form of business 
of sources for raising funds. Short- organisation and status influences 
term borrowings offer the benefit of the choice of a source for raising 
reduced cost due to reduction of idle money. A partnership firm, for 
capital, but long – term borrowings example, cannot raise money by 
are  considered a necessity on many issue of equity shares as these 
grounds. Similarly equity capital has can be issued only by a joint stock 
a role to play in the scheme for raising company.
funds in the corporate sector. 	(iv)	 Purpose and time period: 

As no source of funds is devoid Business should plan according 
of limitations, it is advisable to use to the time period for which the 
a combination of sources, instead funds are required. A short-term 
of relying only on a single source. A need for example can be met 
number of factors affect the choice through borrowing funds at low 
of this combination, making it a very rate of interest through trade 
complex decision for the business. The credit, commercial paper, etc. For 
factors that affect the choice of source long term finance, sources such 
of finance are briefly discussed below: as issue of shares and debentures 
	 (i)	 Cost: There are two types of cost are more appropriate. Similarly, 

viz., the cost of procurement of the purpose for which funds are 
funds and cost of utilising the required need to be considered so 
funds. Both these costs should be that the source is matched with 
taken into account while deciding the use. For example, a long-
about the source of funds that will term business expansion plan 
be used by an organisation. should not be financed by a bank 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   192 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 193

overdraft which will be required to 	(vii)	Effect on credit worthiness: 
be repaid in the short term.   The dependence of business on 

	 (v)	 Risk profile: Business should certain sources may affect its 
evaluate each of the source credit worthiness in the market. 
of finance in terms of the risk For example, issue of secured 
involved. For example, there is a debentures may affect the interest 
least risk in equity as the share of unsecured creditors of the 
capital has to be repaid only at the company and may adversely 
time of winding up and dividends affect their willingness to extend 
need not be paid if no profits are further loans as credit to the 
available. A loan on the other company.
hand, has a repayment schedule 	(viii) Flexibility and ease: Another 
for both the principal and the aspect affecting the choice of a 
interest. The interest is required source of finance is the flexibility 
to be paid irrespective of the firm and ease of obtaining funds. 
earning a profit or incurring a Restrictive provisions, detailed 
loss. investigation and documentation 

	(vi)	 Control: A particular source in case of borrowings from banks 
of fund may affect the control and financial institutions for 
and power of the owners on the example may be the reason that 
management of a firm. Issue of a business organisations may 
equity shares may mean dilution not prefer it, if other options are 

readily available.
of the control. For example, as 	(ix)	 Tax benefits: Various sources 
equity share holders enjoy voting may also be weighed in terms of 
rights, financial institutions may their tax benefits. For example, 
take control of the assets or while the dividend on preference 
impose conditions as part of the shares is not tax deductible, 
loan agreement. Thus, business interest paid on debentures 
firm should choose a source and loan is tax deductible and 
keeping in mind the extent to may, therefore, be preferred 
which they are willing to share by organisations seeking tax 
their control over business. advantage.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   193 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



194 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Key Terms

Finance	 Owned capital	 Fixed capital
Working capital	 Borrowed capital	 Short term sources
Restrictive conditions	 Long term sources	 Charge on assets
Voting power	 Fixed charge funds	 Accounts receivable
Bill discounting	 Factoring	 GDRs
FCCBs	 ADRs	 1CD
	 	 1DR

SUMMARY

Meaning and significance of business finance: Finance required by business 
to establish and run its operations is known as business finance. No business 
can function without adequate amount of funds for undertaking various 
activities. The funds are required for purchasing fixed assets (fixed capital 
requirement), for running day-to-day operations (working capital requirement), 
and for undertaking growth and expansion plans in a business organisation.  
Classification of sources of funds: Various sources of funds available to 
a business can be classified according to three major basis, which are 
(i) time period (long, medium and short term), (ii) ownership (owner’s funds 
and borrowed funds), and (iii) source of generation (internal sources and 
external sources).
Long, medium and short-term sources of funds: The sources that provide 
funds for a period exceeding 5 years are called long-term sources. The sources 
that fulfill the financial requirements for the period of more than one year but 
not exceeding 5 years are called medium term sources and the sources that 
provide funds for a period not exceeding one year are termed as short term 
sources. 
Owner’s funds and borrowed funds: Owner’s funds refer to the funds that 
are provided by the owners of an enterprise. Borrowed capital, on the other 
hand, refers to the funds that are generated through loans or borrowings from 
other individuals or institutions.
Internal and external sources: Internal sources of capital are those sources 
that are generated within the business say through ploughing back of profits. 
External sources of capital, on the other hand are those that are outside the 
business such as finance provided by suppliers, lenders, and investors.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   194 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 195

Sources of business finance: The sources of funds available to a business 
include retained earnings, trade credit, factoring, lease financing, public 
deposits, commercial paper, issue of shares and debentures, loans from 
commercial banks, financial institutions and international sources of finance.
Retained earnings: The portion of the net earnings of the company that is 
not distributed as dividends is known as retained earnings. The amount of 
retained earnings available depends on the dividend policy of the company. It 
is generally used for growth and expansion of the company.
Trade credit: The credit extended by one trader to another for purchasing 
goods or services is known as trade credit. Trade credit facilitates the purchase 
of supplies on credit. The terms of trade credit vary from one industry to 
another and are specified on the invoice. Small and new firms are usually 
more dependent on trade credit, as they find it relatively difficult to obtain 
funds from other sources. 
Factoring: Factoring has emerged as a popular source of short-term funds in 
recent years. It is a financial service whereby the factor is responsible for all 
credit control and debt collection from the buyer and provides protection against 
any bad-debt losses to the firm. There are two methods of factoring — recourse 
and non-recourse factoring. 
Lease financing: A lease is a contractual agreement whereby the owner of an 
asset (lessor) grants the right to use the asset to the other party (lessee). The 
lessor charges a periodic payment for renting of an asset for some specified 
period called lease rent. 
Public deposits: A company can raise funds by inviting the public to deposit 
their savings with their company. Pubic deposits may take care of both long 
and short-term financial requirements of business. Rate of interest on deposits 
is usually higher than that offered by banks and other financial institutions.
Commercial paper (CP): It is an unsecured promissory note issued by a firm 
to raise funds for a short period The maturity period of commercial paper 
usually ranges from 90 days to 364 days. Being unsecured, only firms having 
good credit rating can issue the CP and its regulation comes under the purview 
of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Issue of equity shares: Equity shares represents the ownership capital of a 
company. Due to their fluctuating earnings, equity shareholders are called 
risk bearers of the company. These shareholders enjoy higher returns during 
prosperity and have a say in the management of a company, through exercising 
their voting rights.
Issue of preference shares: These shares provide a preferential right to 
the shareholders with respect to payment of earnings and the repayment of 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   195 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



196 BUSINESS  STUDIES

capital. Investors who prefer steady income without undertaking higher risks 
prefer these shares. A company can issue different types of preference shares. 
Issue of debentures: Debenture represents the loan capital of a company and 
the holders of debentures are the creditors. These are the fixed charged funds 
that carry a fixed rate of interest. The issue of debentures is suitable in the 
situation when the sales and earnings of the company are relatively stable. 
Commercial banks: Banks provide short and medium-term loans to firms of 
all sizes. The loan is repaid either in lump sum or in instalments. The rate of 
interest charged by a bank depends upon factors including the characteristics 
of the borrowing firm and the level of interest rates in the economy. 
Financial institutions: Both central and state governments have established 
a number of financial institutions all over the country to provide industrial 
finance to companies engaged in business. They are also called development 
banks. This source of financing is considered suitable when large funds are 
required for expansion, reorganisation and modernisation of the enterprise.

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1.	 What is business finance? Why do businesses need funds? Explain.
2.	 List sources of raising long-term and short-term finance. 
3.	 What is the difference between internal and external sources of raising 

funds? Explain.
4.	 What preferential rights are enjoyed by preference shareholders. Explain.
5.	 Name any three special financial institutions and state their objectives.
6.	 What is the difference between GDR and ADR? Explain. 

Long Answer Questions
1.	 Explain trade credit and bank credit as sources of short-term finance for 

business enterprises.
2.	 Discuss the sources from which a large industrial enterprise can raise 

capital for financing modernisation and expansion.
3.	 What advantages does issue of debentures provide over the issue of equity 

shares?
4.	 State the merits and demerits of public deposits and retained earnings as 

methods of business finance.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   196 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



SOURCES OF BUSINESS FINANCE 197

Projects/Assignment
1.	 Collect information about the companies that have issued debentures in 

recent years. Give suggestions to make debentures more popular.
2.	 Institutional financing has gained importance in recent years. In a scrapbook 

paste detailed information about various financial institutions that provide 
financial assistance to Indian companies.  

3.	 On the basis of the sources discussed in the chapter, suggest suitable 
options to solve the financial problem of the restaurant owner.  

4.	 Prepare a comparative chart of all the sources of finance.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 8.indd   197 9/2/2022   2:14:09 PM



Chapter 9

##9##
MSME and Business Entrepreneurship

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 explain the meaning and nature of MSME in India;

•	 appreciate the role of MSME in India;

•	 analyse the problems faced by of MSME in India; and

•	 discuss the role of innovation and entrepreneurship for MSMEs

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   198 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME and Business Entrepreneurship 199

Romi Bags of Manipur
Khumbongmayum Dhanachandra Singh didn’t have much in life. The son of a poor 
tailor, he wasn’t brought up with many privileges. He saw his father working day 
and night to earn a meagre income. He saw the rich getting richer and the poor 
remaining poor. The boy wanted to do something more in life. He couldn’t imagine 
a life of stitching clothes relentlessly and earn just enough to survive.

Imphal is a small city in Manipur. Hardworking men and women send 
their children away to bigger cities so they can have opportunities to progress. 
Khumbongmayum’s father couldn’t afford to send him or even educate him. He just 
taught him what he knew— tailoring. Fabrics, stitching and clothing styles was 
what the boy grew up with. There was only one sewing machine and the boy used 
it when his father wasn’t using it. He learnt it silently because he knew it was what 
his father wanted, but his heart wasn’t in it.

Sometimes an incident can change your life. This happened to Khumbongmayum 
when he stitched a purse made out of leftover fabrics from his father’s scraps. 
Khumbongmayum offered the purse to his friend who marvelled at the unique design. 
The friend in turn showed the interesting purse to his other friends. They asked 
Khumbongmayum if he could make such purses for them also. It led him to wonder if 
there was a market for his designs. And he knew he had stumbled on to his business 
venture. He made a business plan and launched a purse making venture ‘Romi 
Bags’ in 1996. Khumbongmayum was not one to do anything on a whim. He noticed 
the demands of his product and he calculated his costs, expenses and expected 
income. In 2007, he received the National Award for bag making under Micro and 
Medium Enterprises.  For him, though it’s just the beginning, Khumbongmayum 
Dhanchandra Singh has changed his life by sheer grit, perseverance and hard work. 
You can’t let anything stop you from moving forward. You can’t become successful 
or reach the top if you don’t listen and hear effectively.

9.1 Introduction MSMEs play a significant role in 
the economic growth and contribute 

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises approximately 29.7 per cent of GDP 
(MSME) contribute significantly to and 49.66 per cent of exports. The 
the development process and acts as sector offers employment to nearly 
a vital link in the industrialisation 60 million people through 28.5 million 
in terms of production, employment enterprises, after the agriculture 
and exports for economic prosperity sector. MSMEs are complementary to 
by widening entrepreneurial base large industries as ancillary units and 
and use of local raw materials and form an integral part of value chain for 
indigenous skills. MSME dominate the building a conducive environment for 
industrial scenario in the country with indigenous skills, grass root innovations 
sizeable proportion of labour force and and entrepreneurship development. 
tremendous export potential. This sector produces a wide range of 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   199 18-04-2024   11:33:03



200 BUSINESS  STUDIES

products, from simple consumer handicrafts, coir, sericulture, khadi 
goods to high-precision, sophisticated and village industries, small scale 
finished products. industries and powerlooms. The 

Recognising the potential of this Khadi and Village Industries and Coir 
sector for the national development, segment is another major contributor 
this segment of industry is encouraged 
in both in pre-reform and post–reform to the growth of the MSME. Many 
period for fulfilling the objective of self- global companies are increasingly 
reliance and rural industrialisation. looking to Indian MSMEs for strategic 

In India, the MSME consists of partnerships of mutual benefit due 
both ‘traditional’ and ‘modern’ small to the innovative capabilities in niche 
industries. This sector has eight of low-cost manufacturing and local 
subgroups. They are handlooms, skills and capabilities. 

The Diversity of the Indian MSME Sector
MSME Tool Rooms have been credited to provide at least 10 components for 
Mangalyaan (Mars Orbiter Mission probe), India’s first inter-planetary space mission. 
It has contributed vital inputs for other space satellites such as the Chandrayan. 
India’s second moon mission.  Chandrayaan-2, which was successfully launched 
on July 22, 2019 the moon mission of India, acknowledges the contribution Central 
Tool Room and Training Centre (CTTC) Bhubaneswar and Institute for Design 
of Electrical Measuring Instruments (IDEMI) Mumbai in developing several vital 
components for the Cryogenic engine of the Launch Vehicle, Navigational assemblies 
of the Lunar Orbiter and the wheel assemblies for the Moon Launch. MSMEs are 
now only not limited up to small business but their contribution starts from ground 
level which directly creates a major effect on such big missions. This sector, thus, 
holds key to inclusive growth and plays a critical role in India’s future.
Source: Ministry of MSME, MSME Insider, 2019, Government of India.

9.2 Micro, Small and Medium The def init ion used by the 
Enterprises Government of India to describe 

It is important to know how size is MSME is based on the investment in 
defined in our country, with reference plant and machinery and turnover. 
to MSME establishments. Several This measure seeks to keep in view the 
parameters can be used to measure the socio-economic environment in India 
size of business units. These include where capital is scarce and labour is 
the number of persons employed in abundant.
business, capital invested in business, 
turnover of business, etc.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   200 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 201

Type of Units Investment in Plant 
and Machinery Turnover

Micro Enterprises 1 Crore Does not exceed 5 crore

Small Enterprises 10 Crore Does not exceed 50 crore

Medium Enterprises 50 Crore Does not exceed 250 core

% share of MSMES in

Micro Enterprises 99.4%

Small Enterprises 0.52%

Medium Enterprises 0.1%

The emergence of a large service concerns of such enterprises as micro, 
sector has necessitated the government small and medium and provide them 
to include other enterprises covering with a single legal framework. The 
both Small Scale Industries (SSI) sector MSMED Act, 2006 came into force 
and related service entities under the w.e.f., October, 2006. The Micro, Small 
same umbrella. Expansion of the small and Medium Enterprises Development 
enterprises was taking place growing (MSMED) Act, 2006 addressed these 
into medium enterprises and they issues relating to its definition, 
were required to adopt higher levels credit, marketing and technology up 
of technologies in order to remain gradation. Medium scale enterprises 
competitive in a fast globalising world. and service related enterprises also 
Thus, it was necessary to address the come under the purview of this Act. 

Village Industries
Village industry has been defined as any industry located in a rural area which 
produces any goods, renders any service with or without the use of power and in 
which the fixed capital investment per head or artisan or worker is specified by 
the central government, from time to time.
Cottage Industries
Cottage industries are also known as rural industries or traditional industries. 
They are not defined by capital investment criteria as in the case of other small 
scale industries.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   201 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



202 BUSINESS  STUDIES

9.3 Role of MSME intensive. This is a boon for a 
labour surplus country like India.

MSME in India enjoy a distinct position 	(iii)	 MSME in our country supply an 
in view of their contribution to the enormous variety of products 
socio-economic development of the which include mass consumption 
country. The emphasis on MSME has goods, readymade garments, 
always been an integral part of India’s hosiery goods, stationery items, 
industrial strategy. Development of soaps and detergents, domestic 
MSME prevents migration of rural utensils, leather, plastic and 
population to urban areas in search rubber goods, processed foods 
of employment and contributes to and vegetables, wood and steel 
other socio-economic aspects, such furniture, paints, varnishes, 
as reduction in income inequalities, safety matches, etc. Among 
dispersed development of industries t h e  s o p h i s t i c a t e d  i t e m s 
and linkage with other sectors of the manufactured are electric and 
economy. electronic goods like televisions, 

In fact promotion of MSME and calculators, electro-medical 
rural industrialisation has been equipment, electronic teaching 
considered by the Government of India aids like overhead projectors, air 
as a powerful instrument for realising conditioning equipment, drugs 
the twin objectives of ‘accelerated and pharmaceuticals, agricultural 
industrial growth and creating tools and equipment and several 
additional productive employment other engineering products. A 
potential in rural and backward areas.’ special mention should be made 

The following points highlight their of handlooms, handicrafts and 
contribution. other products from traditional 
	 (i)	 The contr ibut ion of  these village industries in view of their 

industries to the balanced regional export value.
development of our country is 	(iv)	 MSME which produce simple 
noteworthy. Small industries in p r o d u c t s  u s i n g  s i m p l e 
India account for 95 per cent of technologies and depend on 
the industrial units in the country. locally available resources both 

	 (ii)	 MSME are the second largest material and labour can be set up 
employers of human resources, anywhere in the country. Since 
after agriculture. They generate they can be widely spread without 
more number of employment any locational constraints, the 
opportunities per unit of capital benefits of industrialisation can 
invested compared to large be reaped by every region. They, 
industries. They are, therefore, thus, contribute significantly to 
considered to be more labour the balanced development of the 
intensive and less capital country.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   202 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 203

	 (v)	 MSME provide ample opportunity modern technology, procurement of 
for entrepreneurship. The latent raw materials are some of these areas. 
skills and talents of people can This gives rise to several problems.
be channelled into business ideas The problems majorly include 
which can be converted into reality remote location with less developed 
with little capital investment and infrastructural facilities, lack of 
almost nil formalities to start a managerial talent, poor quality, 
small business. traditional technology and inadequate 

	(vi)	 MSME also enjoy the advantage availability of finance. The problems 
of low cost of production. Locally of exporting small scale units include 
available resources are less lack of adequate data on foreign 
expensive. Establishment and markets, lack of market intelligence, 
running costs of small industries exchange rate fluctuations, quality 
are on the lower side because of standards, and pre-shipment finance. 
low overhead expenses. Infact, In general the small businesses are 
the low cost of production which faced with the following problems:
small industries enjoy is their (i) Finance: One of the severe 
competitive strength. problems faced by MSME is that of 

	(vii)	 Due to the small size of the non-availability of adequate finance 
organ isa t i ons ,  qu ick  and to carry out its operations. Generally 
timely decisions can be taken these businesses begin with a small 
without consulting many people capital base. Many of the units in the 
as it happens in large sized small sector lack the credit worthiness 
organisations. New business required to raise as capital from the 
opportunities can be captured at capital markets. As a result, they 
the right time. heavily depend on local financial 

resources and are frequently the 
9.5 Problems Associated With MSME victims of exploitation by the money 
The potential of MSME is often not lenders. These units frequently suffer 
realised fully, because of several from lack of adequate working capital, 
problems related to size and operations. either due to delayed payment of dues 
We shall now examine some of the to them or locking up of their capital in 
major problems that small businesses unsold stocks. Banks also do not lend 
whether in urban or in rural areas money without adequate collateral 
are encountering in their day-to-day security or guarantees and margin 
functioning. money, which many of them are not 

M SMEs  a r e  a t  a  d i s t i n c t in a position to provide.
disadvantage as compared to largescale (ii) Raw materials: Another major 
industries. The scale of operations, problem of MSME is the procurement 
availability of finance, ability to use of raw materials. If the required 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   203 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



204 BUSINESS  STUDIES

materials are not available, they have may not be feasible for small business 
to compromise on the quality or have firms as they lack the necessary 
to pay a high price to get good quality infrastructure.
materials. Their bargaining power is 
relatively low due to the small quantity (v)	 Quality: Many MSMEs do not 
of purchases made by them. Also, they adhere to desired standards of quality. 
cannot afford to take the risk of buying Instead they concentrate on cutting the 
in bulk as they have no facilities cost and keeping the prices low. They 
to store the materials. Because of do not have adequate resources to 
general scarcity of metals, chemicals invest in quality research and maintain 
and extractive raw materials in the the standards of the industry, nor do 
economy, the small scale sector suffers they have the expertise to upgrade 
the most. This also means a waste of technology. In fact maintaining quality 
production capacity for the economy is their weakest point, when competing 
and loss of further units. in global markets.
( i i i )  Managerial skil ls:  These (vi) Capacity utilisation: Due to lack 
businesses are generally promoted and of marketing skills or lack of demand, 
operated by a single person, who may many firms have to operate below full 
not possess all the managerial skills capacity due to which their operating 
required to run the business. Many costs tend to increase. Gradually this 
of the small business entrepreneurs leads to sickness and closure of the 
possess sound technical knowledge business.
but are less successful in marketing (vii) 	 Global competition: Apart from 
the output. Moreover, they may not the problems stated above MSME are 
find enough time to take care of all not without fears, especially in the 
functional activities. At the same time present context of globalisation. These 
they are not in a position to afford 
professional managers. enterprises face competition is not only 

from medium and large industries, but 
(iv) Marketing: Marketing is one also from multinational companies 
of the most important activities which are giants in terms of their size 
as it generates revenue. Effective and business volumes. 
marketing of goods requires a thorough 
understanding of the customer’s needs 9.7 MSME and Entrepreneurship 
and requirements. In most cases, Development
marketing is a weaker area of small 
organisations. These organisations Entrepreneurship is the process of 
have, therefore, to depend excessively setting up one’s own business as 
on middlemen, who at times exploit distinct from pursuing any other 
them by paying low price and delayed economic activity, be it employment 
payments. Further, direct marketing or practising some profession. The 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   204 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 205

person who set-up his business is step-by-step and purposeful activity. 
called an entrepreneur. The output of It has certain temperamental, skill 
the process, that is, the business unit and other knowledge and competency 
is called an enterprise. It is interesting requirements that can be acquired, 
to note that entrepreneurship learnt and developed, both by formal 
besides providing self-employment educational and vocational training 
to the entrepreneur is responsible as well as by observation and work 
to a great extent for creation and experience. Such an understanding 
expansion of opportunities for the of the process of entrepreneurship is 
other two economic activities, that crucial for dispelling the myth that 
is, employment and profession. And, entrepreneurs are born rather than 
in the process, entrepreneurship made.
becomes crucial for overall economic (ii) 	Lawful and Purposeful Activity: 
development of a nation. The object of entrepreneurship is 

Every country, whether developed lawful business. It is important to 
or developing, needs entrepreneurs. take note of this as one may try 
Whereas, a developing country needs to legitimise unlawful actions as 
entrepreneurs to initiate the process entrepreneurship on the grounds that 
of development, the developed one just as entrepreneurship entails risk, 
needs entrepreneurship to sustain so does illicit businesses. Purpose of 
it. In the present Indian context, entrepreneurship is creation of value 
where on the one hand, employment for personal profit and social gain.
opportunities in public sector and 
large-scale sector are shrinking, and (iii)	 Innovation: From the point of 
on the other, vast opportunities arising view of the firm, innovation may be 
from globalisation are waiting to be cost saving or revenue-enhancing. If 
exploited; entrepreneurship can really it does both it is more than welcome. 
take India to the heights of becoming a Even if it does none, it is still welcome 
super economic power. Thus, the need as innovation must become a habit!
for entrepreneurship arises from the Entrepreneurship is creative in 
functions the entrepreneurs perform the sense that it involves creation 

of value. By combining the various 
in relation to the process of economic factors of production, entrepreneurs 
development and in relation to the produce goods and services that meet 
business enterprise. the needs and wants of the society. 

The following are the characteristics Every entrepreneurial act results 
of entrepreneurship: in income and wealth generation. 
(i)	 S y s t e m a t i c  A c t i v i t y : Entrepreneurship is creative also in 
Entrepreneurship is not a mysterious the sense that it involves innovation-
gift or charm and something that introduction of new products, discovery 
happens by chance! It is a systematic, of new markets and sources of supply 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   205 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



206 BUSINESS  STUDIES

of inputs, technological breakthroughs employment or practice of a profession 
as well as introduction of newer as there is no “assured” payoff. In 
organisational forms for doing things practice, for example, when a person 
better, cheaper, faster and, in the quits a job to start on his own, he 
present context, in a manner that tries to calculate whether he or she 
causes the least harm to the ecology/ would be able to earn the same level 
environment. of income or not. To an observer, the 

risk of quitting a well-entrenched and 
(iv) Organisation of Production: promising career seems a “high” risk, 
Production, implying creation of form, but what the person has taken is a 
place, time personal utility, requires calculated risk. They are so sure of 
the combined utilisation of diverse their capabilities that they convert 50 
factors of production, land, labour, per cent chances into 100 per cent 
capital and technology. Entrepreneur, success. They avoid situations with 
in response to a perceived business higher risks as they hate failure as 
opportunity mobilises these resources anyone would do; they dislike lower 
into a productive enterprise or risk situations as business ceases to 
firm. It may be pointed out that the be a game/fun! Risk as such more 
entrepreneur may not be possessing than a financial stake, becomes a 
any of these resources; he may just matter of personal stake, where less 
have the ‘idea’ that he promotes among than expected performance causes 
the resource providers. In an economy displeasure and distress.
with a well-developed financial system, 
he has to convince just the funding 9.9 Intellectual Property Rights 
institutions and with the capital so (Ipr)
arranged he may enter into contracts Over the past two decades, intellectual 
of supply of equipment, materials, property rights have grown to a stature 
utilities (such as water and electricity) from where it plays a major role in 
and technology. What lies at the core the development of global economy. 
of organisation of production is the Intellectual property is everywhere, 
knowledge about availability and i.e., the music you listen to, the 
location of the resources as well as technology that makes your phone 
the optimum way to combine them. An work, the design of your favourite 
entrepreneur needs negotiation skills car, the logo on your sneakers, etc. It 
to raise these in the best interests of exists in all the things you can see—all 
the enterprise. are the products of human creativity 
(v) Risk-taking: It is generally believed and skill, such as inventions, books, 
that entrepreneurs take high risks. paintings, songs, symbols, names, 
Yes, individuals opting for a career images, or designs used in business, 
in entrepreneurship take a bigger etc. All inventions of creations begin 
risk that involved in a career in with an ‘idea’. Once the idea becomes 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   206 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 207

Startup India Scheme
The objective of Startup India Scheme is to build a strong ecosystem for nurturing 
innovation and startups in the country. The scheme specifically aims to:
	 (i)	 trigger an entrepreneurial culture and inculcate entrepreneurial values in the 

society at large and influence the mindset of people towards entrepreneurship,
	 (ii)	 create awareness about the charms of being an entrepreneur and the process 

of entrepreneurship.
	(iii)	 encourage more dynamic startups by motivating educated youth, scientists 

and technologists to consider entrepreneurship as a lucrative, preferred and 
viable career, and

	 (iv)	 Broad base the entrepreneurial supply by meeting specific needs of under 
represented target groups, like women, socially and economically backward 
communities, under represented regions to achieve inclusiveness and 
sustainable development to address the needs of the population at the bottom 
of the pyramid.

an actual product, i.e., Intellectual musical works, artistic works, such as 
Property, one can apply to the authority drawings, paintings, photographs and 
concerned under the Government sculptures and architectural designs.
of India for protection. Legal rights The most noticeable difference 
conferred on such products are called between intellectual property and other 
‘Intellectual Property Rights’ (IPR). forms of property is that intellectual 
Hence Intellectual property (IP) refers property is intangible, i.e., it cannot 
to products of human mind, hence, be defined or indentified by its own 
just like other types of property, the physical parameters. The scope and 
owners of IP can rent, give or sell it to definition of intellectual property is 
other people. constantly evolving with the inclusion 

Specifically, Intellectual property of newer forms. In recent times, 
(IP) refers to the creations of the geographical integrated circuits and 
human mind, like inventions, literary undisclosed indications, protection 
and artistic works, symbols, names, of plant varieties, information have 
images and designs used in business. been brought under the protection 

Intellectual property is divided of semi-conductors and umbrella of 
into two broad categories: industrial intellectual property. The following 
property, which includes inventions types of Intellectual Property Rights 
(patents), trademarks, industrial are recognised in India: Copyright, 
designs and geographical indications, Trademark, Geographical Indication, 
while the other is copyrights, which Patent,  Design, Plant Variety, 
includes literary and artistic works, Semiconductor Integrated Circuit 
such as novels, poems, plays, films, Layout Design. In addition to this, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   207 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



208 BUSINESS  STUDIES

traditional knowledge also fall under 9.9.1 Why is IPR Important for 
IP. You must have often taken Entrepreneurs?
homely remedies passed on from your 
grandparents and great-grandparents It encourages creation of new, path-
as cure for an ailment. These homely breaking inventions, such as cancer 
remedies are traditional medicines cure medicines. It incentivises inventors, 
that have been practiced in India for authors, creators, etc., for their work. 
past several centuries. They are also It allows the work created by a person 
known as ‘Traditional Knowledge’. to be distributed and communicated to 
Some examples of Indian traditional the public only with his/her permission. 
medicinal systems are Ayurveda, Therefore, it helps in the prevention 
Unani, Siddha and Yoga. Traditional of loss of income. It helps authors, 
Knowledge (TK) means the knowledge, creators, developers and owners to get 
systems, innovations and practices of 
local communities across the globe. recognition for their works.
Such wisdom has been developed and 
accumulated over the years and has 9.9.2 Types of IPs
been used and passed down through IPRs are extremely essential for 
several generations. A Traditional fostering creativity and contribute 
Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) has 
been developed by Government of India, towards the economic growth of a 
which is essentially a digital knowledge nation. Such rights allow creators 
repository of Traditional Knowledge that and inventors to have control over 
has existed in our ancient civilization, their creations and inventions. 
especially about medicinal plants and These rights create incentives for 
formulations used in Indian systems of artists, entrepreneurs and inventors 
medicine. This rich body of knowledge to further commit the necessary 
helps prevents wrongful patenting of resources to research, develop, and 
our traditional knowledge. market new technology and creative 

Another type of IP is Trade Secrets. works. The changing global economy 
You must have heard about the is creating unprecedented challenges 
popular beverage, Coca Cola. But and opportunities for continued 
do you know that the recipe of this progress in human development. 
beverage is only known to three 
people in the whole world? This secret There are business opportunities 
information is termed as a ‘Trade to market or sell IP worldwide. 
Secret’. A trade secret is basically Geographical borders present no 
any confidential information which impediments—consumers enjoy 
provides a competitive edge. Trade near immediate access to almost 
secrets in India are protected under everything. At such exciting times, 
the Indian Contract Act, 1872 and acts it is critical that we are aware about 
enacted by the Government of India the importance of IPRs and how it 
from time to time. affects daily life. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   208 06/09/2024   15:00:28



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 209

Let’s understand each IP now. use of the content which includes 
Copyright reproducing and distributing copies of 
Copyright is the right to “not copy”. the subject matter. The unique feature 
It is offered when an original idea is of copyright is that, the protection of 
expressed by the creator or author. It work arises automatically as soon 
is a right conferred upon the creators as the work comes into existence. 
of literary, artistic, musical, sound The registration of the content is 
recording and cinematographic film. not mandatory but is essential to 
The copyright is an exclusive right of exercise exclusive rights in case of an 
the creator to prohibit the unauthorised infringement.

What is protected under Copyright?

Literary work Pamphlets, Brochures, Novels, Books, Poems, Song Lyrics, 
Computer Programme

Artistic work Drawings, Paintings, Sculpture, Architectural Drawings, 
Technical Drawings, Maps, Logos

Dramatic work Including Dance or Mime, Screenplay, Musical Work, Sound 
Recording, Cinetographic films

Trademark of deceptive similarity which may be 
A trademark is any word, name, or defined as phonetic, structural or 

visual similarity. Trademark may be 
symbol (or their combination) that categorised as Conventional and Non-
lets us identify the goods made by an Conventional trademark—
individual, company, organization, etc. 	 (i)	 Conventional Trademark: Words, 
Trademarks also let us differentiate colour combination, label, logo, 
the goods of one company from packaging, shape of goods, etc.
another. In a single brand or logo, 	 (ii)	 Non-Conventional Trademark: 
trademarks can let you know many Under this category those marks 
things about a company’s reputation, are considered which were not 
goodwill, products and services. A considered distinctive previously 
trademark helps in distinguishing but started getting recognition 
similar products in the market from with the passage of time, i.e., 
its competitors. A competitor cannot sound mark, dynamic mark, etc.
use the same, or similar trademark Besides these, smell and taste 
to sell their product in the market are also considered for protection 
as the same fall under the concept as trademarks, in some parts of the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   209 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



210 BUSINESS  STUDIES

world, but they are not recognised as to the geographical origin of products 
trademarks in India. The registration of and accord much care to the specific 
trademark is not mandatory under the characteristics present in the products 
Trademark Act 1999, but registration that they purchase. In some cases, 
of trademark helps establish exclusive there is a difference between “place of 
rights over the mark. To register origin” and “geographical indications” 
the mark you can visit http://www. which suggests to consumers, that the 
ipindia.nic.in which is the website of product will have a particular quality 
the Indian Trademark Registry. or characteristic, that they may value.

Geographical Indication Patent
A Geographical Indication (GI) is A patent is a type of IPR which protects 
primarily an indication which identifies the scientific inventions (products and 
agricultural, natural or manufactured or process) which shows technical 
products (handicrafts, industrial advancement over the already known 
goods and food stuffs) originating products. A ‘patent’ is an exclusive 
from a definite geographical territory, right granted by the Government 
where a given quality, reputation or which provides the exclusive ‘right to 
other characteristic are essentially exclude’ all others and prevent them 
attributable to its geographical origin. from making, using, offering for sale, 
GIs are part of our collective and selling or importing the invention.
intellectual heritage that need to For an invention to be patentable, 
be protected and promoted. Goods it must be new, non-obvious to any 
protected and registered as GI are person who is skilled in the relevant 
categorised into agricultural products, field of technology and must be capable 
natural, handicrafts, manufactured of industrial application.
goods and food stuffs. Naga Mircha, 	 (i)	 It must be new, i.e., it should 

not already exist in the current 
Mizo Chill i ,  Shaphee Lanphee, knowledge anywhere in the world.
Moirangphee and Chakhesang Shawl, 	 (ii)	 It must be non-obvious to any 
Bastar Dhokra, Warli Paintings, person who is skilled in the 
Darjeeling Tea, Kangra Painting, relevant field of technology. That 
Nagpur Orange, Banaras Brocades is, the standard is a person 
and Sarees, and Kashmir Pashmina reasonably skilled in such field 
are some of the examples of GIs. The of study (Inventive Step).
importance of GIs has increasingly 	(iii)	 Finally, it must be capable of 
grown over the past few decades. GI industrial application, i.e., capable 
represents collective goodwill of a of being used or manufactured in 
geographical region, which has built the industry.
itself over centuries. Today, consumers Patent can only be filed to get 
are paying more and more attention rights over an invention and not 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   210 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 211

discovery. Newton saw the apple Patent creates a temporary 
fall and discovered gravity which is monopoly. Once the term of a patent 
considered to be a discovery.  On the expires, the invention is in public 
other hand, the father of telephone domain which means it is free for use 
Alexander Graham Bell invented by people. This prevents the patentee 
telephone. Thus when we use our from involving in anti-competitive 
ability to create something novel, or practices like creating monopoly, etc.
something unique into existence, it 
is called an invention, whereas the Design
process of highlighting the existence 
of an already existing thing is called A ‘design’ includes shape, pattern, 
discovery. and arrangement of lines or colour 

combination that is applied to any 
article. It is a protection given to 

What cannot be patented?
aesthetic appearance or eye-catching 

Scientific principles, contrary to features. The term of protection of a 
well established natural laws, 
formulation of abstract theory, design is valid for 10 years, which can 
frivolous inventions, prejudicial be renewed for further 5 years after 
to morality or injurious to public expiration of this term, during which 
health, method of agriculture or a registered design can only be used 
horticulture, method of treatment, after getting a license from its owner 
admixtures, traditional knowledge, and once the validity period is over, the 
incremental inventions without 
increase in efficacy and inventions design is in public domain.
related to atomic energy are some of 
the inventions not patentable under Plant Variety
Sections 3 and 4 of the Patents Act, 
1970. Plant Variety is essentially grouping 

plants into categories based on their 
botanical characteristics. It is a type 

The purpose of patent is to of variety which is bred and developed 
encourage innovation in the scientific by farmers. This helps in conserving, 
field. A patent grants exclusive rights improving and making available 
to the inventor for a period of 20 
years, during which anybody else who plant genetic resources. For example, 
wishes to use the patented subject- hybrid versions of potatoes. Such 
matter needs to seek permission from protection promotes investment in 
the patentee, by paying certain costs R&D, recognizes Indian farmers as 
for the commercial use of such an cultivators, conservers and breeders 
invention. This process of seeking as well as facilitates high quality seeds 
exclusive rights of the patentee for a and planting material. This leads to the 
fee is called Licensing. growth of the seed industry.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   211 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



212 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Semiconductor Integrated Circuits IP, not only on ethical grounds, but 
Layout Design also legal. After all, respect for others’ 
Have you ever seen a computer chip? IP begets respect for one’s IP. Start-
Are you aware of integrated circuits also up is an entrepreneurial venture that 
known as ‘ICs’? A semiconductor is an capitalises on developing, improving 
integral part of every computer chip. and innovating new products, processes 
Any product that contains transistors and services for the target audience. 
and other circuitry elements used and Start-ups today are responsible for 
formed on a semiconductor material, several disruptive technologies that 
as an insulating material, orinside the have changed the very way we think 
semiconductor material. Its design and live. With 20,000+ start-ups, India 
is to perform an electronic circuitry is said to have the third largest start-
function. up ecosystem in the world. The Start-

Whether a business is establishing up India initiative seeks to capture the 
its presence in the marketplace or is entrepreneurial streak in Indians, and 
already well-entrenched, protecting create a nation of job-creators, not job-
and managing its intellectual property seekers. Intellectual property rights 
is critical in taking the business ahead. can be critical in aiding new ventures 
Any business has to continuously monetise their ideas and establish 
innovate and think ahead, otherwise it competitiveness in the market by 
will simply stagnate and wither away. extending the protective umbrella 
It is equally essential to respect others’ offered by IPRs.

Key Terms

Small scale industries	 Cottage industries	 Tiny industries
Micro business industries	 Khadi industries	 Entrepreneurship

SUMMARY

Role of small business in India: Small Scale Industries play a very important 
role in the socio-economic development of the country. These industries 
account for 95 per cent of industrial units, contributing up to 40 per cent of the 
gross industrial value added and 45 per cent of the total exports. SSIs are the 
second largest employers of human resources, after agriculture and produce 
a variety of products for the economy. These units contribute to the balanced 
regional development of the country by using locally available material and 
indigenous technology. These provide ample scope for entrepreneurship; enjoy 
the advantage of low cost of production; quick decision making, and have 
quick adaptability and are best suited to customised production.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   212 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



MSME AND BUSINESS ENTREPRENEURSHIP 213

Role of small business in rural India: Small business units provide multiple 
source of income, in wide range of non-agricultural activities and provide 
employment opportunities in rural areas, especially for the traditional artisan 
and weaker sections of the society.
Entrepreneur: The terms ‘entrepreneur,’ ‘entrepreneurship’ and ‘enterprises’ 
can be understood by drawing an analogy with the structure of a sentence in 
English language. Entrepreneur is the person (the subject), entrepreneurship 
is the process (the verb) and enterprise is the creation of the person and the 
output of the process (the object).

EXERCISES

Very Short Answer Questions
1.	 Which year the MSMED Act passed?
2.	 What is the micro enterprise.
3.	 What is a cottage industry?
4.	 What is meant by Village and Khadi Industry?
5.	 Give any two characteristics of entrepreneurship development.

Short Answer Questions
1.	 What is MSME?
2.	 State the meaning of entrepreneurship?
3.	 MSME and Entrepreneurship are connected. Do you agree. Give two 

reasons. 
4.	 State the role of MSME in development of a country? 
5.	 What are the different parameters used to measure the size of MSME?
6.	 State the meaning of Village and Khadi industries?
7.	 State any three major problems faced by MSMEs? 

Long Answer Questions
1.	 How do small scale industries contribute to the socio-economic development 

of india? Discuss
2.	 Describe the role of small business in rural India.
3.	 Discuss the problems faced by small scale industries.
4.	 What measures has the government taken to solve the problem of finance 

and marketing in the small scale sector?
5.	 ‘Innovation is integral to MSME’. Discuss giving reasons to your answer. 
6.	 ‘Creativity and Innovation is the key to MSME’. Justify the statement. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   213 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



214 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Projects/Assignments
1.	 Prepare a profile of anyone MSME operating locally in your area. Prepare a 

questionnaire to find out: 
	 (a)	 The growth prospects of the unit.
	 (b)	 Use of local resources and indigenous skills used.
	 (c)	 The actual problems faced by an owner of a MSME. Prepare a project 

report on it.
	 (d)	 Marketing of products and services

2.	 Find out the GI tag(s) for your sate. Prepare a chart showing its unique 
attributes. Discuss in the class how GI tag for the product has led to regional 
development. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 9.indd   214 9/2/2022   2:20:50 PM



Chapter 10

##10##
Internal Trade

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 describe the meaning and types of internal trade;

•	 specify the services of wholesalers to manufactures and retailers;

•	 explain the services of retailers;

•	 classify the types of retailers;

•	 explain the forms of small scale and large scale retailers; and

•	 state the role of Chambers of Commerce and industry in the promotion 
of internal trade.

•	 officiate the implementation of GST

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   215 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



216 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Have you ever thought if there were no markets, how products of different 
manufacturers would reach us? We are all aware of our general provisions store 
round the corner which is selling items of our daily need. But is that enough? When 
we need to buy items of a specialised nature, we like to look at bigger markets or 
shops with variety. Our observation tells us that there are different types of shops 
selling different items or specialised goods and depending on our requirements 
we purchase from certain shops or markets. In rural areas, we may have noticed 
people selling their goods on the streets, these goods may range from vegetables to 
clothes. This is a completely different scene from what we see in the urban areas. In 
our country, all kinds of markets co-exist in harmony. With the advent of imported 
goods and multinational corporations, we have shops selling these products too. 
In big towns and cities, there are many retail shops selling particular branded 
products only. Another aspect of all this is, how these products reach the shops 
from the manufacturers? There must be some middlemen doing this job. Are they 
really useful or do prices increase because of them?

10.1 	 Introduction countries, on the other hand, is called 
Trade refers to buying and selling of external trade. The present chapter 
goods and services with the objective discusses in detail the meaning and 
of earning profit. Mankind has been nature of internal trade and explains 
engaged in trading, in some form or the its different types and the role of 
other, since early days of civilisation. chambers of commerce in promoting 
The importance of trade in modern internal trade.
times has increased as new products 
are being developed every day and are 10.2	 Internal Trade

being made available for consumption Buying and selling of goods and services 
throughout the world. No individual or within the boundaries of a nation are 
country can claim to be self-sufficient referred to as internal trade. Whether 
in producing all the goods and services the products are purchased from a 
required by it. Thus, each one is neighbourhood shop in a locality or a 
engaged in producing what it is best central market or a departmental store 
suited to produce and exchanging the or a mall or even from any door-to-door 
excess produce with others. salesperson or from an exhibition, all 

On the basis of geographical these are examples of internal trade 
location of buyers and sellers, trade as the goods are purchased from an 
can broadly be classified into two individual or establishment within a 
categories (i) Internal trade; and (ii) country. No custom duty or import 
External trade. Trade which takes duty is levied on such trade as goods 
place within a country is called internal are part of domestic production and 
trade. Trade between two or more are meant for domestic consumption. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   216 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 217

Generally, payment has to be made in 10.3	 Wholesale Trade
the legal tender of the country or any As discussed in the previous section, 
other acceptable currency. wholesale trade refers to buying and 

Internal trade can be classified into selling of goods and services in large 
two broad categories viz., (i) wholesale quantities for the purpose of resale or 
trade and (ii) retail trade. Generally, for intermediate use.
products, which are to be distributed Wholesaling is concerned with 
to a large number of buyers who the activities of those persons or 
are located over a wide geographical es tab l i shments  which se l l  to 
area, it becomes very difficult for the retailers and other merchants, and/

or to industrial, institutional and 
producers to reach all the consumers commercial users but who do not 
or users directly. For example, if sell in significant amount to ultimate 
vegetable oil or bathing soap or salt consumers. Wholesalers serve as an 
produced in a factory in any part of important link between manufacturers 
the country are to reach millions of and retailers. They enable the 
consumers throughout the country, producers not only to reach large 
the help of wholesalers and retailers number of buyers spread over a wide 
becomes very important. Purchase geographical area (through retailers), 

but also  to perform a variety of 
and sale of goods and services in large functions in the process of distribution 
quantities for the purpose of resale of goods and services. They generally 
or intermediate use is referred to as take the title of the goods and bear 
wholesale trade. the business risks by purchasing and 

On the other hand, purchase selling the goods in their own name. 
and sale of goods in relatively small They purchase in bulk and sell in small 
quantities, generally to the ultimate lots to retailers or industrial users. 
consumers, is referred to as retail They undertake various activities such 

as grading of products, packing into 
trade. Traders dealing in wholesale smaller lots, storage, transportation, 
trade are called wholesale traders promotion of goods, collection of 
and those dealing in retail trade are market information, collection of small 
called retailers. Both retailers and and scattered orders of retailers and 
wholesalers are important marketing distribution of supplies to them. They 
intermediaries who perform very useful also relieve the retailers of maintaining 
functions in the process of exchange of large stock of articles and extend credit 
goods and services  between producers facilities to them. Most of the functions 

performed by wholesalers are such 
and users or ultimate consumers. which cannot be eliminated. If there 
Internal trade aims at equitable are no wholesalers, these functions 
distribution of goods within a nation shall have to be performed either by 
speedily and at reasonable cost. the manufacturers or the retailers.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   217 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



218 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Services of Wholesalers purchased by them. To that extent, the 
Wholesalers provide various services manufacturers need not block their 
to manufacturers as well as retailers capital in the stocks. Sometimes they 
and provide immense help in the also advance money to the producers 
distribution of goods and services. for bulk orders placed by them.

(iv) Expert advice: As the wholesalers 
By making the products available at are in direct contact with the retailers, 
a place where these are needed and they are in a position to advice the 
at a time when these are needed for manufacturers about various aspects 
consumption or use, they provide both including customer’s tastes and 
the time and place utility. The various preferences, market conditions, 
services of wholesalers to different competitive activities and the features 
sections are discussed below: preferred by the buyers. They serve 
10.3.1	 Services to Manufacturers as an important source of market 

information on these and related 
Major services offered by wholesalers aspects.
to the producers of goods and services (v)  Help in marketing function: 
are given as below: The wholesalers take care of the 
(i) Facilitating large scale production: distribution of goods to a number of 
Wholesalers collect small orders retailers who, in turn, sell these goods 
from a number of retailers and pass to a large number of customers spread 
on the pool of such orders to the over a large geographical area. This 
manufacturers and make purchases relieves the manufacturers from many 
in bulk quantities. This enables the of the marketing activities and enable 
producers to undertake production on them to concentrate on the production 
a large scale and take advantage of the activity.
economies of scale. (vi) Facilitate production continuity: 
(ii)  Bearing risk: The wholesale The wholesalers facilitate continuity of 
merchants deal in goods in their own production activity throughout the 
name, take delivery of the goods and year by purchasing the goods as and 
keep the goods purchased in large lots when these are produced and storing 
in their warehouses. In the process, them till the time these are demanded 
they bear variety of risks such as the by retailers or consumers in the 
risk of fall in prices, theft, pilferage, market.
spoilage, fire, etc. To that extent, they (vii)  Storage:  Wholesalers take 
relieve the manufacturers from bearing delivery of goods when these are 
these risks. produced in factory and keep them 
(iii)  Financial assistance:  The in their godowns/warehouses. This 
wholesa lers  prov ide  f inanc ia l reduces the burden of manufacturers 
assistance to the manufacturers of providing for storage facilities for the 
in the sense that they generally finished products. They thus provide 
make cash payment for the goods time utility. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   218 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 219

10.3.2	 Services to Retailers (v)  Risk sharing: The wholesalers 
The important services offered by purchase in bulk and sell in relatively 
manufacturers to the retailers are small quantities to the retailers. Being 
described as below: able to purchase merchandise in 
(i)  Availability of goods: Retailers smaller quantities, retailers are in a 
have to maintain adequate stock position to avoid the risk of storage, 
of varied commodities so that they pilferage, obsolescence, reduction in 
can offer variety to their customers. prices and demand fluctuations in 
The wholesalers make the products respect of larger quantites of goods 
of various manufacturers readily that they would have to purchase in 
available to the retailers. This relieves case the services of wholesalers are 
the retailers of the work of collecting not available.
goods from several producers and 
keeping big inventory of the same. 10.4	R etail Trade

(ii) Marketing support: The whole- A retailer is a business enterprise 
salers perform various marketing that is engaged in the sale of goods 
functions and provide support to the and services directly to the ultimate 
retailers. They undertake advertising consumers. The retailer normally buys 
and other sales promotional activities goods in large quantities from the 
to induce customers to purchase the wholesalers and sells them in small 
goods. The retailers are benefitted as it quantities to the ultimate consumers. 
helps them in increasing the demand The retails represents the final  stage 
for various new products. in the distribution where goods are 
(iii) Grant of credit: The wholesalers transferred from the hands of the 
generally extend credit facilities to manufacturers or wholesalers to the 
their regular customers. This enables final consumers or users. Retailing is, 
the retailers to manage their business thus, that branch of business which 
with relatively small amount of working is devoted to the sale of goods and 
capital. services to the ultimate consumers for 
(iv)  Specialised knowledge: The their personal and non-business use. 
wholesalers specialise in one line of There may be different ways of 
products and know the pulse of the selling the goods viz., personally, 
market. They pass on the benefit of on telephone, or through vending 
their specialised knowledge to the machines. Also, the products may be 
retailers. They inform the retailers sold at different places, viz., in a store, 
about the new products, their uses, at the customer’s house or any other 
quality, prices, etc. They may also place. Some of the common situations 
advise them on the decor of the retail that we encounter in our daily life, 
outlet, allocation of shelf space and for example, are the sale of ball pens 
demonstration of certain products. or some magic medicine or book of 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   219 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



220 BUSINESS  STUDIES

jokes in the roadways buses; the (i) Help in distribution of goods: A 
sale of cosmetics/detergent powder, retailer’s most important service to the 
on door-to-door sales basis; and the wholesalers and manufacturers is to 
sale of vegetables by the road side provide help in the distribution of their 
by a small farmer. But as long as the products by making these available 
goods are sold to ultimate consumers, to the final consumers, who may be 
these will be treated as cases of retail scattered over a large geographic area. 
selling. Thus, irrespective of ‘how’ the They thus provide place utility.
products are sold or ‘where’ the sale is (ii)  Personal selling: In the process 
made, if the sales are made directly to of sale of most consumer goods, some 
the consumers, it will be considered amount of personal selling effort is 
as retailing.

A retailer performs different necessary. By undertaking personal 
functions in the distribution of goods selling efforts, the retailers relieve the 
and services. He/she purchases a producers of this activity and greatly 
variety of products from the wholesale help them in the process of actualising 
distributors and others, arranges for the sale of the products.
proper storage of goods, sells the goods (iii) Enabling large-scale operations: 
in small quantities, bears  business On account of retailer’s services, the 
risks, grades the products, collects manufacturers and wholesalers are 
market information, extends credit to freed from the trouble of making 
the buyers and promotes the sale of individual sales to consumers in 
products through displays, participation small quantities. This enables them 
in various schemes, etc. to operate on, at relatively large scale, 

and thereby fully concentrate on their 
Services of Retailers other activities.
Retailers serve as an important link (iv) Collecting market information: 
between the producers and final As retailers remain in direct and 
consumers in the distribution of constant touch with the buyers, 
products and services. They provide they serve as an important source of 
useful services to the consumers, collecting market information about 
wholesalers and manufacturers. Some the tastes, preferences and attitudes 
of the important services of retailers of customers. Such information is 
are described as below: considered very useful in taking 

important marketing decisions in an 
10.4.1	 Services to Manufacturers organisation.

and Wholesalers (v)   Help in promotion:  From 
The invaluable services that the time-to-time, manufacturers and 
retailers render to the wholesalers and distributors have to carry on various 
producers are given as here under: promotional activities in order to 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   220 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 221

increase the sale of their products. selling efforts, retailers provide 
For example, they have to advertise important information about the 
their products and offer short-term arrival, special features, etc., of new 
incentives in the form of coupons, products to the customers. This 
free gifts, sales contests, and so on. serves as an important factor in the 
Retailers participate in these activities buying decision making process of the 
in various ways and, thereby, help in purchase of such goods.
promoting the sale of the products.

(iii) Convenience in buying: Retailers 
10.4.2	 Services to Consumers generally buy goods in large quantities 
Some of the important services of and sell these in small quantities, 
retailers from the point of view of according to the requirements of their 
consumers are as follows : customers. Also, they are normally 

situated very near to the residential 
(i) Regular availability of products: areas and remain open for long hours. 
The most important service of a This offers great convenience to the 
retailer to consumers is to maintain customers in buying products of their 
regular availability of various products requirements.
produced by different manufacturers. 
This enables the buyers to buy products (iv) Wide selection: Retailers generally 
as and when needed. keep stock of a variety of products of 
(ii)  New products information: different manufacturers. This enables 
By arranging for effective display of the consumers to make their choice 
products and through their personal out of a wide selection of goods.

Terms of Trade
The following are the main terms used in the trade
	 1.	 Cash on delivery (COD):- It refers to a type of transaction in which payment 

for goods or services is made at the time of delivery. If the buyer is unable 
to make payment when the goods or services are delivered then it will be 
returned to the seller.

	 2.	 Free on Board or Free on Rail (FoB or FOR):- It rerers to a contract between 
the seller and the buyer in which all the expenses up to the point of delivery 
to a carrier (it may be a ship, rail, lorry, etc.) are to be borne by seller.

	 3.	 Cost, Insurance and Freight (CFF):- It is the price of goods which includes 
not only the cost of goods but also the insurance and frieght charges payable 
on goods upto destination port.

	 4.	 Errors and Omissions Excepted(E&OE):- It refers to that term which is used 
in trade documents to say that mistakes and things that have been forgotten 
should be taken into account.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   221 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



222 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(v)  After-sales services: Retailers 10.5.1	 Itinerant Retailers
provide important after-sales services 
in the form of home delivery, supply Itinerant retailers are traders who do 
of spare parts and attending to not have a fixed place of business to 
customers. This becomes an important operate from. They keep on moving 
factor in the buyers’ decision for repeat with their wares from street to street or 
purchase of the products. place to place, in search of customers. 

(vi)  Provide credit facilities: The Characteristics
retailers sometimes provide credit 
facilities to their regular buyers. This 	 (a)	 They are small traders operating 
enables the latter to increase their level with limited resources.
of consumption and, thereby, their 	 (b)	 They normally deal in consumer 
standard of living. products of daily use such as 

toiletry products, fruits and 
10.5	T ypes of Retailing Trade vegetables, and so on.
There are many types of retailers in 	 (c)	 The emphasis of such traders is 
India. For proper understanding, it on providing greater customer 
would be useful, to classify them into service by making the products 
certain common categories. Different available at the very doorstep of 
classifications have been used by the customers.
experts to categorise retailers into 	 (d)	 As they do not have any fixed 
different types. For example, on the business establishment to operate 
basis of ‘size of business’, they may from, these retailers have to 
be categorised into large, medium and keep their limited inventory of 
small retailers. On the basis of ‘type of merchandise either at home or at 
ownership’, they may be categorised some other place.
into ‘sole trader’, ‘partnership firm’, Some of the most common types 
‘cooperative store’ and ‘company’. of itinerant retailers operating in India 
Similarly, on the basis of  ‘merchandise are as below:
handled’, the different classifications (i)  Peddlers and hawkers: Peddlers 
may be ‘speciality store’, ‘supermarket’ and hawkers are probably amongst the 
and ‘departmental store’. Another oldest form of retailers in the market 
common basis of classification is place who have not lost their utility 
whether or not they have a fixed place even during the modern times. They 
of business. On this basis, there are are small producers or petty traders 
two categories of retailers: who carry the products on a bicycle, a 

(a)	 Itinerant retailers, and hand cart, a cycle-rickshaw or on their 
(b)	 Fixed shop retailers heads, and move from place to place to 
Both these types of retailers have sell their merchandise at the doorstep 

been described in detail  in the sections of the customers. They generally deal 
that follow here after. in non-standardised and low-value 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   222 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 223

products such as toys, vegetables and of a temporary nature in a business 
fruits, fabrics, carpets, snacks and locality. They keep on changing their 
ice creams, etc. They are also found business from one locality to another, 
in streets of residential areas, places depending upon the potentiality of the 
of exhibitions or meals, and outside area. However, the change of place 
schools, during a lunch break. is not as frequent as in the case of 

The main advantage of this form of hawkers or market traders. They deal 
retailing is the provision of convenient in consumer items as well as services 
service to the consumers. However, such as repair of watches, shoes, 
one should be careful in dealing with buckets etc.
them, as the products they deal in are 
not always reliable in terms of quality 10.5.2	 Fixed Shop Retailers
and price. This is the most common type of 
(ii) Market traders: Market traders retailing in the market place. As is 
are the small retailers who open their evident from the name, these are 
shops at different places on fixed retail shops who maintain permanent 
days or dates, such as every Saturday establishment to sell their merchandise. 
or alternate Saturdays, and so on. They, therefore, do not move from 
These traders may be dealing in one place to place to serve their customers. 
particular line of merchandise, say Some of the other characteristics of 
fabrics or ready-made garments, toys, such traders are:
or crockery, or alternatively, they 
may be general merchants. They are Characteristics
mainly catering to lower-income group 	(a)	Compared with the itinerant 
of customers and deal in low-priced traders, normally they have 
consumer items of daily use. greater resources and operate on 
(iii)  Street traders (pavement a relatively large scale. However, 
vendors): Street traders are the there are different size groups of 
small retailers who are commonly fixed shop retailers, varying from 
found at places where huge floating very small to very large.
population gathers, for example, near 	(b)	These retailers may be dealing 
railway stations and bus stands, and in different products, including 
sell consumer items of common use, consumer durables as well as non-
such as stationery items, eatables, durables. 
ready-made garments, newspapers 	(c)	 This category of retailers has 
and magazines. They are different from greater credibility in the minds 
market traders in the sense that they of customers, and they are in a 
do not change their place of business position to provide greater services 
so frequently. to the customers such as home 
(iv) Cheap jacks: Cheap jacks are petty delivery, guarantees, repairs, credit 
retailers who have independent shops facilities, availability of spares, etc.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   223 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



224 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Types of products. For example, shops selling 
The fixed-shop retailers can be children’s garments, men’s wear, ladies 
classified into two distinct types on shoes, toys and gifts, school uniforms, 
the basis of the size of their operations. college books or consumer electronic 
These are: goods, etc. These are some of the 

(a) small shop-keepers, and commonly found stores of this type in 
(b) large retailers. the marketplace.
The different types of retailers The speciality shops are generally 

falling under the above two broad located in a central place where a large 
heads are described as follows: number of customers can be attracted, 

and they provide a wide choice to the 
Fixed Shop Small Retailers customers in the selection of goods.

(iii)  Street stall holders: These small 
(i)  General stores: General stores vendors are commonly found at street 
are most commonly found in a local crossings or other places where flow of 
market and residential areas. As the traffic is heavy. They attract floating 
name indicates, these shops carry customers and deal mainly in goods 
stock of a variety of products required of cheap variety like hosiery products, 
to satisfy the day-to-day needs of toys, cigarettes, soft drinks, etc. They 
the consumers residing in nearby get their supplies from local suppliers 
localities. Such stores remain open for as well as wholesalers. The total area 
long hours at convenient timings and covered by a stall is very limited and, 
often provide credit facilities to some therefore, they handle goods on a very 
of their regular customers. small scale. Their main advantage is 

The biggest advantage of such in providing convenient service to the 
stores is in terms of convenience to customers in buying some of the items 
the customers in buying products of of their needs.
daily use such as grocery items, soft (iv)  Second-hand goods shop: These 
drinks, toiletry products, stationery shops deal in second-hand or used 
and confectionery. As most of their goods, like books, clothes, automobiles, 
customers are residents of the furniture and other household goods. 
same locality, an important factor Generally persons with modest means 
contributing to their success is the purchase goods from such shops. The 
image of the owner and the rapport he goods are sold at lower prices. Such 
has established with them. shops may also stock rare objects of 
(ii)  Speciality shops: This type of historical value and antique items 
retail store is, of late, becoming very which are sold at rather heavy prices 
popular, particularly in urban areas. to people who have special interest in 
Instead of selling a variety of products such antique goods.
of different types, these retail stores The shops, selling second-hand 
specialise in the sale of a specific line goods may be located at street crossings 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   224 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 225

or in busy streets in the form of a stall Some of the important features 
having very little structure —a table of a departmental store are 
or a temporary platform to display as follows:
the books or may have reasonably 	 (a)	 A modern departmental store 
good infrastructure, as in the case of may provide all facilities such as 
those selling furniture or used cars or restaurant, travel and information 
scooters or motorcycles. bureau, telephone booth, rest-

rooms, etc. As such they try 
Fixed shop — Large stores to provide maximum service 
	 1.	 Departmental stores to higher class of customers 
		  A departmental store is a large for whom price is of secondary 

establishment offering a wide importance.
variety of products, classified into 	 (b)	 These stores are generally located 
well-defined departments, aimed at a central place in the heart 
at satisfying practically every of a city, which caters to a large 
customer’s need under one roof. number of customers.
It has a number of departments, 	 (c)	 As the size of these stores is very 
each one confining its activities to large, they are generally formed as 
one kind of product. For example, a joint stock company managed 
there may be separate departments by a board of directors. There is 
for toiletries, medicines, furniture, a managing director assisted by 
groceries, electronics, clothing a general manager and several 
and dress material within a store. department managers.
Thus, they satisfy diverse market 	 (d)	 A departmental store combines 
segments with a wide variety both the functions of retailing 
of goods and services. It is not a s  we l l  a s  wa r ehous ing . 
uncommon for a department They purchase directly from 
store in the United States of manufacturers and operate 
America to carry ‘needle to an separate warehouses. That 
aeroplane’ or ‘all shopping under way they help in eliminating 
one roof.’  Everything from ‘a pin undesirable middlemen between 
to an elephant’ is the spirit behind the producers and the customers.
a typical department store. 	 (e)	 They have centralised purchasing 
In India real departmental stores arrangements. All the purchases 
have not yet come in a big way in a department store are made 
in the retailing business. However, central ly  by the purchase 
some stores on this line in department of the store, whereas 
India include ‘Akberally’ in Mumbai sales are decentralised in different 
and ‘Spencers’ in Chennai. departments.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   225 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



226 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Advantages Limitations
The major advantages of retailing However, there are certain limitations 
through departmental stores may be of this type of retailing. These are 
listed as follows: described as follows:
( i )   Att ract  large  number  o f (i)  Lack of personal attention: 
customers: As these stores are usually Because of the large-scale operations, 
located at central places, they attract a it is very difficult to provide adequate 
large number of customers during the personal attention to the customers in 
best part of the day. these stores.
(ii)  Convenience in buying: By (ii)  High operating cost: As these 
offering large variety of goods under stores give more emphasis on providing 
one roof, the departmental stores services, their operating costs tend to 
provide great convenience to customers be on the higher side. These costs, 
in buying almost all goods of their in turn, make the prices of the goods 
requirements at one place. As a result, high. They are, therefore, not attractive 
customers do not have to run from to the lower income group of people.
one place to another to complete their (iii)  High possibility of loss: As a 
shopping. result of high operating costs and 
(iii)   Attractive  services:   A large-scale operations, the chances 
departmental store aims at providing of incurring losses in a departmental 
maximum services to the customers. store are high. For example, if there is 

any change in the tastes of customers 
Some of the services offered by it or latest fashions, it necessitates 
include home delivery of goods, selling of such out-of-fashion articles 
execution of telephone orders, grant in clearance sale, to reduce the huge 
of credit facilities and provision for inventory of goods built up.
restrooms,  te lephone booths , (iv)  Inconvenient location: As 
restaurants, saloons, etc. a departmental store is generally 
( iv )   Economy of  large -sca le situated at a central location, it is not 
operations: As these stores are convenient for the purchase of goods 
organised at a very large scale, the that are needed at short notice.
benefits of large scale operations, In spite of some of these limitations 
particularly, in respect of purchase of the departmental stores have been 
goods are available to them. popular in some of the western 
(v )   Promotion of  sa les :  The countries of the world because of 
departmental stores are in a position to their benefits to a certain class of 
spend considerable amount of money customers.
on advertising and other promotional 	 2.	 Chain Stores or Multiple Shops: 
activities, which help in boosting their Chain stores or multiple shops 
sales. are networks of retail shops that 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   226 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



Internal Trade 227

are owned and operated by daily reports to the head office 
manufacturers or intermediaries. in respect of the sales, cash 
Under this type of arrangement, deposits, and the require-ments 
a number of shops with similar of the stock.
appearance are established in 	 (d)	 All the branches are controlled by 
localities, spread over different the head office, which is concerned 
parts of the country. These with formulating the policies and 
different shops normally deal getting them implemented.
in standardised and branded 	 (e)	 The prices of goods in such 
consumer products, which have shops are fixed and all sales 
rapid sales turnover. These shops are made on cash basis.  The 
are run by the same organisation cash realised from the sales of 
and have identical merchandising merchandise is deposited daily 

into a local bank account on 
strategies, with identical products behalf of the head office, and a 
and displays. Some of the report is sent to the head office 
important features of such shops in this regard.
may be described as follows: 	 (f)	 The head office normally appoints 

	 (a)	 These shops are located in inspectors, who are concerned 
fairly populous localities, where with day-to-day supervision of 
sufficient number of customers the shops, in respect of quality 
can be approached.  The idea of customer service provided, 
is to serve the customers at a adherence to the policies of the 
point which is nearest to their head office, and so on.
residence or work place, rather The chain operation is most effective 
than attracting them to a central in handling high-volume merchandise, 
place. whose sales are relatively constant 

	 (b)	 The manufacturing/procurement throughout the year. In India, Bata 
of merchandise for all the retail Shoe stores DCM, Nirula’s Raymonds 
units is centralised at the head etc., are typical examples of such 
office, from where the goods are shops.
despatched to each of these shops 
according to their requirements. Advantages
This results in savings in the cost Multiple shops are offering various 
of operation of these stores. advantages to the consumers, which 

	 (c)	 Each retail shop is under the are described as follows:
direct supervision of a Branch (i)  Economies of scale: As there is 
Manager, who is held responsible central procurement, the multiple-shop 
for its day-to-day management. organisation enjoys the economies of 
The Branch Manager sends scale.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   227 18-04-2024   11:38:20



228 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(ii)  Elimination of middlemen: By of other manufacturers. In that way 
selling directly to the consumers, the the consumers get only a limited choice 
multiple-shop organisation is able to of goods. This, however is not the case 
eliminate unnecessary middlemen in with retailer owned chain stores such 
the sale of goods and services. as Big Apple or Reliance Retail which 
(iii) No bad debts: Since all the sales sell products of a large number of 
in these shops are made on cash basis, manufacturers.
there are no losses on account of bad (ii)  Lack of initiative: The personnel 
debts. managing the multiple shops have to 
(iv)  Transfer of goods: The goods obey the instructions received from 
not in demand in a particular locality the head office.   This makes them 
may be transferred to another locality habitual of looking up to the head 
where it is in demand.  This reduces office for guidance on all matters, and 
the chances of dead stock in these takes away the initiative from them to 
shops. use their creative skills to satisfy the 
(v)  Diffusion of risk: The losses customers.
incurred by one shop may be covered (iii)  Lack of personal touch: Lack of 
by profits in other shops, reducing the initiative in the employees sometimes 
total risk of an organisation. leads to indifference and lack of 
(vi)  Low cost: Because of centralised personal touch in them.
purchasing, elimination of middlemen, (iv)  Difficult to change demand: 
centralised promotion of sales and If the demand for the merchandise 
increased sales, the multiple shops handled by multiple shops change 
have lower cost of business. rapidly, the management may have 
(vii)  Flexibility: Under this system, to sustain huge losses because of 
if a shop is not operating at a profit, large stocks lying unsold at the 
the management may decide to close it central depot.
or shift it to some other place without 
really affecting the profitability of the Difference between Departmental 
organisation as a whole. stores and Multiple shops

Limitations Although both these types of retail 
organisations are large establishments, 

(i)  Limited selection of goods: there are certain differences between 
Some of the multiple shops deal only the two. Such differences are given 
in limited range of products. This is here below:
especially the problem with the chain (i)  Location: A departmental store 
stores which are owned and operated is located at a central place, where 
by manufacterers, and as such mostly a large number of customers can be 
sell the products produced by the attracted to it.  However, the multiple 
themselves. They do not sell products stores are located at a number of 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   228 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 229

places for approaching a large number (vi) Credit facilities: All sales in the 
of customers.  Thus, central location multiple shops are made strictly on cash 
is not necessary for a multiple shop. basis. In contrast, the departmental 
(ii) Range of products:  Departmental stores may provide credit facilities to 
stores aim at satisfying all the needs some of their regular customers.
of customers under one roof. As (vii) Flexibility:  As the departmental 
such, they have to carry a variety of stores deal in a wide variety of products, 
products of different types. However, they have certain flexibility in respect 
the multiple stores generally aim to of the line of goods marketed.  However, 
satisfy the requirements of customers there is not much scope for flexibility 
relating to a specified range of their in the chain stores, which deal only in 
products only. limited line of products.
( i i i )   S e r v i c e s  o f f e r e d :  Th e 
departmental stores lay great emphasis Mail Order Houses
on providing maximum service to their 
customers.   Some of the services, Mail order houses are the retail 
provided by them include alteration outlets that sell their merchandise 
of garments, restaurant and so on. through mail. There is generally no 
As against this, the multiple shops direct personal contact between the 
provide very limited service confined to buyers and the sellers in this type of 
guarantees and repairs if  the sold out trading. For obtaining orders, potential 
goods turn out to be defective. customers are approached through 
(iv)  Pricing: The multiple shop advertisements in newspapers or 
chains sell goods at fixed prices and magazines, circulars, catalogues, 
maintain uniform pricing policies samples and bills, and price lists 
for all the shops. The departmental sent to them by post. All the relevant 
stores, however, do not have uniform information about the products 
pricing policy for all the departments; 
rather they have to occasionally offer such as the price, features, delivery 
discounts on certain products and terms, terms of payment, etc., are 
varieties to clear their stock. described in the advertisement. On 
(v) Class of customers: The depart- receiving the orders, the items are 
mental stores cater to the needs carefully scrutinised with respect to 
of relatively high income group of the specifications asked for by the 
customers who care more for the buyers and are complied with through 
services provided rather than the prices the post office.
of the product.  The multiple shops, There can be different alternatives 
on the other hand, cater to different for receiving payments. First, the 
types of customers, including those customers may be asked to make 
belonging to the lower income groups, full payment in advance. Second, the 
who are interested in buying quality goods may be sent by Value Payable 
goods at reasonable prices. Post (VPP). Under this arrangement, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   229 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



230 BUSINESS  STUDIES

the goods are sent through post and infrastructural facilities. Therefore, 
are delivered to the customers only it can be started with relatively low 
on making full payment for the same. amount of capital.
Third, the goods may be sent through (ii)  Elimination of middle men: 
a bank, which is instructed to deliver The biggest advantage of mail-order 
the articles to the customers. In this business from the point of view 
arrangement there is no risk of bad of consumers is that unnecessary 
debt, as the goods are handed over middlemen between the buyers and 
to the buyers only after he makes full sellers are eliminated. This may result 
payment. However, there is a need in lot of savings both to the buyers as 
to ensure the buyers that the goods well as to the sellers.
despatched are in accordance with (iii)  Absence of bad debt: Since the 
their specifications. mail order houses do not extend credit 

This type of business is not suitable facilities to the customers, there are 
for all types of products. For example, no chances of any bad debt on 
goods that are perishable in nature or account of non payment of cash by 
are bulky and cannot be easily handled, the customers.
are not recommended for mail-house (iv) Wide reach: Under this system 
trading. Only the goods that can be the goods can be sent to all the places 
(i) graded and standardised, (ii) easily having postal services. This opens wide 
transported at low cost, (iii) have scope for business as a large number 
ready demand in the market, (iv) are of people throughout the country can 
available in large quantity throughout be served through mail.
the year, (v) involve least possible (v) Convenience: Under this system 
competition in the market and (vi) goods are delivered at the doorstep of 
can be described through pictures the customers. This results in great 
etc., are suitable for this type of convenience to the customers in 
trading. Another important point in buying these products.
this regard is that mail house business 
cannot be successfully carried out Limitations
unless education is wide spread. (i)  Lack of personal contact: As 
It is so because only the literate there is no personal contact between 
people can be reached through the buyers and the sellers under the 
advertisements and other forms of system of mail order selling, there 
written communication. are greater possibilities of mis-
Advantages understanding and mistrust between 

the two. The buyers are not in a 
(i)  Limited capital requirement: Mail position to examine the products 
order business does not require heavy before buying and the sellers cannot 
expenditure on building and other pay personal attention to the likes and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   230 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 231

dislikes of the buyers and cannot clear without postal facilities, this type of 
all their doubts through catalogues business has limited prospects.
and advertisements.
(ii) High promotion cost: The mail Consumer Cooperative Store
order business has to rely heavily on 
advertisements and other methods A consumer cooperative store is an 
of promotion in order to inform and organisation owned, managed and 
persuade the potential buyers to buy controlled by consumers themselves. 
their products. As a result, there is The objective of such stores is to 
heavy expenditure on promotion of reduce the number of middlemen 
the products. who increase the cost of produce, and 
(iii)  No after sales service: In mail thereby provide service to the members. 
order selling, the buyers and sellers The cooperative stores generally 
may be located very far away from each buy in large quantity, directly from 
other and there is no personal contact manufacturers or wholesalers and sell 
between the two. As a result, there is them to the consumers at reasonable 
absence of after sales services which prices. Since the middleman are 
is so important for the satisfaction of eliminated or reduced, the members 
the customers. get products of good quality at cheaper 
(iv) No credit facilities: The mail order rates. The profits earned by consumer 
houses do not provide credit facilities cooperative stores during a year 
to the buyers. Thus, customers with are utilised for declaring bonus to 
limited means may not be interested members and for strengthening the 
in this type of trading. general reserves and general welfare 
(v)  Delayed delivery: There is no funds or similar funds for social and 
immediate delivery of goods to the educational benefits of the members.
customers, as receipt and execution of To start a consumer cooperative 
order through mail takes its own time. store, at least 10 people have to 
(vi)  Possibility of abuse: This type of come together and form a voluntary 
business provides greater possibility association and get it registered under 
of abuse to dishonest traders to cheat the Cooperative Societies Act. The 
the customers by making false claims capital of a cooperative store is raised 
about the products or not honouring by issue of shares to members. The 
the commitments made through hand management of the store is democratic 
bills or advertisements. and entrusted to an elected managing 
(vii)  High dependence on postal committee where one man one vote is 
services: The success of mail order the rule. The liability of the members of 
business depends heavily on the a cooperative store is generally limited 
availability of efficient postal services to the extent of the capital contributed 
at a place.  But in a vast country like by them. To ensure fair management 
ours, where many places are still of funds, the accounts of the stores are 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   231 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



232 BUSINESS  STUDIES

audited by the Registrar of Cooperative (vi)  Convenient location:  The 
Societies or a person authorised by consumer cooperative stores are 
him/her. generally opened at convenient public 

places where the members and others 
Advantages can easily buy the products as per 
The major advantages of a consumer their requirements.
cooperative store are as follows: Limitations
(i)  Ease information: It is easy to 
form a consumer cooperative society. The limitations of consumer cooperative 
Any ten people can come together stores are given as below:
to form a voluntary association and ( i )   Lack of initiative:  As the 
get themselves registered with the cooperative stores are managed by 
Registrar of Cooperative Societies by people who work on honorary basis, 
completing certain formalities. there is a lack of sufficient initiative 
(ii)  Limited liability: The liability and motivation amongst them to work 
of the members in a cooperative more effectively.
store is limited to the extent of the (ii)  Shortage of funds: The primary 
capital contributed by them. Over source of funds for a cooperative 
and above that amount, they are not store is the money raised from 
liable personally to pay for the debts members by issue of shares. The 
of society, in case the liabilities are stores generally face shortage of funds 
greater than its assets. as membership is limited. This comes 
(iii)  Democratic management: in the way of growth and expansion of 
Cooperative societies are democratically the cooperative stores.
managed through management (iii)  Lack of patronage: The members 
committees which are elected by the of the cooperative stores generally do 
members. Each member has one vote, not patronise them regularly. As a 
irrespective of the number of shares result of this, the stores are not able 
held by him/her. to operate successfully.
(iv)  Lower prices: A cooperative store (iv)  Lack of business training: The 
purchases goods directly from the people entrusted with the management 
manufacturers or wholesalers and of cooperative stores lack expertise as 
sells them to members and others. they are not trained in running the 
Elimination of middlemen results in 
lower prices for the consumer goods stores efficiently.
to the members.
(v)   Cash sales: Super Markets

 The consumer 
cooperative stores normally sell A super market is a large retailing 
goods on cash basis. As a result, the business unit selling wide variety 
requirement for working capital is of consumer goods on the basis of 
reduced. low price appeal, wide variety and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   232 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 233

assortment, self-service and heavy of retail stores because of bulk 
emphasis on merchandising appeal. purchasing, lower operational 
The goods traded are generally food cost, and low profit margins.
products and other low priced, branded 	 (v)	 The goods are sold on cash basis 
and widely used consumer products only.
such as grocery, utensils, clothes, 	(vi)	 The super markets are generally 
electronic appliances, household located at central locations to 
goods, and medicines. Super markets secure high turnover.
are generally situated at the main 
shopping centres. Goods are kept Advantages
on racks with clearly labelled price The following are the merits of super 
and quality tags in such stores. The markets:
customers move into the store to (i) One roof, low cost: Super markets 
pick up goods of their requirements, offer a wide variety of products at low 
bring them to the cash counter, make cost under one roof. These outlets are, 
payment and take home the delivery. therefore, not only convenient but also 

Super markets are organised on 
departmental basis where customers economical to the buyers for making 
can buy various types of goods under their purchases.
one roof. However, as compared to (ii)  Central location: The super 
departmental stores, these markets markets are generally located in the 
do not offer certain services such as heart of the city. As a result, these 
free home delivery, credit facilities, are easily accessible to large number 
etc., and also do not appoint sales of people staying in the surrounding 
persons to convince customers about localities.
the quality of products. Some of the (iii) Wide selection: Super markets 
important characteristics of a super keep a wide variety of goods of different 
market are as follows: designs, colour, etc., which enables the 
	 (i)	 A super market generally carries buyers to make better selection.

a complete line of food items and (iv)  No bad debts: As generally the 
groceries, in addition to non-food sales are made on cash basis, there 
convenience goods. are no bad debts in super markets. 

	 (ii)	 The buyers can purchase different (v) Benefits of being large scale: A 
products as per their requirements super market is a large scale retailing 
under one roof in such markets. store. It enjoys all the benefits of large 

	(iii)	 A super market operates on the scale buying and selling because of 
principle of self-service. The which its operating costs are lower.
distribution cost is, therefore, 
lower. Limitations

	(iv)	 The prices of the products are The major limitations of super markets 
generally lower than other types are as follows:

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   233 9/2/2022   2:21:21 PM



234 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(i) No credit: Super markets sell their area in which this concept is getting 
products on cash basis only. No credit popular in many parts of our country 
facilities are made available to the (particularly in the urban areas) is 
buyers. This restricts the purchasing the case of Automated Teller Machines 
power of buyers from such markets. (ATM) in the banking service. As 
(ii)  No personal attention: Super the name suggests, these machines 
markets work on the principle of self- have altogether changed the concept 
service. The customers, therefore, do of banking and made it possible to 
not get any personal attention. As a withdraw money at any time without 
result, such commodities that require visiting any branch of a bank.
personal attention by sales people Vending machines can be useful for 
cannot be handled effectively in super selling pre-packed brands of low priced 
markets. products which have high turnover 
(iii)  Mishandling of goods: Some and which are uniform in size and 
customers handle the goods kept in weight. However, the initial cost of 
the shelf carelessly. This may raise installing a vending machine and the 
costs in super markets. expenditure on regular maintenance 
(iv) High overhead expenses: Super and repair are quite high. Also 
market incur high overhead expenses. consumers cannot feel or see the 

product before buying and do not have 
As a result these have not been able the opportunity of returning unwanted 
to create low price appeal among the goods. Apart from that, special packs 
customers. have to be developed for the machines. 
(v)  Huge capital requirement: The machines have to be made reliable 
Establishing and running a super in their operations. In spite of these 
market requires huge investment. The limitations, with the growth in the 
turnover of a store should be high so economy, vending machines have a 
that the overheads are kept under promising future in retail sales of high 
reasonable level. This can be possible turnover and low priced consumer 
in bigger towns but not in small towns. products.

Vending Machines Goods and Services Tax
Vending machines are the newest The Government of India, following 
revolution in marketing methods. the credo of ‘One Nation and One Tax’, 
Coin operated vending machines and wanting a unified market in order 
are proving useful in selling several to ensure the smooth flow of goods 
products such as hot beverages, across the country implemented the 
platform tickets, milk, soft drinks, Goods and Services Tax (GST) from 
chocolates, newspaper, etc., in many July 1, 2017. The move also aims to 
countries. Apart from some of the make life easier for  manufacturers, 
products mentioned here, the latest producers, investors and consumers. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   234 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 235

This system is regared as the most + 9 State levels) and 23 cesses of the 
revolutionising tax reform in the Indian Centre and the States, eliminating the 
taxation history. Tax apart from being need for filing multiple returns and 
a source of revenue for growth also assessments and rationalising the tax 
plays a key role in making the State treatment of goods and services along 
accountable to its taxpayers. Effective the supply chain from producers to 
taxation ensures that public funds are consumers. GST comprises  Central 
effectively employed in fulfilling social GST (CGST) and the State GST 
objectives for sustainable development. (SGST), subsuming levies previously 

GST is a destination-based single charged by the Central and the State 
tax on the supply of goods and governments respectively. GST (CGST 
services from the manufacturer to the + SGST) is charged at each stage of 
consumer, and has replaced multiple value addition and the supplier off-
indirect taxes levied by the Central sets the levy on inputs in the previous 
and the State governments, thereby, stages of value chain through the tax 
converting the country into a unified credit mechanism. The last dealer in 
market. Among other benefits, GST is the supply chain passes on the added 
expected to improve the ease of doing GST to the consumer, making GST a 
business in tax compliance, reduce destination-based consumption tax. 
the tax burden by eliminating tax- The provision of availing input credit 
on-tax, improve tax administration, at each stage of value chain helps in 
mitigate tax evasion, broaden the avoiding the cascading effect (tax on 
organised segment of the economy tax) under GST, which is expected 
and boost tax revenues. The GST has to reduce prices of commodities and 
replaced 17 indirect taxes (8 Central benefit the consumers. (refer page 253)

Some Facts about GST
	 1.	 GST aims to subsume a plethora of taxes into one single tax across the 

country and make goods uniformly priced across India, albeit some goods 
become costly and some become cheaper.

	 2.	 With the implementation of GST, luxury goods have become costlier, while 
items of mass consumption have become cheaper. 

	 3. 	 GST is not taxation at source. It is a destination tax or rather it’s a consumption 
tax. A product is manufactured in Tamil Nadu and travels through the country 
before it reaches Delhi, where the buyer or consumer pays tax for it. Both 
the Centre and the State have their share in this tax. 

	 4.	 The Indian GST will have a mechanism of matching of invoices. Input tax credit of 
purchased goods and services will only be available if the taxable supplies received 
by the supplies received by the supplier. The Goods and Services Tax network is a  
self-regulating mechanism, which not only checks tax frauds and tax evasion, 
but also brings in more and more businesses into the formal economy.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   235 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



236 BUSINESS  STUDIES

	 5.	 Anti-profiteering measure is one of the key features of the recently implemented 
Goods and Services Tax law. These measures prevent entities from making 
excessive profits. Since the GST, along with the input tax credit, is eventually 
expected to bring down prices, a National Anti-profiteering Authority (NAA) is 
to be set up to ensure that the benefits accrued to entities due to reduction in 
costs is passed on to the consumers. Also, entities that hike rates inordinately, 
citing GST as the reason, will be checked by this body.

How will GST Benefit and Empower Citizens
	Reduction in overall tax burden
	No hidden taxes
	Development of a harmonised national market for goods and services
	Higher disposable income in hand, education and essential needs
	Customers to have wider choice
	Increased economic activity
	More employment opportunities

Key Features of GST:
	 1.	 The territorial spread of GST is the whole country.
	 2.	 GST is applicable on  the ‘supply’ of goods or services as against the present 

concept of tax on the manufacture or  sale of goods or on the provision of 
services.

	 3.	 It is based on the principle of destination-based consumption tax against 
the present principle of origin-based taxation.

	 4.	 Import of goods and services is treated as inter-State supplies and 
would 	 be subject to IGST in addition to the applicable customs duties.

	 5.	 CGST, SGST and  IGST are levied at rates mutually agreed upon by the 
Centre and the States under the aegis of the GST Council.

	 6.	 There are four tax slabs namely 5 per cent, 12 per cent, 18 per cent and   	
28 per cent for all goods or services.

	 7.	 Exports and supplies to SEZ are zero-rated.
	 8.	 There are various modes of payment of tax available to the taxpayer, 

including Internet banking, debit/credit card and National Electronic 
Funds Transfer (NEFT)/Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS).

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   236 10/21/2022   2:48:25 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 237

GST Council – Constitution
	 Chairperson: Finance Minister
	 Vice Chairperson is to be chosen amongst the Ministers of State 	
	 Government
	Members: MoS (Finance) and all Ministers of Finance/Taxation of  
	 each State
	Quorum is 50% of total members
	 States have two-third weightage and Centre has one-third weightage
	Decision is taken by 75% majority
	 The Council shall make recommendations on everything related to GST  
	 including, rules and rates, etc.

The CGST/
SGST  is payable 
on all intra-state 
supply of goods or 
services or both

IGST is payable 

GST on all inter-state 
supply of goods 

and services

Tax liability 
arises when the 
taxable person 

crosses exemption 
limit

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   237 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



238 BUSINESS  STUDIES

10.6	R ole of Commerce and For example, the construction of golden 
Industry Associations is in quadrilateral corridor announced by 
Promotion of Internal Trade the Prime Minister of India in one of 

the Annual General Meetings of the 
Associations of business and industrial Federation of Indian Chambers of 
houses are formed to promote and Commerce and  Industry (FICCI) will 
protect their common interest and facilitate internal trade.
goals. Many such associations have (ii)  Octroi and other local levies: 
been formed and are present in the Octroi and local taxes are the 
country such as Associated Chamber of important sources of revenue of the 
Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM), local government. These are collected 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) on the goods and from people entering 
and Federation of Indian Chambers of the state or the municipal limits. The 
Commerce and Industry (FICCI). These Chambers of Commerce try to ensure 
associations or chambers act as the that their imposition is not at the cost 
national guardians of trade, commerce of smooth  transportation and  local 
and industry. trade.

These associations have been (iii)  Harmonisation of sales tax 
playing a catalytic role in strengthening structure and  Value  Added  Tax: 
internal trade to make it an important The Chambers of Commerce and 
part of overall economic activity.The Industry play an important role in 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry interacting with the government to 
interact with the government at harmonise the sales tax structure in 
different levels to reorient or put in different states. The sales tax is an 
place policies which reduce hindrances, important part of   the  state revenue. 
increase interstate  movement of A rational structure of the sales tax 
goods, introduce transparency and and its uniform rates across states, 
remove multiple layers of  inspection are important for promoting a balance 
and bureaucratic hurdles. Besides, in trade. As per the new policy of the 
the chambers also aim at erecting government, the Value Added Tax is 
sound infrastructure and simplifying being levied in place of the sales tax 
and harmonising the tax structures. to remove  the cascading effect of the 
The  interventions  are  mainly  in  the   sales tax.
following  areas: (iv) Marketing of agro products and 
(i)  Interstate movement of goods: related issues: The associations of 
The Chambers of Commerce and agriculturists and other federations 
Industry help in many activities play an important role in the marketing 
concerning inter state movement of of agro products. Streamlining of local 
goods which include registration of subsidies and marketing policies of 
vehicles, surface transport policies, organisations selling agro products are 
construction of highways and roads. some of the areas where the Chambers 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   238 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 239

of Commerce and Industry can really need to interact with the government 
intervene and interact with concerned to ensure streamlining of excise duties.
agencies like farming cooperatives. (vii) Promoting sound infrastructure: 
(v)  Weights and Measures and A sound infrastructure like road, 
prevention of duplication brands: port, electricity, railways etc., play a 
Laws relating to  weights and measures catalytic role in promoting trade. The 
and protection of brands are necessary Chambers of Commerce and Industry 
to protect the interest of the consumers hold discussions with government 
as well as the traders. These need to 
be enforced strictly. The Chambers of agencies for investments into these 
Commerce and Industry interact with projects.
the government to formulate such laws (viii)  Labour legislation: A simple 
and take action against those who and flexible labour legislation is 
violate rules and regulations. helpful in running industries, 
(vi)  Excise duty: Central  excise is maximising production and  generating 
the chief  source of  the  government employment. The Chambers of 
revenue levied  across  states  by  the Commerce and Industry and the 
central  government. The  excise  policy   government are constantly interacting 
plays  an important  role  in  pricing on issues like labour laws, retrenchment 
mechanism. The trade associations etc. with the government.

Key Terms

Internal trade	 Wholesalers	 Market traders
Wholesale trade	 Retailers	 Cheap jacks
Retail trade	 Internal retailers	 Speciality stores
Departmental stores	 Chain stores	 Vending machines
	 Super markets	 Chambers of Commerce

SUMMARY

Trade refers to buying and selling of goods and services with the objective of 
earning profit on the basis of geographical location of buyers and sellers. It 
can be classified into two categories (i) internal trade; and (ii) external trade.
Internal trade: Buying and selling of goods and services within the boundaries 
of a nation are referred to as internal trade. No custom duties or import duties 
are levied on such trade as goods are part of domestic production and are 
meant for domestic consumption. Internal trade can be categorised into two 
broad categories (i) wholesale trade; and (ii) retailing trade.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   239 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



240 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Wholesale trade: Purchase and sale of goods and services in large quantities 
for the purposes of resale or intermediate use is referred to as wholesale trade. 
Wholesalers perform a number of functions in the process of distribution 
of goods and services and provide valuable services to manufacturers and 
retailers.
Services of wholesalers: Wholesalers are an important link between 
manufacturers and retailers. They add value by creating time and place utility. 
Services of manufacturers: The services provided by wholesalers to 
manufacturers include (i) facilitating large scale production; (ii) bearing risk; 
(iii) providing financial assistance; (iv) expert advice; (v) help in marketing 
function; (vi) facilitating continuity; and (vii) storage.
Services to retailers: The services provided by wholesalers to retailers include 
(i) availability of goods (ii) marketing support (iii) grant of credit (iv) specialised 
knowledge (v) risk sharing
Retail trade: A retailer is a business enterprise that is engaged in the sale of 
goods and services directly to the ultimate consumers.
Services of retailers: Retailers are an important link between the producers 
and final consumers. They provide useful service to consumers wholesalers 
and manufacturers in the distribution of products and services.
Services to manufacturers/wholesalers: Different services provided by 
retailers to wholesalers and manufacturers include (i) helping distribution of 
goods; (ii) personal selling; (iii) enabling large scale operations; (iv) collecting 
market information; and (v) help in promotion of goods and services.
Services to consumers: The different services provided by retailers to 
consumers include (i) regular availability of products (ii) new product 
information (iii) convenience of buying (iv) trade selection (v) after sales services 
and (vi) providing credit facilities.
Types of retail trade: Retail trade can be classified into different types 
according to their size, type of ownership, on the basis of merchandise 
handled and whether they have fixed place of business or not. Retailers can be 
categorised as (i) itinerant retailers; and (ii) fixed shop retailers.
Itinerant retailers: Itinerant retailers are traders who don’t have a fixed place 
of business to operate from. They are small traders operating with limited 
resources who keep on moving with their wares from street to street or place 
to place in search of customers. The major types of such retailers are:
(i) Peddlers and hawkers: They are small producers or petty traders who carry 
the products on a bicycle or handcart or on their heads and move from place 
to place, to sell their goods at the doorstep of the customers.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   240 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 241

(ii) Market traders: Market traders are small retailers who open their shops at 
different places on fixed days/dates, catering mainly to lower income group of 
customers and dealing in low priced consumer items of daily use.
(iii) Street trades: Street traders are the small retailers who are commonly 
found at places where huge floating population gathers.
(iv) Cheap jacks: Cheap jacks are those petty retailers who have independent 
shops of a temporary nature in a business location. They deal in consumer 
items and provide services to consumers in terms of making the products 
available where needed.
Fixed shop retailers: On the basis of size of operations, (fixed shop retailers 
can be classified as a) small shopkeepers and (b) large retailers.
Fixed shop small retailers
(i) General stores: General stores carry stock of a variety of products such as 
grocery items, soft drinks, toiletry products, confectionery, and stationery, 
needed to satisfy day-to-day needs of consumers, residing in nearby localities.
(ii) Speciality shops: Speciality shops specialise in the sale of specific line 
of products such as children’s garments, men’s wear, ladies shoes, school 
uniform, college books or consumer electronic goods, etc.,
(iii) Street stall holders: These small vendors are commonly found at street 
crossing or other places where flow of traffic is heavy and deal mainly in goods 
of cheap variety like hosiery products, toys, cigarettes, soft drinks, etc.
(iv) Second hand goods shop: These shops deals in second hand or used goods 
of different kinds like furniture, books, clothes and other household articles 
which are sold at lower prices.
(v) Single line stores: Single line stores deal in a single product line such as 
ready made garments, watches, shoes etc., and keep variety of items of the 
same line and are situated at central location.
Fixed shop large stores: In fixed shop large stores, the volume and variety of 
goods stocked is large.
Departmental stores: A departmental store is a large establishment offering 
a wide variety of products, classified into well-designed departments, aimed at 
satisfying practically every customer’s need under one roof.
Advantages: (a) attracts large number of customers (b) convenience 
in buying (c) attractive services (d) economy of large scale operation 
(e) promotion of sales.
Limitations: (a) lacks personal attention (b) high operating cost (c) high 
possibility of loss (d) inconvenient location.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   241 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



242 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Chain stores or multiple shops: These shops are networks of retail shops 
that are owned and operated by manufacturers or intermediaries dealing in 
standardised and branded consumer products having rapid sales turnover.
Advantages:  (a) economies of scale (b) elimination of middlemen  
(c) no bad debts (d) transfer of goods (e) diffusion of risk (e) low cost  
(f) flexibility.
Limitations: (a) limited selection of goods (b) lack of initiative (c) lack of personal 
touch (d) difficult to change demand.
Difference between Departmental Stores and Multiple Shops: (a) location 
(b) range of products (c) services offered (d) pricing (e) class of customers 
(f) credit facilities (g) flexibility.
Mail order houses: Mail order houses are retail outlets that sell their 
merchandise through mail, without any direct personal contact with  
the buyers.
Advantages: (a) limited capital requirements (b) elimination of middlemen, (c) 
absence of bad debts (d) wide reach (e) convenience.
Limitations: (a) lack of personal contact, (b) high promotion cost (c) no after 
sales services (d) no credit facilities (e) delayed delivery (f) possibility of abuse 
(g) high dependence on postal services.
Consumer cooperative stores: A consumer cooperative store is an 
organisation owned managed and controlled by consumers themselves formed 
with the objective of reducing the number of middlemen and thereby providing 
services to members.
Advantages: (i) ease in formation (ii) limited liability (iii) democratic management 
(iv) lower prices (v) cash sales (vi) convenient location.
Limitations: (i) lack of initiative (ii)shortage of funds (iii) lack of patronage (iv) 
lack of business training.
Super markets: A super market is a large retailing business unit selling wide 
variety of consumer goods on the basis of low margin appeal, wide variety and 
assortment and heavy emphasis on merchandising appeal.
Advantages: (i) one roof, low cost (ii) central location (iii) wide selection (iv) no 
bad debts (v) benefits of large scale.
Limitations: (a) no credit (b) no personal attention (c) mishandling of goods (d) 
high over head expenses (e) huge capital requirements.
Vending Machines: Vending machines are proving useful in selling 
pre-packed brands of low priced products which have high turnover and which 
are uniform in size and weight.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   242 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 243

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1.	 What is meant by internal trade?
2.	 Specify the characteristics of fixed shop retailers.
3.	 What purpose is served by wholesalers providing warehousing facilities?
4.	 How does market information provided by the wholesalers benefit the 

manufacturers?
5.	 How does the wholesaler help the manufacturer in availing the economies of 

scale?
6.	 Distinguish between single line stores and speciality stores. Can you identify 

such stores in your locality?
7.	 How would you differentiate between street traders and street shops?
8.	 Explain the services offered by wholesalers to manufacturers.
9.	 What are the services offered by retailers to wholesalers and consumers?

Long Answer Questions
1.	 Itinerant traders have been an integral part of internal trade in India.  Analyse 

the reasons for their survival in spite of competition from large scale retailers.
2.	 Discuss the features of a departmental store. How are they different from 

multiple shops or chain stores.
3.	 Why are consumer cooperative stores considered to be less expensive? What 

are its relative advantages over other large scale retailers?
4.	 Imagine life without your local market. What difficulties would a consumer 

face if there is no retail shop?
5.	 Explain the usefulness of mail orders houses. What type of products are 

generally handled by them? Specify.

Projects/Assignments
1.	 Identify various fixed shop retailers in your locality and classify them 

according to the different types you have studied.
2.	 Do you know any retailers selling second-hand goods in your area? Find out 

the category of the product that they deal in? Which products are suitable 
for resale? List some of your findings. What conclusions do you draw?

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   243 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



244 BUSINESS  STUDIES

3.	 Do you observe any difference in the retail business of yesterday and the 
times to come. Prepare a brief write-up and discuss it in class.

4.	 From you own experience, compare the features of two retail stores selling 
the same product. For example, the same products being sold at a small 
scale retailer like a general store and in a big store like a departmental 
store. What similarities and differences can you identify in terms of price, 
service, variety, convenience, etc.

5.	 The GST has been rolled out by the Government of India on July, 01, 2017. 
Different goods and services are classified under GST rates viz., 0%, 5%, 
12%, 18% and 28%. Collect the information on GST from newspapers, 
media news, Internet and business magazines and classify the given goods 
and services five GST rates:

Activity: Classification of GST Rates of different Goods and Services
Items No tax (0%) 5%        12%   18%     28%

Jute
Newspaper
Coffee/Tea
Shampoo
Washing Machine
Motorcycles
Vegetables
Milk
Curd
Salt
Spices
Kerosene
Kites
Apparel
above Rs 1000
Cheese
Ghee
Fruit Juices
Bhujia
Ayurvedic Medicines

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   244 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



INTERNAL TRADE 245

Sewing Machine
Cell Phones
Ketchup & Sauces
Exercise Books
Notebooks
Spectacles
Luxury goods
Fertilisers
Biscuits
Pasta
Pastries and cakes
Jams
Mineral Water
Steel
Products
Camera
Speakers and monitors
Aluminum Foil
CCTV
Telecom Services
Branded Garments

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 10.indd   245 9/2/2022   2:21:22 PM



Chapter 11

##11##
International Business

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

After studying this chapter, you should be able to:

•	 State the meaning of International Business

•	 Distinguish between Internal and International Business

•	 Discuss the scope of International Business 

•	 Enumerate the benefits of International Business

•	 Discuss the documents required for import and export transactions

•	 Identify the incentives and schemes available for international firms

•	 Discuss the role of different organisations for the promotion of 
International Business

•	 List the major international institutions and agreements at the global 
level for the promotion of international trade and development.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   246 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 247

Mr. Sudhir Manchanda is a small manufacturer of automobile components. His 
factory is located in Gurgaon and employs about 55 workers with an investment 
of Rs. 9.2 million in plant and machinery. Due to recession in the domestic 
market, he foresees prospects of his sales going up in the next few years in the 
domestic market. He is exploring the possibility of going international. Some 
of his competitors are already in export business. A casual talk with one of his 
close friends in the tyre business reveals that there is a substantial market for 
automobile components and accessories in South-East Asia and Middle East. 
But his friend also tells him, “Doing business internationally is not the same as 
carrying out business within the home country. International business is more 
complex as one has to operate under market conditions that are different from 
those that one faces in domestic business”. Mr. Manchanda is, moreover, not sure 
as to how he should go about setting up international business. Should he himself 
identify and contact some overseas customers and start exporting directly to them 
or else route his products through export houses which specialise in exporting 
products made by others? 

Mr. Manchanda’s son who has just returned after an MBA in USA suggests that 
they should set up a fully owned factory in Bangkok for supplying to customers 
in South-East Asia and Middle East. Setting up a manufacturing plant there will 
help them save costs of transporting goods from India. This would also help them 
coming closer to the overseas customers. Mr. Manchanda is in a fix as to what to 
do. In the face of difficulties involved in overseas ventures as pointed out by his 
friend, he is wondering about the desirability of entering into global business. He 
is also not sure as to what the different ways of entering into international market 
are and which one will best suit his purpose.

11.1	 Introduction The prime reason behind this 
radical change is the development 

Countries all over the world are of communication, technology, 
undergoing a fundamental shift in infrastructure etc. Emergence of 
the way they produce and market newer modes of communication and 
various products and services. The development of faster and more 
national economies which so far were efficient means of transportation have 
pursuing the goal of self-reliance are brought nations closer to one another. 
now becoming increasingly dependent Countries that were cut-off from one 
upon others for procuring as well as another due to geographical distances 
supplying various kinds of goods and and socio-economic differences have 
services. Due to increased cross border now started increasingly interacting 
trade and investments, countries are with others. World Trade Organisation 
no more isolated. (WTO) and reforms carried out by the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   247 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



248 BUSINESS  STUDIES

governments of different countries India has been trading with other 
have also been a major contributory countries for a long time. But it has 
factor to the increased interactions of late considerably speeded up its 
and business relations amongst the process of integrating with the world 
nations. economy and increasing its foreign 

We are today living in a world trade and investments (see Box A: 
where the obstacles to cross-border India Embarks on the Path to 
movement of goods and persons have Globalisation). 
substantially come down. The national 
economies are increasingly becoming 11.1.1	 Meaning of International 
borderless and getting integrated into Business
the world economy.  Little wonder 
that the world has today come to be Business transaction taking place 
known as a ‘global village’. Business in within the geographical boundaries 
the present day is no longer restricted of a nation is known as domestic or 
to the boundaries of the domestic national business. It is also referred 
country. More and more firms are to as internal business or home trade. 
making forays into international Manufacturing and trade beyond the 
business which presents them with boundaries of one’s own country is 
numerous opportunities for growth known as international business. 
and increased profits. International or external business can, 

Box A
India Embarks on the Path to Globalisation

International business has entered into a new era of reforms. India too did not 
remain cut-off from these developments. India was under a severe debt trap and was 
facing crippling balance of payment crisis. In 1991, it approached the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) for raising funds to tide over its balance of payment deficits. 
IMF agreed to lend money to India subject to the condition that India would undergo 
structural changes to be able to ensure repayment of borrowed funds. 

India had no alternative but to agree to the proposal. It was the very conditions 
imposed by IMF which more or less forced India to liberalise its economic 
policies. Since then a fairly large amount of liberalisation at the economic front 
has taken place. 

Though the process of reforms has somewhat slowed down, India is very much 
on the path to globalisation and integrating with the world economy. While, on 
the one hand, many multinational corporations (MNCs) have ventured into Indian 
market for selling their products and services; many Indian companies too have 
stepped out of the country to market their products and services to consumers in 
foreign countries.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   248 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 249

therefore, be defined as those business 11.1.2	 Reason for International 
activities that take place across the Business
national frontiers. It involves not The fundamental reason behind 
only the international movements of international business is that the 
goods and services, but also of capital, countries cannot produce equally well 
personnel, technology and intellectual or cheaply all that they need. This is 
property like patents, trademarks, because of the unequal distribution 
know-how and copyrights. of natural resources among them 

It may be mentioned here that or differences in their productivity 
mostly people think of international levels. Availability of various factors 
business as international trade. But of production such as labour, capital 
this is not true. No doubt international and raw materials that are required for 
trade, comprising exports and imports producing different goods and services 
of goods, has historically been an differ among nations. Moreover, labour 
important component of international productivity and production costs 
business. But of late, the scope differ among nations due to various 
of  internat ional  business has socio-economic, geographical and 
substantially expanded. International political reasons.
trade in services such as international Due to these differences, it is not 
travel and tourism, transportation, uncommon to find one particular 
communication, banking, ware- country being in a better position to 
housing, distribution and advertising produce better quality products and/
has considerably grown. The other or at lower costs than what other 
equally important developments are nations can do.  In other words, we 
increased foreign investments and can say that some countries are in an 
overseas production of goods and advantageous position in producing 

select goods and services which 
services. Companies have started other countries cannot produce that 
increasingly making investments into effectively and efficiently, and vice-
foreign countries and undertaking versa. As a result, each country finds it 
production of goods and services in advantageous to produce those select 
foreign countries to come closer to goods and services that it can produce 
foreign customers and serve them more effectively and efficiently at 
more effectively at lower costs. All these home, and procuring the rest through 
activities form part of international trade with other countries which the 
business. To conclude, we can say other countries can produce at lower 
that international business is a much costs.  This is precisely the reason as 
broader term and is comprised of both to why countries trade with others 
the trade and production of goods and and engage in what is known as 
services across frontiers. international business. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   249 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



250 BUSINESS  STUDIES

The international business as it firms from engaging in international 
exists today is to a great extent the business in a later section. 
result of geographical specialisation as 
pointed out above. Fundamentally, it 11.1.3	 International Business vs. 
is for the same reason that domestic Domestic Business
trade between two states or regions 
within a country takes place. Most Conducting and managing international 
states or regions within a country business operations is more complex 
tend to specialise in the production than undertaking domestic business. 
of goods and services for which they Because of variations in political, social, 
are best suited. In India, for example, cultural and economic environments 
while West Bengal specialises in jute across countries, business firms find 
products; Mumbai and neighbouring it difficult to extend their domestic 
areas in Maharashtra are more involved business strategy to foreign markets. 
with the production of cotton textiles. To be successful in the overseas 
The same principle of territorial markets, they need to adapt their 
division of labour is applicable at the product, pricing, promotion and 
international level too. Most developing distribution strategies and overall 
countries which are labour abundant, business plans to suit the specific 
for instance, specialise in producing requirements of the target foreign 
and exporting garments. Since they markets (see Box B on Firms need 
lack capital and technology, they to be Cognisant of Environmental 
import textile machinery from the Differences). Key aspects in respect 
developed nations which the latter of which domestic and international 
are in a position to produce more businesses differ from each other are 
efficiently. discussed below.

What is true for the nation is more (i) Nationality of buyers and sellers: 
or less true for firms. Firms too engage Nationality of the key participants (i.e., 
in international business to import buyers and sellers) to the business 
what is available at lower prices in deals differs between domestic and 
other countries, and export goods to international businesses. In the case 
other countries where they can fetch of domestic business, both the buyers 
better prices for their products. Besides and sellers are from the same country. 
price considerations, there are several This makes it easier for both the parties 
other benefits which nations and firms to understand each other and enter 
derive from international business. In into business deals. But this is not the 
a way, these other benefits too provide case with international business where 
an impetus to nations and firms to buyers and sellers come from different 
engage in international business. We countries. Because of differences 
shall turn our attention to some of in their languages, attitudes, social 
these benefits accruing to nations and customs and business goals and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   250 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 251

practices, it becomes relatively more and aspirations of the stakeholders 
difficult for them to interact with belonging to different nations.
one another and finalise business (iii) Mobility of factors of production: 
transactions. The degree of mobility of factors 
(ii) Nationality of other stakeholders: like labour and capital is generally 
Domestic and international businesses less between countries than within 
also differ in respect of the nationalities a country. While these factors of 
of the other stakeholders such as movement can move freely within 
employees, suppliers, shareholders/ the country, there exist various 
partners and  general public who restrictions to their movement across 
interact with business firms. While nations. Apart from legal restrictions, 
in the case of domestic business all even the variations in socio-cultural 
such factors belong to one country, environments, geographic influences 
and therefore relatively speaking and economic conditions come in a 
depict more consistency in their value big way in their movement across 
systems and behaviours; decision countries. This is especially true of 
making in international business the labour which finds it difficult to 
becomes much more complex as the adjust to the climatic, economic and 
concerned business firms have to socio-cultural conditions that differ 
take into account a wider set of values from country to country.

Box B 
Firms need to be Cognisant of Environmental Differences

It is to be kept in mind that conducting and managing international business is not 
an easy venture. It is more difficult to manage international business operations 
due to variations in the political, social, cultural and economic environments that 
differ from country to country. 

Simply being aware of these differences is not sufficient. One also needs to 
be sensitive and responsive to these changes by way of introducing adaptations 
in their marketing programmes and business strategies. It is, for instance, a well 
known fact that because of poor lower per capita income, consumers in most of the 
developing African and Asian countries are price sensitive and prefer to buy less 
expensive products. But consumers in the developed countries like Japan, United 
States, Canada, France, Germany and Switzerland have a marked preference for 
high quality and high priced products due to their better ability to pay. Business 
prudence, therefore, demands that the firms interested in marketing to these 
countries are aware of such differences among the countries, and design their 
strategies accordingly. It will be in the fitness of things if the firms interested in 
exporting to these countries produce less expensive products for the consumers 
in the African and Asian regions, and design and develop high quality products 
for consumers in Japan and most of the European and North American countries.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   251 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



252 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(iv) Customer heterogeneity across Countries differ from one another 
markets: Since buyers in international in terms of their socio-economic 
markets hail from different countries, development, availability, cost and 
they differ in their socio-cultural efficiency of economic infrastructure 
background. Differences in their and market support services, and 
tastes, fashions, languages, beliefs business customs and practices due 
and customs, attitudes and product to their socio-economic milieu and 
preferences cause variations in historical coincidences. All such 
not only their demand for different differences make it necessary for 
products and services, but also in firms interested in entering into 
variations in their communication international markets to adapt 
patterns and purchase behaviours. their production, finance, human 
It is precisely because of the socio- resource and marketing plans as 
cultural differences that while people per the conditions prevailing in the 
in China prefer bicycles, the Japanese international markets.  
in contrast like to ride bikes.  Similarly, (vi)  Political system and risks: 
while people in India use right-hand Political factors such as the type of 
driven cars, Americans drive cars fitted government, political party system, 
with steering, brakes, etc., on the left political ideology, political risks, etc., 
side. Moreover, while people in the have a profound impact on business 
United States change their TV, bike operations. Since a business person is 
and other consumer durables very familiar with the political environment 
frequently — within two to three years of his/her country, he/she can well 
of their purchase, Indians mostly do understand it and predict its impact 
not go in for such replacements until on business operations. But this is not 
the products currently with them have the case with international business. 
totally worn out. Political environment differs from 

Such variations greatly complicate one country to another. One needs 
the task of designing products and to make special efforts to understand 
evolving strategies appropriate for the differing political environments 
customers in different countries. and their business implications. 
Though to some extent customers Since political environment keeps 
within a country too differ in their on changing, one needs to monitor 
tastes and preferences.  These political changes on an ongoing 
differences become more striking when basis in the concerned countries and 
we compare customers across nations. devise strategies to deal with diverse 
(v) Differences in business systems political risks.
and practices: The differences in A major problem with a foreign 
business systems and practices are country’s political environment is a 
considerably much more among tendency among nations to favour 
countries than within a country. products and services originating in 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   252 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 253

their own countries to those coming international trade. It includes not only 
from other countries. While this is not international trade (i.e., export and 
a problem for business firms operating import of goods and services), but also 
domestically, it quite often becomes a a wide variety of other ways in which 
severe problem for the firms interested the firms operate internationally. 
in exporting their goods and services to Major forms of business operations 
other nations or setting up their plants that constitute international business 
in the overseas markets. are as follows. 
(vii)  Business regulations and (i) Merchandise exports and imports: 
policies: Coupled with its socio- Merchandise means goods that are 
economic environment and political tangible, i.e., those that can be seen 
philosophy, each country evolves and touched. When viewed from 
its own set of business laws and this perceptive, it is clear that while 
regulations. Though these laws, merchandise exports means sending 
regulations and economic policies are tangible goods abroad, merchandise 
more or less uniformly applicable within imports means bringing tangible 
a country, they differ widely among goods from a foreign country to one’s 
nations. Tariff and taxation policies, own country. Merchandise exports 
import quota system, subsidies and and imports, also known as trade in 
other controls adopted by a nation goods, include only tangible goods and 
are not the same as in other countries exclude trade in services.
and often discriminate against foreign (ii)  Service exports and imports: 
products, services and capital. Service exports and imports involve 
	(viii)	 Currency used in business trade in intangibles. It is because 
transactions: Another important of the intangible aspect of services 
difference between domestic and that trade in services is also known 
international business is that the latter as invisible trade. A wide variety of 
involves the use of different currencies. services are traded internationally 
Since the exchange rate, i.e., the and these include: tourism and 
price of one currency expressed in travel, boarding and lodging (hotel 
relation to that of another country’s and restaurants), entertainment 
currency, keeps on fluctuating, it and recreation, transportation, 
adds to the problems of international professional services (such as training, 
business firms in fixing prices of their  recruitment, consultancy and research), 
products and hedging against foreign communication (postal, telephone, 
exchange risks. fax, courier and other audio-visual 
11.1.4	 Scope of International services), construction and engineering, 

Business marketing (e.g., wholesaling, retailing, 
advertising, marketing research 

As pointed out earlier, international and warehousing), educational and 
business is much broader than financial services (such as banking 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   253 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



254 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Table 11.1    Major Difference between Domestic 
       and International Business

Basis Domestic business International business

1. Nationality of People or organisations Peop le  o r  o rgan isa t ions  o f 
buyers and	 f r o m  o n e  n a t i o n different countries participate 
sellers participate in domestic i n  i n t e r n a t i o n a l  b u s i n e s s 

business transactions. transactions.

2. Nationality Various other stake- Various other stakeholders such as 
of other  	 holders such as suppliers, suppliers, employees, middlemen, 
stakeholders employees, middlemen, shareholders and partners are from 

shareholders and partners different nations.
are usually citizens of the 
same country.

3. Mobility of	 The degree of mobility The degree of mobility of factors of 
factors of 	 of factors of production production like labour and capital 
production like labour and capital is across nations is relatively less.

relatively more within a 
country.

4. Customer  	 Domestic markets International markets lack 
heterogeneity	 are relatively more homogeneity due to differences in 
across markets homogeneous in nature. language, preferences, customs, 

etc., across markets.

5. Differences 	 Business systems and Business systems and practices 
in business	 practices are relatively vary considerably across countries.
systems and 	 more homogeneous within 
practices a country.

6. Political 	 Domestic business is Different countries have different 
system and	 subject to political system forms of political systems and 
risks and risks of one single different degrees of risks which often 

country. become a barrier to international 
business.

7. Business 	 Domestic business is International business transactions 
regulations	 subject to rules, laws and are subject to rules, laws and 
and policies policies, taxation system, policies, tariffs and quotas, etc. of 

etc., of a single country. multiple countries. 

8. Currency used Currency of domestic International business transactions 
in	 business 	 country is used. involve use of currencies of more 
transactions than one country.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   254 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 255

and insurance). Of these, tourism, (iv)  Foreign investments: Foreign 
transportation and business services investment is another important form 
are major constituents of world trade of international business. Foreign 
in services (see Box C). investment involves investments 
(iii)  Licensing and franchising: of funds abroad in exchange for 
Permitting another party in a foreign financial return. Foreign investment 
country to produce and sell goods can be of two types: direct and portfolio 
under your trademarks, patents or copy investments.
rights in lieu of some fee is another way Direct investment takes place 
of entering into international business. when a company directly invests 
It is under the licensing system that in properties such as plant and 
Pepsi and Coca Cola are produced and machinery in foreign countries with a 
sold all over the world by local bottlers view to undertaking production and 
in foreign countries. Franchising is marketing of goods and services in 
similar to licensing, but it is a term those countries. Direct investment 
used in connection with the provision provides the investor a controlling 
of services. McDonalds, for instance, interest in a foreign company, known 
operates fast food restaurants the as Direct Investment, i.e., FDI. It can 
world over through its franchising be in the form of joint venture on PPP. 
system. A company, if it so desires, can also set 

Box C 
Tourism, Transportation and Business Services dominate 

International Trade in Services
Tourism and transportation have emerged as major components of international 
trade in services. Most of the airlines, shipping companies, travel agencies and 
hotels get their major share of revenues from their overseas customers and 
operations abroad. Several countries have come to heavily depend on services as an 
important source of foreign exchange earnings and employment. India, for example, 
earns a sizeable amount of foreign exchange from exports of services related to 
travel and tourism.
Business services: When one country provides services to other country and in 
the process earns foreign exchange, this is also treated as a form of international 
business activity. Fee received for services like banking, insurance, rentals, 
engineering and management services form part of country’s foreign exchange 
earnings. Undertaking of construction projects in foreign countries is also an 
example of export of business services. The other examples of such services  include 
overseas management contracts where arrangements are made by one company of 
a country which provides personnel to perform general or specialised management 
functions for another company in a foreign country in lieu of the other country.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   255 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



256 BUSINESS  STUDIES

up a wholly owned subsidiary abroad capital goods, technology, petroleum 
by making 100 per cent investment in products and fertilisers, pharma-
foreign ventures, and thus acquiring ceutical products and a host of other 
full control over subsidiary’s operations consumer products which otherwise 
in the foreign market. might not be available domestically.

A portfolio investment, on the other (ii) More efficient use of resources: 
hand, is an investment that a company As stated earlier, international business 
makes into another company by the operates on a simple principle —
way of acquiring shares or providing produce what your country can 
loans to the latter, and earns income by produce more efficiently, and trade the 
way of dividends or interest on loans. surplus production so generated with 
Unlike foreign direct investments, the other countries to procure what they 
investor under portfolio investment can produce more efficiently. When 
does not get directly involved into countries trade on this principle, they 
production and marketing operations. end up producing much more than 
It simply earns an income by investing what they can when each of them 
in shares, bonds, bills, or notes in a attempts to produce all the goods 
foreign country or providing loans to and services on its own. If such an 
foreign business firms. enhanced pool of goods and services is 

distributed equitably amongst nations, 
11.1.5	 Benefits of International it benefits all the trading nations. 

Business (iii)  Improving growth prospects and 
Notwithstanding greater complexities employment potentials: Producing 
and risks, international business is solely for the purposes of domestic 
important to both nations and business consumption severely restricts 
firms. It offers them several benefits. a country’s prospects for growth 
Growing realisation of these benefits and employment. Many countries, 
over time has in fact been a contributory especially the developing ones, could 
factor to the expansion of trade and not execute their plans to produce 

on a larger scale, and thus create 
investment amongst nations, resulting employment for people because their 
in the phenomenon of globalisation. domestic market was not large enough 
Some of the benefits of international to absorb all that extra production. 
business to the nations and business Later on a few countries such as 
firms are discussed below. Singapore, South Korea and China 
Benefits to Countries which saw markets for their products 

in the foreign countries embarked upon 
(i)  Earning of foreign exchange: the strategy ‘export and flourish’, and 
International business helps a country soon became the star performers on the 
to earn foreign exchange which it can world map. This helped them not only 
later use for meeting its imports of in improving their growth prospects, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   256 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 257

but also created opportunities for improve prospects of their growth by 
employment of people living in these plunging into overseas markets. This is 
countries. precisely what has prompted many of 
(iv)  Increased standard of living: the multinationals from the developed 
In the absence of international trade countries to enter into markets of 
of goods and services, it would not developing countries. While demand 
have been possible for the world in their home countries has got almost 
community to consume goods and saturated, they realised their products 
services produced in other countries were in demand in the developing 
that the people in these countries are countries and demand was picking 
able to consume and enjoy a higher up quite fast.
standard of living. (iv)  Way   out   to   intense 

competition in domestic market: 
Benefits to Firms W h e n  c o m p e t i t i o n  i n  t h e 
(i)  Prospects for higher profits: domestic market is very intense, 
International business can be more internationalisation seems to be 
profitable than the domestic business. the only way to achieve significant 
When the domestic prices are lower, growth. Highly competitive domestic 
business firms can earn more profits market drives many companies to go 
by selling their products in countries international in search of markets for 
where prices are high. their products. International business 
(ii)  Increased capacity utilisation: thus acts as a catalyst of growth for 
Many f i rms setup product ion firms facing tough market conditions 
capacities for their products which on the domestic turf. 
are in excess of demand in the (v)  Improved business vision: The 
domestic market. By planning overseas growth of international business of 
expansion and procuring orders from many companies is essentially a part 
foreign customers, they can think of of their business policies or strategic 

management. The vision to become 
making use of their surplus production international comes from the urge 
capacities and also improving the to grow, the need to become more 
profitability of their operations. competitive, the need to diversify 
Production on a larger scale often leads and to gain strategic advantages of 
to economies of scale, which in turn internationalisation.
lowers production cost and improves 
per unit profit margin.
(iii)  Prospects for growth: 11.2	 Modes of Entry into 

 Business 
firms find it quite frustrating when International Business

demand for their products starts Simply speaking, the term mode 
getting saturated in the domestic means the manner or way. The phrase 
market. Such firms can considerably ‘modes of entry into international 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   257 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



258 BUSINESS  STUDIES

business’, therefore, means various of overseas customers located in the 
ways in which a company can enter home country or wholesale importers 
into international business. While in the case of import operations. Such 
discussing the meaning and scope firms do not directly deal with overseas 
of international business, we have customers in the case of exports and 
already familiarised you with some of suppliers in the case of imports.
the modes of entry into international 
business. In the following sections, Advantages
we shall discuss in detail important Major advantages of exporting include:
ways of entering into international 	 •	 As compared to other modes of 
business along with their advantages entry, exporting/importing is the 
and limitations. Such a discussion easiest way of gaining entry into 
will enable you to know as to which international markets. It is less 
mode is more suitable under what complex an activity than setting 
conditions. up and managing joint-ventures 

or wholly owned subsidiaries 
11.2.1	 Exporting and Importing abroad.
Exporting refers to sending of goods 	 •	 Exporting/importing is less 
and services from the home country involving in the sense that 
to a foreign country. In a similar business firms are not required 
vein, importing is purchase of foreign to invest that much time and 
products and bringing them into money as is needed when they 
one’s home country. There are two desire to enter into joint ventures 
important ways in which a firm can or set up manufacturing plants 
export or import products: direct and and facilities in host countries. 
indirect exporting/importing. In the 	 •	 Since exporting/importing does 
case of direct exporting/importing, not require much of investment 
a firm itself approaches the overseas in foreign countries, exposure to 
buyers/suppliers and looks after all foreign investment risks is nil or 
the formalities related to exporting/ much lower than that is present 
importing activities including those when firms opt for other modes of 
related to shipment and financing of entry into international business.
goods and services. Indirect exporting/ Limitations
importing, on the other hand, is one 
where the firm’s participation in Major limitations of exporting/
the export/import operations is importing as an entry mode of 
minimum, and most of the tasks international business are as follows: 
relating to export/import of the goods 	 •	 Since the goods physically move 
are carried out by some middle men from one country to another, 
such as export houses or buying offices exporting/importing involves 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   258 9/2/2022   2:24:10 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 259

additional packaging, trans- Despite the above mentioned 
portation and insurance costs. limitations, exporting/importing is 
Especially in the case of heavy the most preferred way for business 
items, transportation costs alone firms when they are getting initially 
become an inhibiting factor to their involved with international business. 
exports and imports. On reaching As usually is the case, firms start 
the shores of foreign countries, their overseas operations with exports 
such products are subject to and imports, and later having gained 
custom duty and a variety of familiarity with the foreign market 
other levies and charges. Taken operations switch over to other forms 
together, all these expenses and of international business operations.  
payments substantially increase 
product costs and make them less 11.2.2	 Contract Manufacturing 
competitive.

	 •	 Exporting is not a feasible option Contract manufacturing refers to a 
when import restrictions exist type of international business where 
in a foreign country. In such a a firm enters into a contract with one 
situation, firms have no alternative or a few local manufacturers in foreign 
but to opt for other entry modes countries to get certain components or 
such as licensing/franchising goods produced as per its specifications. 
or joint venture which makes Contract manufacturing, also known 
it feasible to make the product as outsourcing, can take three major 
available by way of producing forms:
and marketing it locally in foreign 	 •	 Production of certain components 
countries. such as automobile components 

	 •	 Export firms basically operate or shoe uppers to be used later for 
from their home country. They producing final products such as 
produce in the home country and cars and shoes;
then ship the goods to foreign 	 •	 Assembly of components into final 
countries. Except a few visits products such as assembly of 
made by the executives of export hard disk, mother board, floppy 
firms to foreign countries to disk drive and modem chip into 
promote their products, the export computers; and
firms in general do not have much 	 •	 Complete manufacture of the 
contact with the foreign markets. products such as garments.
This puts the export firms in The goods are produced or assembled 
a disadvan-tageous position vis- by the local manufacturers as per the 
à-vis the local firms which are technology and management guidance 
very near the customers and are provided to them by the foreign 
able to better understand and company. The goods so manufactured 
serve them. or assembled by the local producers 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   259 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



260 BUSINESS  STUDIES

are delivered to the international any idle production capacities, 
firm for use in its final products or manufacturing jobs obtained on 
out rightly sold as finished products contract basis in a way provide a 
by the international firm under its ready market for their products 
brand names in various countries and ensure greater utilisation of 
including the home, host and other their production capacities. This is 
countries. All the major international how the Godrej group is benefitting 
companies such as Nike, Reebok, from contract manufacturing 
Levis and Wrangler today get their in India. It is manufacturing 
products or components produced soaps under contract for many 
in the developing countries under multinationals including Dettol 
contract manufacturing. soap for Reckitt and Colman. 

This has considerably helped it 
Advantages in making use of its excess soap 
Contract manufacturing offers several manufacturing capacity.
advantages to both the international 	 •	 The local manufacturer also gets 
company and local producers in the the opportunity to get involved 
foreign countries. with international business and 
	 •	 Contract manufacturing permits avail incentives, if any, available 

the international firms to get the to the export firms in case the 
goods produced on a large scale international firm desires goods so 
without requiring investment in produced  be delivered to its home 
setting up production facilities. country or to some other foreign 
These firms make use of the countries.
production facilities already 
existing in the foreign countries. Limitations

	 •	 Since there is no or little investment The major disadvantages of contract 
in the foreign countries, there manufacturing to international firm 
is hardly any investment risk and local producer in foreign countries 
involved in the foreign countries. are as follows:

	 •	 Contract manufacturing also gives 	 •	 Local firms might not adhere to 
an advantage to the international production design and quality 
company of getting products standards, thus causing serious 
manufactured or assembled at product quality problems to the 
lower costs especially if the local international firm. 
producers happen to be situated 	 •	 Local manufacturer in the foreign 
in countries which have lower country loses his control over the 
material and labour costs. manufacturing process because 

	 •	 Local producers in foreign goods are produced strictly as per 
countries also gain from contract the terms and specifications of the 
manufacturing. If they have contract.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   260 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 261

	 •	 The local firm producing under licensing. Franchisers usually set 
contract manufacturing is not strict rules and regulations as to how 
free to sell the contracted output the franchisees should operate while 
as per its will. It has to sell running their business.  Barring these 
the goods to the international two differences, franchising is pretty 
company at predetermined prices. much the same as licensing.  Like in 
This results in lower profits for the case of licensing, a franchising 
the local firm if the open market agreement too involves grant of rights 
prices for such goods happen to by one party to another for use of 
be higher than the prices agreed technology, trademark and patents 
upon under the contract. in return of the agreed payment for 

a certain period of time. The parent 
11.2.3	 Licensing and Franchising company is called the franchiser and 
Licensing is a contractual arrangement the other party to the agreement is 
in which one firm grants access to its called franchisee. The franchiser 
patents, trade secrets or technology to can be any service provider be it a 
another firm in a foreign country for a restaurant, hotel, travel agency, bank 
fee called royalty. The firm that grants wholesaler or even a retailer - who 
such permission to the other firm is has developed a unique technique for 
known as licensor and the other firm in creating and marketing of services 
the foreign country that acquires such under its own name and trade mark. It 
rights to use technology or patents is is the uniqueness of the technique that 
called the licensee. It may be mentioned gives the franchiser an edge over its 
here that it is not only technology that competitors in the field, and makes the 
is licensed. In the fashion industry, a would-be-service providers interested 
number of designers license the use in joining the franchising system. 
of their names. In some cases, there McDonald, Pizza Hut and Wal-Mart 
is exchange of technology between the are examples of some of the leading 
two firms. Sometimes there is mutual franchisers operating worldwide. 
exchange of knowledge, technology 
and/or patents between the firms Advantages
which is known as cross-licensing. As compared to joint ventures and 

Franchising is a term very similar wholly owned subsidiaries, licensing/
to licensing. One major distinction franchising is relatively a much easier 
between the two is that while the mode of entering into foreign markets 
former is used in connection with with proven product/technology 
production and marketing of goods, without much business risks and 
the term franchising applies to service investments. Some of the specific 
business. The other point of difference advantages of licensing are as follows: 
between the two is that franchising 	 •	 Under the licensing/franchising 
is relatively more stringent than system, it is the l icensor/

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   261 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



262 BUSINESS  STUDIES

franchiser who sets up the and brand names in foreign 
business unit and invests his/her countries. As a result, other firms 
own money in the business. As in the foreign market cannot 
such, the licensor/franchiser has make use of such trademarks and 
to virtually make no investments patents. 
abroad. Licensing/franchising 
is, therefore, considered a less Limitations
expensive mode of entering into 
international business. Licensing/franchising as a mode of 

	 •	 Since no or very little foreign international business suffers from the 
investment is involved, licensor/ following weaknesses.
franchiser is not a party to the 	 •	 When a licensee/franchisee 
losses, if any, that occur to foreign becomes skilled in the manu-
business. Licensor/franchiser is facture and marketing of the 
paid by the licensee/franchisee by licensed/franchised products, 
way of fees fixed in advance as a there is a danger that the licensee 
percentage of production or sales can start marketing an identical 
turnover. This royalty or fee keeps product under a slightly different 
accruing to the licensor/franchiser brand name. This can cause 
so long as the production and severe competition to the licenser/
sales keep on taking place in the franchiser. 
licensee’s/franchisee’s business 	 •	 If not maintained properly, trade 
unit. secrets can get divulged to others 

	 •	 Since the business in the foreign in the foreign markets. Such 
country is managed by the lapses on the part of the licensee/
licensee/franchisee who is a local franchisee can cause severe 
person, there are lower risks of losses to the licensor/franchiser.
business takeovers or government 	 •	 Over time, conflicts often develop 
interventions. between the licensor/franchiser 

	 •	 Licensee/franchisee being a and licensee/franchisee over 
local person has greater market issues such as maintenance of 
k n o w l e d g e  a n d  c o n t a c t s accounts, payment of royalty and 
which can prove quite helpful non-adherence to norms relating 
to the licensor/franchiser in to production of quality products. 
successfully conducting its These differences often result in 
marketing operations. costly litigations, causing harm to 

	 •	 As per the terms of the licensing/
franchising agreement, only the both the parties. 
parties to the licensing/franchising 
agreement are legally entitled 11.2.4	 Joint Ventures
to make use of the licensor’s/ Joint venture is a very common 
franchiser’s copyrights, patents strategy for entering into foreign 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   262 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 263

markets.  A joint venture means local partner under joint venture 
establishing a firm that is jointly agreements. 
owned by two or more otherwise 
independent firms. In the widest sense Limitations
of the term, it can also be described Major limitations of a joint venture are 
as any form of association which discussed below: 
implies collaboration for more than a 
transitory period. A joint ownership 	 •	 Foreign firms entering into joint 
venture may be brought about in three ventures share the technology 
major ways: and trade secrets with local 
	 (i)	 Foreign investor buying an firms in foreign countries, thus 

interest in a local company always running the risks of such 
	 (ii)	 Local firm acquiring an interest a technology and secrets being 

in an existing foreign firm disclosed to others. 
	(iii)	 Both the foreign and local 	 •	 The dual ownership arrangement 

entrepreneurs jointly forming a may lead to conflicts, resulting 
new enterprise. in battle for control between the 

investing firms. 
Advantages

11.2.5   Wholly Owned Subsidiaries
Major advantages of joint venture 
include: This entry mode of international 
	 •	 Since the local partner also business is preferred by companies 

contributes to the equity capital of which want to exercise full control over 
such a venture, the international their overseas operations. The parent 
firm finds it financially less company acquires full control over the 
burdensome to expand globally.  foreign company by making 100 per 

	 •	 Joint ventures make it possible to cent investment in its equity capital. 
execute large projects requiring A wholly owned subsidiary in a foreign 
huge  cap i ta l  out lays  and market can be established in either of 
manpower. the two ways:  

	 •	 The foreign business firm benefits 	 (i)	 Setting up a new firm altogether 
from a local partner’s knowledge to start operations in a foreign 
of the host countries regarding the country — also referred to as a 
competitive conditions, culture, green field venture, or  
language, political systems and 
business systems. 	 (ii)	 Acquiring an established firm in 

	 •	 In many cases entering into a the foreign country and using 
foreign market is very costly and that firm to manufacture and/or 
risky. This can be avoided by promote its products in the host 
sharing costs and/or risks with a nation. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   263 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



264 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Advantages 11.3	E xport-Import Procedures 
Major advantages of a wholly owned and Documentation

subsidiary in a foreign country are as A major distinction between domestic 
follows: and international operations is the 
	 •	 The parent firm is able to exercise complexity of the latter. Export and 

import of goods is not that straight 
full control over its operations in forward as buying and selling in the 
foreign countries. domestic market. Since foreign trade 

	 •	 Since the parent company on transactions involves movement 
its own looks after the entire of goods across frontiers and use 
operations of foreign subsidiary, of foreign exchange, a number of 
it is not required to disclose its formalities are needed to be performed 
technology or trade secrets to before the goods leave the boundaries 
others. of a country and enter into that of 

another. Following sections are devoted 
Limitations to a discussion of major steps that 
The limitations of setting up a wholly need to be undertaken for completing 
owned subsidiary abroad include:   export and import transactions. 

	 •	 The parent company has to make 11.3.1	 Export Procedure
100 per cent equity investments 
in the foreign subsidiaries. This The number of steps and the sequence 
form of international business is, in which these are taken vary from one 

export transaction to another. Steps 
therefore, not suitable for small involved in a typical export transaction 
and medium size firms which do are as follows.
not have enough funds with them (i) Receipt of enquiry and sending 
to invest abroad. quotations: The prospective buyer 

	 •	 Since the parent company owns of a product sends an enquiry to 
100 per cent equity in the foreign different exporters requesting them 
company, it alone has to bear the to send information regarding price, 
entire losses resulting from failure quality and terms and conditions 
of its foreign operations. for export of goods. Exporters can 

	 •	 Some countries are averse to be informed of such an enquiry even 
setting up of 100 per cent wholly by way of advertisement in the press 
owned subsidiaries by foreigners put in by the importer. The exporter 
in their countries. This form of sends a reply to the enquiry in the 
international business operations, form of a quotation —referred to as 
therefore, becomes subject to proforma invoice. The proforma invoice 
higher political risks.  contains information about the price at 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   264 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 265

which the exporter is ready to sell the export licence before it proceeds with 
goods and also provides information exports. Important pre-requisites for 
about the quality, grade, size, weight, getting an export licence are as follows:
mode of delivery, type of packing and 	 •	 Opening a bank account in any 
payment terms. bank authorised by the Reserve 
(ii) Receipt of order or indent: In case Bank of India (RBI) and getting 
the prospective buyer (i.e., importing an account number.
firm) finds the export price and other 	 •	 Obtaining Import Export Code 
terms and conditions acceptable, it (IEC) number from the Directorate 
places an order for the goods to be General Foreign Trade (DGFT) or 
despatched. This order, also known Regional Import Export Licensing 
as indent, contains a description of Authority.  
the goods ordered, prices to be paid, 	 •	 Registering with appropriate 
delivery terms, packing and marking export promotion council.
details and delivery instructions. 	 •	 Registering with Export Credit and 
(iii)  Assessing the importer’s Guarantee Corporation (ECGC) in 
creditworthiness and securing order to safeguard against risks of 
a guarantee for payments: After non payments.
receipt of the indent, the exporter An export firm needs to have the 
makes necessary enquiry about the Import Export Code (IEC) number as 
creditworthiness of the importer. The it needs to be filled in various export/
purpose underlying the enquiry is to import documents. For obtaining 
assess the risks of non payment by the IEC number, a firm has to apply 
the importer once the goods reach the to the Director General for Foreign 
import destination. To minimise such Trade (DGFT) with documents such as 
risks, most exporters demand a letter exporter/importer profile, bank receipt 
of credit from the importer. A letter for requisite fee, certificate from the 
of credit is a guarantee issued by the banker on the prescribed form, two 
importer’s bank that it will honour copies of photographs attested by the 
payment up to a certain amount of banker, details of the non-resident 
export bills to the bank of the exporter. interest and declaration about the 
Letter of credit is the most appropriate applicant’s non association with 
and secure method of payment adopted caution listed firms. 
to settle international transactions. It is obligatory for every exporter 
(iv) Obtaining export licence: Having to get registered with the appropriate 
become assured about payments, export promotion council. Various 
the exporting firm initiates the steps export promotion councils such as 
relating to compliance of export Engineering Export Promotion Council 
regulations. Export of goods in India is (EEPC) and Apparel Export Promotion 
subject to custom laws which demand Council (AEPC) have been set up by the 
that the export firm must have an Government of India to promote and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   265 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



266 BUSINESS  STUDIES

develop exports of different categories quality products are exported from the 
of products. We shall discuss about country. One such step is compulsory 
export promotion councils in a later inspection of certain products by a 
section. But it may be mentioned here competent agency as designated by 
that it is necessary for the exporter to the government. The government has 
become a member of the appropriate passed Export Quality Control and 
export promotion council and obtain Inspection Act, 1963 for this purpose. 
a Registration cum Membership and has authorised some agencies 
Certificate (RCMC) for availing benefits to act as inspection agencies. If the 
available to export firms from the product to be exported comes under 
Government. such a category, the exporter needs to 

Registration with the ECGC contact the Export Inspection Agency 
is necessary in order to protect (EIA) or the other designated agency 
overseas payments from political and for obtaining inspection certificate. 
commercial risks. Such a registration The pre-shipment inspection report 
also helps the export firm in getting is required to be submitted along 
financial assistance from commercial with other export documents at the 
banks and other financial institutions.   time of exports. Such an inspection 
(v) Obtaining pre-shipment finance: is not compulsory in case the goods 
Once a confirmed order and also a are being exported by star trading 
letter of credit have been received, houses, trading houses, export houses, 
the exporter approaches his banker industrial units setup in export 
for obtaining pre-shipment finance processing zones/special economic 
to undertake export production. Pre- zones (EPZs/SEZs) and 100 per cent 
shipment finance is the finance that export oriented units (EOUs). We shall 
the exporter needs for procuring raw discuss about these special types of 
materials and other components, export firms in a later section.
processing and packing of goods and (viii) 	 Excise clearance: As per the 
transportation of goods to the port of Central Excise Tariff Act, excise 
shipment.  duty is payable on the materials 
(vi)  Production or procurement used in manufacturing goods. The 
of goods: Having obtained the pre- exporter, therefore, has to apply to 
shipment finance from the bank, the the concerned Excise Commissioner 
exporter proceeds to get the goods in the region with an invoice. If the 
ready as per the specifications of the Excise Commissioner is satisfied, 
importer. Either the firm itself goes in he may issue the excise clearance. 
for producing the goods or else it buys But in many cases the government 
from the market. exempts payment of excise duty or 
(vii)  Pre-shipment inspection: The later on refunds it if the goods so 
Government of India has initiated manufactured are meant for exports. 
many steps to ensure that only good The idea underlying such exemption 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   266 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 267

or refund is to provide an incentive to captain of the ship that the specified 
the exporters to export more and also goods after their customs clearance at 
to make the export products more a designated port be received on board. 
competitive in the world markets. (xi)  Packing and forwarding: The 
The refund of excise duty is known as goods are then properly packed and 
duty drawback. This scheme of duty marked with necessary details such 
drawback is presently administered as name and address of the importer, 
by the Directorate of Drawback under gross and net weight, port of shipment 
the Ministry of Finance which is and destination, country of origin, etc. 
responsible for fixing the rates of The exporter then makes necessary 
drawback for different products.  The arrangement for transportation of 
work relating to sanction and payment goods to the port. On loading goods 
of drawback is, however, looked after into the railway wagon, the railway 
by the Commissioner of Customs authorities issue a ‘railway receipt’ 
or Central Excise Incharge of the which serves as a title to the goods. The 
concerned port/airport/land custom exporter endorses the railway receipt 
station from where the export of goods in favour of his agent to enable him 
is considered to have taken place. to take delivery of goods at the port of 
(ix) Obtaining certificate of origin: shipment. 
Some importing countries provide (xii)  Insurance of goods: The exporter 
tariff concessions or other exemptions then gets the goods insured with an 
to the goods coming from a particular insurance company to protect against 
country. For availing such benefits, the the risks of loss or damage of the goods 
importer may ask the exporter to send due to the perils of the sea during the 
a certificate of origin. The certificate of transit. 
origin acts as a proof that the goods (xiii) Customs clearance: The goods 
have actually been manufactured in must be cleared from the customs 
the country from where the export before these can be loaded on the ship. 
is taking place. This certificate can For obtaining customs clearance, the 
be obtained from the trade consulate exporter prepares the shipping bill. 
located in the exporter’s country.  Shipping bill is the main document 
(x) Reservation of shipping space: on the basis of which the customs 
The exporting firm applies to the office gives the permission for export. 
shipping company for provision of Shipping bill contains particulars of 
shipping space. It has to specify the goods being exported, the name 
the types of goods to be exported, of the vessel, the port at which goods 
probable date of shipment and the are to be discharged, country of final 
port of destination. On acceptance of destination, exporter’s name and 
application for shipping, the shipping address, etc.  
company issues a shipping order. A Five copies of the shipping bill 
shipping order is an instruction to the along with the following documents 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   267 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



268 BUSINESS  STUDIES

are then submitted to the Customs (xv) Payment of freight and issuance 
Appraiser at the Customs House: of bill of lading: The C&F agent 
	 •	 Export Contract or Export Order surrenders the mates receipt to the 
	 •	 Letter of Credit shipping company for computation of 
	 •	 Commercial Invoice freight. After receipt of the freight, the 
	 •	 Certificate of Origin shipping company issues a bill of lading 
	 •	 Certificate of Inspection, where which serves as an evidence that the 

necessary shipping company has accepted the 
	 •	 Marine Insurance Policy goods for carrying to the designated 

A f te r  submiss ion  o f  these destination. In the case the goods are 
documents, the Superintendent of the being sent by air, this document is 
concerned port trust is approached for referred to as airway bill. 
obtaining the carting order. Carting (xvi)  Preparation of invoice: After 
order is the instruction to the staff sending the goods, an invoice of the 
at the gate of the port to permit the despatched goods is prepared. The 
entry of the cargo inside the dock. invoice states the quantity of goods 
After obtaining the carting order, the sent and the amount to be paid by the 
cargo is physically moved into the port importer. The C&F agent gets it duly 
area and stored in the appropriate attested by the customs. 
shed. Since the exporter cannot make (xvii)  Securing payment: After 
himself or herself available all the time the shipment 	of goods, the exporter 
for performing all these formalities, informs the importer about the 
these tasks are entrusted to an shipment of goods. The importer 
agent —referred to as Clearing and needs various documents to claim 
Forwarding (C&F) agent. the title of goods on their arrival at 
(xiv) Obtaining mates receipt: The his/her country and getting them 
goods are then loaded on board the customs cleared. The documents 
ship for which the mate or the captain that are needed in this connection 
of the ship issues mate’s receipt to the include certified copy of invoice, bill of 
port superintendent. A mate receipt is lading, packing list, insurance policy, 
a receipt issued by the commanding certificate of origin and letter of credit. 
officer of the ship when the cargo The exporter sends these documents 
is loaded on board, and contains through his/her banker with the 
the information about the name of instruction that these may be delivered 
the vessel, berth, date of shipment, to the importer after acceptance of the 
descripton of packages, marks and bill of exchange — a document which is 
numbers, condition of the cargo at the sent along with the above mentioned 
time of receipt on board the ship, etc. documents. Submission of the relevant 
The port superintendent, on receipt documents to the bank for the purpose 
of port dues, hands over the mate’s of getting the payment from the bank is 
receipt to the C&F agent. called ‘negotiation of the documents’. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   268 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 269

Bill of exchange is an order to says that the necessary documents 
the importer to pay a certain amount (including bill of exchange) relating to 
of money to, or to the order of, a the particular export consignment has 
certain person or to the bearer of the been negotiated (i.e., presented to the 
instrument. It can be of two types: importer for payment) and the payment 
document against sight (sight draft) has been received in accordance with 
or document against acceptance the exchange control regulations.
(usance draft). In case of sight draft, 
the documents are handed over to the 11.3.2	 Import Procedure 
importer only against payment. The 
moment the importer agrees to sign the Import trade refers to purchase of 
sight draft, the relevant documents are goods from a foreign country. Import 
delivered. In the case of usance draft, procedure differs from country to 
on the other hand, the documents are country depending upon the country’s 
delivered to the importer against his or import and custom policies and other 
her acceptance of the bill of exchange statutory requirements. The following 
for making payment at the end of a paragraphs discuss various steps 
specified period, say three months. involved in a typical import transaction 

On receiving the bill of exchange, for bringing goods into Indian territory.
the importer releases the payment (i)  Trade enquiry: The first thing 
in case of sight draft or accepts the that the importing firm has to do 
usance draft for making payment on is to gather information about the 
maturity of the bill of exchange. The countries and firms which export 
exporter’s bank receives the payment the given product. The importer can 
through the importer’s bank and is gather such information from the trade 
credited to the exporter’s account. directories and/or trade associations 

The exporter, however, need not and organisations. Having identified 
wait for the payment till the release of the countries and firms that export 
money by the importer. The exporter the product, the importing firm 
can get immediate payment from approaches the export firms with the 
his/her bank on the submission help of a trade enquiry for collecting 
of documents by signing a letter of information about their export prices 
indemnity. By signing the letter, the and terms of exports. A trade enquiry 
exporter undertakes to indemnify the is a written request by an importing 
bank in the event of non-receipt of firm to the exporter for supply of 
payment from the importer along with information regarding the price and 
accrued interest. various terms and conditions on which 

Having received the payment for the latter is ready to exports goods. 
exports, the exporter needs to get a bank After receiving a trade enquiry, 
certificate of payment. Bank certificate the exporter prepares a quotation and 
of payment is a certificate which sends it to the importer. The quotation 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   269 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



270 BUSINESS  STUDIES

is known as proforma invoice. A goods that he or she wants to import 
proforma invoice is a document that are subject to import licensing. In case 
contains details as to the quality, goods can be imported only against 
grade, design, size, weight and price the licence, the importer needs to 
of the export product, and the terms procure an import licence. In India, it 
and conditions on which their export is obligatory for every importer (and 
will take place. also for exporter) to get registered with 
(ii)  Procurement of import licence: the Directorate General Foreign Trade 
There are certain goods that can be (DGFT) or Regional Import Export 
imported freely, while others need Licensing Authority, and obtain an 
licensing. The importer needs to Import Export Code (IEC) number. This 
consult the Export Import (EXIM) number is required to be mentioned on 
policy in force to know whether the most of the import documents. 

Major Documents needed in Connection with Export Transaction
A.  Documents related to goods 
Export invoice: Export invoice is a sellers’ bill for merchandise and contains 
information about goods such as quantity, total value, number of packages, marks 
on packing, port of destination, name of ship, bill of lading number, terms of delivery 
and payments, etc. 
Packing list: A packing list is a statement of the number of cases or packs and the 
details of the goods contained in these packs. It gives details of the nature of goods 
which are being exported and the form in which these are being sent. 
Certificate of origin: This is a certificate which specifies the country in which the 
goods are being produced. This certificate entitles the importer to claim tariff 
concessions or other exemptions such as non-applicability of quota restrictions 
on goods originating from certain pre-specified countries.  This certificate is also 
required when there is a ban on imports of certain goods from select countries. 
The goods are allowed to be brought into the importing country if these are not 
originating from the banned countries. 
Certificate of inspection: For ensuring quality, the government has made it 
compulsory for certain products that these be inspected by some authorised agency. 
Export Inspection Council of India (EICI) is one such agency which carries out such 
inspections and issues the certificate that the consignment has been inspected as 
required under the Export (Quality Control and Inspection) Act, 1963, and satisfies 
the conditions relating to quality control and inspection as applicable to it, and is 
export worthy. Some countries have made this certificate mandatory for the goods 
being imported to their countries.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   270 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 271

B.  Documents related to shipment 
Mate’s receipt: This receipt is given by the commanding officer of the ship to the 
exporter after the cargo is loaded on the ship. The mate’s receipt indicates the name 
of the vessel, berth, date of shipment, description of packages, marks and numbers, 
condition of the cargo at the time of receipt on board the ship, etc. The shipping 
company does not issue the bill of lading unless it receives the mate’s receipt.
Shipping Bill: The shipping bill is the main document on the basis of which customs 
office grants permission for the export. The shipping bill contains particulars of 
the goods being exported, the name of the vessel, the port at which goods are to be 
discharged, country of final destination, exporter’s name and address, etc.  
Bill of lading: Bill of lading is a document wherein a shipping company gives its 
official receipt of the goods put on board its vessel and at the same time gives an 
undertaking to carry them to the port of destination. It is also a document of title 
to the goods and as such is freely transferable by the endorsement and delivery. 
Airway Bill: Like a bill of lading, an airway bill is a document wherein an airline 
company gives its official receipt of the goods on board its aircraft and at the same 
time gives an undertaking to carry them to the port of destination. It is also a 
document of title to the goods and as such is freely transferable by the endorsement 
and delivery. 
Marine insurance policy: It is a certificate of insurance contract whereby the 
insurance company agrees in consideration of a payment called premium to 
indemnify the insured against loss incurred by the latter in respect of goods exposed 
to perils of the sea.
Cart ticket: A cart ticket is also known as a cart chit, vehicle or gate pass. It is 
prepared by the exporter and includes details of the export cargo in terms of the 
shipper’s name, number of packages, shipping bill number, port of destination and 
the number of the vehicle carrying the cargo.
C.  Documents related to payment
Letter of credit: A letter of credit is a guarantee issued by the importer’s bank that 
it will honour up to a certain amount the payment of export bills to the bank of the 
exporter. Letter of credit is the most appropriate and secure method of payment 
adopted to settle international transactions
Bill of exchange: It is a written instrument whereby the person issuing the instrument 
directs the other party to pay a specified amount to a certain person or the bearer 
of the instrument. In the context of an export-import transaction, bill of exchange 
is drawn by exporter on the importer asking the latter to pay a certain amount to 
a certain person or the bearer of the bill of exchange. The documents giving title 
to the export consignment are passed on to the importer only when the importer 
accepts the order contained in the bill of exchange.
Bank certificate of payment: Bank certificate of payment is a certificate that the 
necessary documents (including bill of exchange) relating to the particular export 
consignment has been negotiated (i.e., presented to the importer for payment) and 
the payment has been received in accordance with the exchange control regulations.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   271 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



272 BUSINESS  STUDIES

(iii)  Obtaining foreign exchange: importer and the overseas supplier 
Since the supplier in the context of is a letter of credit, then the importer 
an import transaction resides in a should obtain the letter of credit from 
foreign country, he/she demands its bank and forward it to the overseas 
payment in a foreign currency. supplier.  As stated previously, a letter 
Payment in foreign currency involves of credit is a guarantee issued by the 
exchange of Indian currency into importer’s bank that it will honour 
foreign currency. In India, all foreign payment up to a certain amount 
exchange transactions are regulated of export bills to the bank of the 
by the Exchange Control Department exporter. Letter of credit is the most 
of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). As appropriate and secured method of 
per the rules in force, every importer payment adopted to settle international 
is required to secure the sanction of transactions. The exporter wants this 
foreign exchange. For obtaining such document to be sure that there is no 
a sanction, the importer has to make risk of non-payment. 
an application to a bank authorised (vi)  Arranging for finance: The 
by RBI to issue foreign exchange. The importer should make arrangements 
application is made in a prescribed in advance to pay to the exporter on 
form along with the import licence arrival of goods at the port. Advanced 
as per the provisions of Exchange planning for financing imports 
Control Act. After proper scrutiny of is necessary so as to avoid huge 
the application, the bank sanctions demurrages (i.e., penalties) on the 
the necessary foreign exchange for the imported goods lying uncleared at the 
import transaction. port for want of payments. 
(iv)  Placing order or indent: After (vii)  Receipt of shipment advice: 
obtaining the import licence, the After loading the goods on the vessel, 
importer places an import order or the overseas supplier dispatches the 
indent with the exporter for supply shipment advice to the importer. A 
of the specified products. The import shipment advice contains information 
order contains information about the about the shipment of goods. The 
price, quantity size, grade and quality information provided in the shipment 
of goods ordered and the instructions advice includes details such as invoice 
relating to packing, shipping, ports number, bill of lading/airways bill 
of shipment and destination, delivery number and date, name of the vessel 
schedule, insurance and mode of with date, the port of export, description 
payment. The import order should be of goods and quantity, and the date of 
carefully drafted so as to avoid any sailing of vessel.
ambiguity and consequent conflict ( v i i i )   Ret i rement  o f  import 
between the importer and exporter. documents: Having shipped the 
(v) Obtaining letter of credit: If the goods, the overseas supplier prepares 
payment terms agreed between the a set of necessary documents as per 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   272 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 273

the terms of contract and letter of manifest.  Import general manifest is a 
credit and hands it over to his or her document that contains the details of 
banker for their onward transmission the imported goods. It is a document 
and negotiation to the importer in the on the basis of which unloading of 
manner as specified in the letter of cargo takes place. 
credit. The set of documents normally (x) Customs clearance and release 
contains bill of exchange, commercial of goods: All the goods imported 
invoice, bill of lading/airway bill, into India have to pass through 
packing list, certificate of origin, customs clearance after they cross the 
marine insurance policy, etc. Indian borders.  Customs clearance 

The bill of exchange accompanying is a somewhat tedious process and 
the above documents is known as calls for completing a number of 
the documentary bill of exchange. As formalities.  It is, therefore, advised that 
mentioned earlier in connection with importers appoint C&F agents who are 
the export procedure, documentary well- versed with such formalities and 
bill of exchange can be of two types: play an important role in getting the 
documents against payment (sight goods customs cleared.
draft )  and documents against Firstly, the importer has to obtain 
acceptance (usance draft). In the case a delivery order which is otherwise 
of sight draft, the drawer instructs known as endorsement for delivery. 
the bank to hand over the relevant Generally when the ship arrives at 
documents to the importer only the port, the importer obtains the 
against payment. But in the case of endorsement on the back of the bill of 
usance draft, the drawer instructs lading. This endorsement is done by 
the bank to hand over the relevant the concerned shipping company. In 
documents to the importer against some cases instead of endorsing the 
acceptance of the bill of exchange. bill, the shipping company issues a 

delivery order. This order entitles the 
The acceptance of bill of exchange for importer to take the delivery of goods. 
the purpose of getting delivery of the Of course, the importer has to first pay 
documents is known as retirement of the freight charges (if these have not 
import documents. Once the retirement been paid by the exporter) before he or 
is over, the bank hands over the import she can take possession of the goods.
documents to the importer. The importer has to also pay 
(ix)  Arrival of goods: Goods are dock dues and obtain port trust dues 
shipped by the overseas supplier as receipt. For this, the importer has to 
per the contract. The person in charge submit to the ‘Landing and Shipping 
of the carrier (ship or airway) informs Dues Office’ two copies of a duly filled 
the officer in charge at the dock or in form — known as ‘application to 
the airport about the arrival of goods import’. The ‘Landing and Shipping 
in the importing country. He provides Dues Office’ levies a charge for services 
the document called import general of dock authorities which has to be 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   273 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



274 BUSINESS  STUDIES

borne by the importer. After payment After payment of the import duty, 
of dock charges, the importer is given the bill of entry has to be presented to 
back one copy of the application as a the dock superintendent. The same has 
receipt. This receipt is known as ‘port to be marked by the superintendent 
trust dues receipt’. and an examiner will be asked to 

The importer then fills in a form 
‘bill of entry’ for assessment of customs physically examine the goods imported. 
import duty. One appraiser examines The examiner gives his report on the 
the document carefully and gives bill of entry. The importer or his agent 
the examination order. The importer presents the bill of entry to the port 
procures the said document prepared authority. After receiving necessary 
by the appraiser and pays the duty, charges, the port authority issues the 
if any. release order.

Major Documents used in an Import Transaction
Trade enquiry: A trade enquiry is a written request by an importing firm to the 
exporter for supply of information regarding the price and various terms and 
conditions on which the latter exports goods. 
Proforma invoice: A proforma invoice is a document that contains details as to the 
quality, grade, design, size, weight and price of the export product, and the terms 
and conditions on which their export will take place. 
Import order or indent: It is a document in which the buyer (importer) orders for 
supply of requisite goods to the supplier (exporter). The order or indent contains 
the information such as quantity and quality of goods to be imported, price to be 
charged, method of forwarding the goods, nature of packing, mode of payment, etc.
Letter of credit: It is document that contains a guarantee from the importer bank to 
the exporter’s bank that it is undertaking to honour the payment up to a certain 
amount of the bills issued by the exporter for exports of the goods to the importer. 
Shipment advice: The shipment advice is a document that the exporter sends to 
the importer informing him that the shipment of goods has been made. Shipment 
of advice contains invoice number, bill of lading/airways bill number and date, 
name of the vessel with date, the port of export, description of goods and quantity, 
and the date of sailing of the vessel.
Bill of lading: It is a document prepared and signed by the master of the ship 
acknowledging the receipt of goods on board. It contains terms and conditions on 
which the goods are to be taken to the port of destination.
Airway Bill: Like a bill of lading, an airway bill is a document wherein an airline/ 
shipping company gives its official receipt of the goods on board its aircraft and 
at the same time gives an undertaking to carry them to the port of destination. It 
is also a document of title to the goods and as such is freely transferable by the 
endorsement and delivery. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   274 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 275

Bill of entry: Bill of entry is a form supplied by the customs office to the importer. 
It is to be filled in by the importer at the time of receiving the goods. It has to be 
in triplicate and is to be submitted to the customs office. The bill of entry contains 
information such as name and address of the importer, name of the ship, number of 
packages, marks on the package, description of goods, quantity and value of goods, 
name and address of the exporter, port of destination, and customs duty payable.
Bill of exchange: It is a written instrument whereby the person issuing the instrument 
directs the other party to pay a specified amount to a certain person or the bearer 
of the instrument. In the context of an export-import transaction, bill of exchange 
is drawn by the exporter on the importer asking the latter to pay a certain amount 
to a certain person or the bearer of the bill of exchange. The documents giving title 
to the export consignment are passed on to the importer only when the importer 
accepts the order contained in the bill of exchange.
Sight draft: It is a type of bill of exchange wherein the drawer of the bill of exchange 
instructs the bank to hand over the relevant documents to the importer only against 
payment. 
Usance draft: It is a type of bill of exchange wherein the drawer of the bill of exchange 
instructs the bank to hand over the relevant documents to the importer only against 
acceptance of the bill of exchange.
Import general manifest:  Import general manifest is a document that contains the 
details of the imported good. It is the document on the basis of which unloading 
of cargo takes place. 
Dock challan: Dock charges are to be paid when all the formalities of the customs are 
completed. While paying the dock dues, the importer or his clearing agent specifies 
the amount of dock dues in a challan or form which is known as dock challan.

Key Terms
International Contract IEC number Certificate of origin
business manufacturing Registration- Customs clearance
International trade Licensing cum membership Letter of credit
Merchandise trade Franchising certificate Shipping bill
Invisible trade Outsourcing Pre-shipment Mate receipt
Foreign investment Joint ventures finance Bill of lading
FDI Wholly owned Pre-shipment Airway bill
Portfolio subsidiaries inspection Invoice
investment Proforma invoice Export inspection Bill of exchange
Exproting Order or intent agency Sight draft
Importing Export licence Excise clearance Usance draft

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   275 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



276 BUSINESS  STUDIES

Negotiation of bills Delivery order Export Promotion Commodity 
Marine insurance Bill of entry Capital Goods Scheme boards
policy C&F agent (EPCG) IIFT
Cart ticket Port trust dues Export finance Indian Institute 
Bank certificate of receipt Post-shipment finance of Packaging
payment Duty drawback Export processing zone ITPO
Certificate of scheme (EPZ) Export 
inspection Export 100% Export Oriented Inspection 
Trade enquiry manufacturing Unit (100% EOU) Council 
Shipment advice under bond scheme Department of Commerce State trading 
Import general Advance licence Export promotion organisations
manifest scheme council 

SUMMARY
International Business: International business refers to business activities 
that take place across national frontiers. Though many people use the terms 
international business and international trade synonymously, the former is a 
much broader term. International business involves not only trade in goods 
and services, but also other operations, such as production and marketing of 
goods and services in foreign countries.
International Vs Domestic Business: Conducting and managing international 
business operations is more complex than undertaking domestic business. 
Differences in the nationality of parties involved, relatively less mobility of 
factors of production, customer heterogeneity across markets, variations in 
business practices and political systems, varied business regulations and 
policies, and use of different currencies are the key aspects that differentiate 
international businesses from domestic business. These, moreover, are the 
factors that make international business much more complex and a difficult 
activity.

EXERCISES

Short Answer Questions
1.	 Differentiate between international trade and international business.
2.	 Discuss any three advantages of international business.
3.	 What is the major reason underlying trade between nations?
4.	 Differentiate between contract manufacturing and setting up wholly owned 

production subsidiary abroad.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd   276 9/2/2022   2:24:11 PM



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 277

5.	 Why is it necessary for an export firm to go in for pre-shipment inspection?
6.	 What is bill of lading? How does it differ from bill of entry?
7.	 What is a letter of credit? Why does an exporter need this document?
8.	 Discuss the process involved in securing payment for exports.

Long Answer Questions
1.	 “International business is more than international trade”. Comment.
2.	 What benefits do firms derive by entering into international business?
3.	 In what ways is exporting a better way of entering international markets 

than setting up wholly owned subsidiaries abroad.
4.	 Rekha Garments has received an order to export 2000 men’s trousers to 

Swift Imports Ltd., located in Australia. Discuss the procedure that Rekha 
Garments would need to go through for executing the export order.

5.	 Your firm is planning to import textile machinery from Canada. Describe 
the procedure involved in importing.

6.	 What is IMF? Discuss its various objectives and functions.
7.	 Write a detailed note on features, structure, objectives and functioning  

of WTO.

Reprint 2025-26



278 BUSINESS  STUDIES

FORM NO. INC-1
(Pursuant to section 4(4) of the Companies Application for
Act, 2013 and pursuant to rule 8 & 9 of reservation of Name
the Companies
(Incorporation) Rules, 2014)

Form language	   English	Hindi
Refer the instruction kit for filing the form.

1.*	 Application for :
	 	 Incorporating a new company (Part A, B, C)
	 	 Changing the name of an existing company (Part B, C, D)
Part A: Reservation of name for incorporation of a new company
2.	 Details of applicant (In case the applicant has been allotted DIN, then it is mandatory to 
	 enter such DIN)
	 (a)	 Director identification number (DIN) or Income tax 				     Pre-fill
	 permanent account number (PAN) or passport number			        Verify Details
	 (b)	 *First Name	
		   Middle Name	
		  *Surname	
	 (c)	 *Occupation Type	  Self-employed	  Professional	  Homemaker	  Student 	
			    Serviceman
	 (d)	 Address	             *LINE I	
			               LINE II	
	 (e)	 *City		
	 (f)	 *State/Union Territory	
	 (g)	 *Pin Code		
	 (h)	 ISO Country code	
	 (i)	 Country		
	 (j)	 e-mail ID		
	 (k)	 Phone (with STD/ISD code)	  — 	
	 (l)	 Mobile (with country code)  — 	
	 (m)	 Fax		   — 	
3.	 (a)	 *Type of company
		    Section 8 company	   Part I company (Chapter XXI)	   Producer company
		    New company (others)
	 (d)	 *State the sub-category of proposed company
		    Public 		    Private		    Private (One Person Company)
	 (b)	 *State class of the proposed company	
	 (c)	 *State the category of proposed company	
4.	 *Name of the State/Union territory in which the proposed company is to be registered
	

Reprint 2025-26



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 279

5.	 *Name of the office of the Registrar of Companies in which the proposed company is to be 
	 registered
	
6.	 Details of promoter(s) (In case the promoter(s) has been allotted DIN, then it is mandatory to 
	 enter such DIN)
	 * Enter the number of promoter(s) 

	 *Category	
	 DIN or Income-tax PAN or passport number or corporate	
	 identification number (CIN) or foreign company registration	    Pre-fill 
	 Number (FCRN) or any other registration number
	 *Name

	

7. *Objects of the proposed Company to be included in its MoA

	
8.	 *Particulars of proposed director(s)
	 (Specify information of one director in case the proposed company is One Person Company or 
	 of two directors in case the proposed company is a private company (other than producer 
	 company) or of three directors in case the proposed company is a public company or of five 
	 directors in case the proposed company is a producer company)	

*Director Identification Number (DIN)  		  Pre-fill
Name

Father’s Name

Nationality	 	  Date of birth (DD/MM/YY)	
Income tax permanent account number (PAN)	
Passport number  	 	 Voter identity card number	
Aadhaar number   	
Present residential address

9	 *Whether the Promoters are carrying on any Partnership firm, sole proprietary or unregistered 
	 entity in the name as applied for
		    Yes		    No
	 (If yes, attach NOC from all owners/partners of such entity for use of such name)
Part B. Particulars about the proposed name(s)
10. *Number of proposed names for the company
	 (Please give maximum six names in order of preference)

Reprint 2025-26



280 BUSINESS  STUDIES

 I.	 Proposed name
	 Significance of key or coined word in the
	 proposed name
	 State the name of the vernacular
	 language(s) if used in the proposed name
11.	 *Whether the proposed name is in resemblance with any class of Trade Marks 
	 Rules, 2002
		    Yes		    No
	 If yes, Please specify the Class(s) of trade mark  
12. *Whether the proposed name(s) is/are based on a registered trade mark or is 
	 subject matter  of an application pending for registration under the Trade Marks Act.
		    Yes		    No
	 If yes, furnish particulars of trade mark or application and the approval of the applicant or 
	 owner of the trademark

	
13.	 In case the name is similar to any existing company or to the foreign holding company, 
	 specify name of such company and also attach copy of the No Objection Certificate by way of 
	 board resolution (Duly attested by a director of that company)
	 (a)	 Whether the name is similar to holding Company
		    Existing Company	   Foreign holding company 
	 (b)	 In case of existing Company, provide CIN 	 Pre-fill
	 (c)	 Name of the Company
	

14.	 (a) Whether the proposed name includes the words such as Insurance, Bank, Stock exchange, 
	 Venture Capital, Asset Management, Nidhi, or Mutual Fund etc.	   Yes	   No
	 If Yes, whether the in-principle approval is received from 		
	 specify other    	    Yes	   No
	 (If yes, attach the approval or if No, attach the approval at the time of filing the incorporation form
	 (b)	 *Whether the proposed name including the phrase ‘Electoral trust’	   Yes	   No 
	 [If Yes, attach the affidavit as per rule 8(2)(b)(vi)]
Part C. Names requiring Central Government approval
15.	 *State whether the proposed name(s) contain such word or expression for which the previous 
	 approval of Central Government is required			     Yes	   No
	 (If Yes, this form shall be treated as an application to the Central Govt., for such approval 		
and shall be dealt with accordingly)
Part D. Reservation of name for change of Name by an Existing Company
16.	 (a)	 *CIN of Company   		  Pre-fill
	 (b)	 Global Location Number (GLN) of Company	
17.	 (a)	 Name of Company  
	 (b)	 Address of the registered office of the Company

	
	 (c)	 Email ID of the Company	
18.	 (a)	 * State whether the change of name is due to direction received from the Central 
		  Government.
		    Yes	   No
	 (If yes, please attach a copy of such directions)

Reprint 2025-26



INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS 281

	 (b)	 * Whether the proposed name is in accordance with the rule 8(8) and specific direction 
		  of the Tribunal is attached.
		    Yes	   No
	 [If ‘Yes’ selected,attach order of tribunal as required in Rule 8(8)]
19.	 (a)	 Whether the change in name requires change in object of the company
		    Yes	   No
	 (b)	 Reasons for change in name (in case of yes above, mention proposed object of the company)

	
Attachments
(12) Optional attachment, if any.		  Attach			   List of attachments

								      
									         Remove attachment

Declaration

	*I have gone through the provisions of The Companies Act, 2013, the rules thereunder and prescribed 
guidelines framed thereunder in respect of reservation of name, understood the meaning thereof and 
the proposed name(s) is/are in conformity thereof.
	*I have used the search facilities available on the portal of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) 
for checking the resemblance of the proposed name(s) with the companies and Limited Liability 
partnerships (LLPs) respectively already registered or the names already approved. I have also used 
the search facility for checking the resemblances of the proposed name(s) with registered trademarks 
and trade mark subject of an application under The Trade Marks Act, 1999 and other relevant search 
for checking the resemblance of the proposed name(s) to satisfy myself with the compliance of the 
provisions of the Act for resemblance of name and Rules thereof.
	*The proposed name(s) is/are not in violation of the provisions of Emblems and Names (Prevention 
of Improper Use) Act, 1950 as amended from time to time.
	*The proposed name is not offensive to any section of people, e.g., proposed name does not contain 
profanity or words or phrases that are generally considered a slur against an ethnic group, religion, 
gender or heredity.
	*The proposed name(s) is not such that its use by the company will constitute an offence under any 
law for the time being in force.
	*To the best of my knowledge and belief, the information given in this application and its attachments 
thereto is correct and complete, and nothing relevant to this form has been suppressed.
	*I undertake to be fully responsible for the consequences in case the name is subsequently found 
to be in contravention of the provisions of section 4(2) and section 4(4) of the Companies Act, 2013 
and rules thereto and I have also gone through and understood the provisions of section 4(5) (ii) (a) 
and (b) of the Companies Act, 2013 and rules thereunder and fully declare myself responsible for 
the consequences thereof.

To be digitally signed by

*Designation	 	  	
*DIN or Income-tax PAN or passport number of the applicant or Director  
identification number of the director; or PAN of the manager or CEO or CFO; or Membership number 
of the Company Secretary
Note: Attention is drawn to the provisions of Section 7(5) and 7(6) which, inter-alia, provides 
that furnishing of any false or incorrect particulars of any information or suppression of any 
material information shall attract punishment for fraud under Section 447. Attention is also 
drawn to provisions of Section 448 and 449 which provide for punishment for false statement 
and punishment for false evidence respectively. 
	 Modify	 Check Form 	 Prescrutiny 	 Submit

Reprint 2025-26



NOTES

Reprint 2025-26