Chapter 1 
##1##
Computer System

1.1 Introduction to Computer System “A computer would deserve 
A computer is an electronic device that can be to be called intelligent if it 
programmed to accept data (input), process it and could deceive a human into 
generate result (output). A computer along with believing that it was human.” 
additional hardware and software together is called a –Alan Turing
computer system.  

A computer system primarily comprises a central 
processing unit (CPU), memory, input/output devices 
and storage devices. All these components function 
together as a single unit to deliver the desired output. 
A computer system comes in various forms and sizes. 
It can vary from a high-end server to personal desktop, 
laptop, tablet computer, or a smartphone. 

Figure 1.1 shows the block diagram of a computer 
system. The directed lines represent the flow of data 
and signal between the components. 

Secondary 
Storage Devices

Primary 
Memory In this chapter

Input Control Unit Output »» Introduction to 
Device (CU) Device Computer System

»» Evolution of 
Arithmetic Logic Computer 

Unit (ALU)
»» Computer Memory 

Central Processing 
Unit (CPU) »» Data Transfer 

Figure 1.1: Components of a computer system between Memory 
and CPU

1.1.1 Central Processing Unit (CPU) »» Data and 
It is the electronic circuitry of a computer that carries Information
out the actual processing and usually referred as the »» Microprocessors
brain of the computer. It is commonly called processor »» Software
also. Physically, a CPU can be placed on one or more 
microchips called integrated circuits (IC). The ICs »» Operating System
comprise semiconductor materials. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   1 08-Apr-19   11:36:15 AM



2 Computer Science – Class xi

The CPU is given instructions and data through 
programs. The CPU then fetches the program and data 
from the memory and performs arithmetic and logic 

Keyboard operations as per the given instructions and stores the 
result back to memory.

While processing, the CPU stores the data as well 
as instructions in its local memory called registers. 

Mouse Registers are part of the CPU chip and they are limited 
in size and number. Different registers are used for 
storing data, instructions or intermediate results. 

Other than the registers, the CPU has two main 
Scanner components — Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU) and Control 

Unit (CU). ALU performs all the arithmetic and logic 
operations that need to be done as per the instruction in a 
program. CU controls sequential instruction execution, 

Touch Screen interprets instructions and guides data flow through the 
computer’s memory, ALU and input or output devices. 

Figure 1.2: Input devices CPU is also popularly known as microprocessor. We will 
study more about it in section 1.5. 
1.1.2 Input Devices
The devices through which control signals are sent 
to a computer are termed as input devices. These 
devices convert the input data into a digital form that is 
acceptable by the computer system. Some examples of 
input devices include keyboard, mouse, scanner, touch 
screen, etc., as shown in Figure 1.2. Specially designed 
braille keyboards are also available to help the visually 
impaired for entering data into a computer. Besides, we 

Display monitor can now enter data through voice, for example, we can 
use Google voice search to search the web where we can 
input the search string through our voice.

Data entered through input device is temporarily 
Speaker stored in the main memory (also called RAM) of the 

computer system. For permanent storage and future use, 
the data as well as instructions are stored permanently 
in additional storage locations called secondary memory.

Printer 1.1.3 Output Devices
The device that receives data from a computer system 
for display, physical production, etc., is called output 

3D printer device. It converts digital information into human-
understandable form. For example, monitor, projector, 

Figure 1.3: Output devices headphone, speaker, printer, etc. Some output devices 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   2 08-Apr-19   11:36:15 AM



Computer System 3

are shown in Figure 1.3. A braille display monitor is 
useful for a visually challenged person to understand 
the textual output generated by computers.

A printer is the most commonly used device to get 
output in physical (hardcopy) form. Three types of 
commonly used printers are inkjet, laserjet and dot 
matrix. Now-a-days, there is a new type of printer 
called 3D-printer, which is used to build physical A punched card is a 
replica of a digital 3D design. These printers are being piece of stiff paper that 
used in manufacturing industries to create prototypes stores digital data in 

the form of holes at 
of products. Their usage is also being explored in the predefined positions.
medical field, particularly for developing body organs.

1.2 Evolution of Computer
From the simple calculator to a modern day powerful 
data processor, computing devices have evolved in a 
relatively short span of time. The evolution of computing 
devices in shown through a timeline in Figure 1.4

Pascaline EDVAC/ENIAC
John Von Neumann introduced 

Blaize Pascal invented a mechanical the concept of stored program 
calculator known as Pascal calculator computer which was capable of 

or Pascaline to do addition and storing data as well as program 
subtraction of two numbers directly in the memory. The EDVAC and 

and multiplication and division through then the ENIAC computers were 
repeated addition and subtraction. developed based on this concept.

Tabulating Machine Integrated Circuit
Herman Hollerith designed An Integrated Circuit (IC) is 

1642 a tabulating machine for 1945 a silicon chip which contains 
summarising the data stored entire electronic circuit on a 

on the punched card. It is very small area. The size of 
computer drastically reduced 

step towards programming. because of ICs.

1890 1970

1834 1947

Analytic Engine Transistor
Charles Babbage invented Vacuum tubes were 

analytical engine, a replaced by transistors 
500 BC mechanical computing device 1937 developed at Bell Labs, 

for inputting, processing, using semiconductor 
storing and displaying the materials.

output, which is considered 
to form the basis of modern 

Abacus computers.
Turing Machine

Computing is attributed to The Turing machine concept was a 
the invention of ABACUS general purpose programmable 
almost 3000 years ago. It machine that was capable of solving 
was a mechanical device any problem by executing the 
capable of doing simple program stored on the punched cards.

arithmetic calculations only.
Figure 1.4:  Timeline showing key inventions in computing technology

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   3 08-Apr-19   11:36:15 AM



4 Computer Science – Class xi

The Von Neumann architecture is shown in Figure 
1.5. It consists of a Central Processing Unit (CPU) 
for processing arithmetic and logical instructions, a 
memory to store data and programs, input and output 

devices and communication 
channels to send or receive the 
output data. Electronic Numerical 
Integrator and Computer (ENIAC) 
is the first binary programmable 

Figure 1.5: Von Neumann architecture for computer based on Von Neumann 
	 the computer architecture. 

During the 1970s, Large Scale Integration (LSI) of 
electronic circuits allowed integration of complete 
CPU on a single chip, called microprocessor. Moore’s 
Law predicted exponential growth in the number 

In 1965, Intel co- of transistors that could be assembled in a single 
founder Gordon Moore microchip. In 1980s, the processing power of computers 

introduced Moore’s increased exponentially by integrating around 3 million 
Law which predicted components on a small-sized chip termed as Very 
that the number of 

transistors on a chip Large Scale Integration (VLSI). Further advancement in 
would double every two technology has made it feasible to fabricate high density 

years while the costs of transistors and other components (approx 106 
would be halved. components) on a single IC called Super Large Scale 

Integration (SLSI) as shown in Figure 1.6. 
IBM introduced its first personal computer (PC) for 

the home user in 1981 and Apple introduced Macintosh 

10,000,000,000
1,000,000,000 Core 2 DUO Core i7

100,000,000 Intel Microprocessors
Pentium II Pentium I V

10,000,000 Pentium III
Pentium 

1,000,000 486
486

100,000 Invention of the 386
10,000 Transistor 286

8086
1,000 4004

100 Doubles every 2 years
10

1
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020

Figure 1.6: Exponential increase in number of  transistors used in ICs over time

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   4 08-Apr-19   11:36:15 AM

Number of Transistors
per Integrated Circuit



Computer System 5

machines in 1984. The popularity of the PC surged 
by the introduction of Graphical User Interface (GUI) 
based operating systems by Microsoft and others in 
place of computers with only command line interface, 
like UNIX or DOS. Around 1990s, the growth of World 
Wide Web (WWW) further accelerated mass usage of 
computers and thereafter computers have become an 
indispensable part of everyday life.

Further, with the introduction of laptops, personal 
computing was made portable to a great extent. This 
was followed by smartphones, tablets and other 
personal digital assistants. These devices have leveraged 
the technological advancements in processor 
miniaturisation, faster memory, high speed data and 
connectivity mechanisms. 

The next wave of computing devices includes 
the wearable gadgets, such as smart watch, lenses, 
headbands, headphones, etc. Further, smart appliances 
are becoming a part of the Internet of Things (IoT), by 
leveraging the power of Artificial Intelligence (AI).

1.3 Computer Memory

A computer system needs memory to store the data and 
instructions for processing. Whenever we talk about the 
‘memory’ of a computer system, we usually talk about the 
main or primary memory. The secondary memory (also 
called storage device) is used to store data, instructions 
and results permanently for future use.
1.3.1 Units of Memory
A computer system uses binary numbers to store and 
process data. The binary digits 0 and 1, which are the 
basic units of memory, are called bits. Further, these 
bits are grouped together to form words. A 4-bit word 
is called a Nibble. Examples of nibble are 1001, 1010, 
0010, etc. A two nibble word, i.e., 8-bit word is called a 
byte, for example, 01000110, 01111100, 10000001, etc.

Like any other standard unit, bytes are grouped 
together to make bigger chunks or units of memory. 
Table 1.1 shows different measurement units for digital 
data stored in storage devices.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   5 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



6 Computer Science – Class xi

Table 1.1	 Measurement units for digital data
Unit Description Unit Description

KB (Kilobyte) 1 KB = 1024 Bytes PB (Petabyte) 1 PB = 1024 TB
MB (Megabyte) 1 MB = 1024 KB EB (Exabyte) 1 EB = 1024 PB
GB (Gigabyte) 1 GB = 1024 MB ZB (Zettabyte) 1 ZB = 1024 EB
TB (Terabyte) 1 TB = 1024 GB YB (Yottabyte) 1 YB = 1024 ZB

1.3.2 Types of Memory
Human beings memorise many things over a lifetime, and 
recall from memory to make a decision or some action.
However, we do not rely on our memory completely, and 
we make notes and store important data and information 
using other media, such as notebook, manual, journal, 
document, etc. Similarly, computers have two types of 
memory   — primary and secondary. 
(A)	 Primary Memory
Primary memory is an essential component of a 
computer system. Program and data are loaded into the 
primary memory before processing. The CPU interacts 
directly with the primary memory to perform read or 
write operation. It is of two types viz. (i) Random Access 
Memory (RAM) and (ii) Read Only Memory (ROM).

RAM is volatile, i.e., as long as the power is supplied 
to the computer, it retains the data in it. But as soon 
as the power supply is turned off, all the contents of 
RAM are wiped out. It is used to store data temporarily 
while the computer is working. Whenever the computer 
is started or a software application is launched, the 
required program and data are loaded into RAM 
for processing. RAM is usually referred to as main 
memory and it is faster than the secondary memory or 
storage devices.

On the other hand, ROM is non-volatile, which 
means its contents are not lost even when the power is 
turned off. It is used as a small but faster permanent 
storage for the contents which are rarely changed. For 

Think and Reflect example, the startup program (boot loader) that loads 
the operating system into primary memory, is stored 

Suppose there is a 
computer with RAM in ROM.
but no secondary (B)	 Cache Memory
storage. Can we install RAM is faster than secondary storage, but not as fast 
a software on that 
computer? as a computer processor. So, because of RAM, a CPU 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   6 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



Computer System 7

may have to slow down. To speed up the operations of 
the CPU, a very high speed memory is placed between 
the CPU and the primary memory known as cache. It 
stores the copies of the data from frequently accessed 
primary memory locations, thus, reducing the average 
time required to access data from primary memory. 
When the CPU needs some data, it first examines the 
cache. In case the requirement is met, it is read from 
the cache, otherwise the primary memory is accessed.
(C)	 Secondary Memory
Primary memory has limited storage capacity and Pen 
is either volatile (RAM) or read-only (ROM). Thus, a Drive

computer system needs auxiliary or secondary memory 
to permanently store the data or instructions for 
future use. The secondary memory is non-volatile and 
has larger storage capacity than primary memory. It 
is slower and cheaper than the main memory. But, it CD/DVD
cannot be accessed directly by the CPU. Contents of 
secondary storage need to be first brought into the main 
memory for the CPU to access. Examples of secondary 
memory devices include Hard Disk Drive (HDD), CD/
DVD, Memory Card, etc., as shown in Figure 1.7.

However, these days, there are secondary storage 
devices like SSD which support very fast data transfer 
speed as compared to earlier HDDs. Also, data transfer 
between computers have become easier and simple due 
to the availability of small-sized and portable flash or 
pen drives. 

1.4 Data Transfer between Memory and CPU
Figure 1.7: Storage devices 

Data need to be transferred between the CPU and 
primary memory as well as between the primary and 
secondary memory. 

Data are transferred between different components of 
a computer system using physical wires called bus. For 
example, bus is used for data transfer between a USB 
port and hard disk or between a hard disk and main 
memory. Bus is of three types — (i) Data bus to transfer 
data between different components, (ii) Address bus to 
transfer addresses between CPU and main memory. 
The address of the memory location that the CPU wants 
to read or write from is specified in the address bus, 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   7 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



8 Computer Science – Class xi

and (iii) Control bus to communicate 
control signals between different 
components of a computer. All these 
three buses collectively make the 
system bus, as shown in Figure 1.8.

As the CPU interacts directly with 
main memory, any data entered from 
input device or the data to be accessed 
from hard disk needs to be placed in the 
main memory for further processing. 

	Figure 1.8: Data transfer between components through The data is then transferred between 
system bus CPU and main memory using bus.

The CPU places on the address bus, the address of 
the main memory location from which it wants to read 
data or to write data. While executing the instructions, 
the CPU specifies the read or write control signal through 
the control bus. 

As the CPU may require to read data from main 
memory or write data to main memory, a data bus is 
bidirectional. But the control bus and address bus are 
unidirectional. To write data into memory, the CPU 
places the data on the data bus, which is then written 
to the specific address provided through the address 
bus. In case of read operation, the CPU specifies the 
address, and the data is placed on the data bus by a 
dedicated hardware, called memory controller. The 
memory controller manages the flow of data into and 
out of the computer's main memory.

1.5 Microprocessors

In earlier days, a computer's CPU used to occupy a large 
room or  multiple cabinets. However, with advancement 
in technology, the physical size of CPU has reduced and 
it is now possible to place a CPU on a single microchip 
only. A processor (CPU) which is implemented on a 
single microchip is called microprocessor. Nowadays, 
almost all the CPUs are microprocessors. Hence, the 
terms are used synonymously for practical purpose.

Microprocessor  is a small-sized electronic component 
inside a computer that carries out various tasks involved 
in data processing as well as arithmetic and logical 
operations. These days, a microprocessor is built over 
an integrated circuit comprising millions of small 
components like resistors, transistors and diodes.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   8 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



Computer System 9

Microprocessors have evolved over time in terms 
of their increased processing capability, decreasing 
physical size and reduced cost. Currently available 
microprocessors are capable of processing millions of 
instructions per millisecond. Table 1.2 lists different 
types of microprocessors along with their generation, 
time period, and underlying technology since their 
inception in early 1970s.

Table 1.2	 Generations of Microprocessor
Generation Era Chip Word Maximum Clock Cores Example*

type size memory size speed
First 1971-73 LSI 4 / 8 1 KB 108 KHz- Single Intel 8080

bit 200 KHz
Second 1974-78 LSI 8 bit 1 MB Upto 2 MHz Single Motorola 6800 

Intel 8085
Third 1979-80 VLSI 16 bit 16 MB 4 MHz - 6 Single Intel 8086

MHz
Fourth 1981-95 VLSI 32 bit 4 GB Upto 133 Single Intel 80386

MHz Motorola 68030
Fifth 1995 till SLSI 64 bit 64 GB 533 MHz - Multicore Pentium, 

date 34 GHz Celeron, Xeon
*few prominent examples are included. 

1.5.1 Microprocessor Specifications
Microprocessors are classified on the basis of different 
features which include chip type, word size, memory 
size, clock speed, etc. These features are briefly 
explained below:
(A)	 Word Size
Word size is the maximum number of bits that a 
microprocessor can process at a time. Earlier, a word 
was of 8 bits, as it was the maximum limit at that 
time. At present, the minimum word size is 16 bits and 
maximum word size is 64 bits.
(B)	 Memory Size
Depending upon the word size, the size of RAM varies. 
Initially, RAM was very small (4MB) due to 4/8 bits word Activity 1.1
size. As word size increased to 64 bits, it has become The maximum memory 
feasible to use RAM of size upto 16 Exabytes (EB). size of microprocessors 

of different generations 
(C)	 Clock Speed are given at Table 1.2. 
Computers have an internal clock that generates pulses Represent each of the 
(signals) at regular intervals of time. Clock speed simply memory size in terms 

of power of 2.
means the number of pulses generated per second by the 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   9 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



10 Computer Science – Class xi

Activity 1.2 clock inside a computer. The clock speed indicates the 
speed at which the computer can execute instructions.

Find out the clock speed 
of the microprocessor Earlier, it was measured in Hertz (Hz) and Kilohertz 
of your computer and (kHz). But with advancement in technology and chip 
compare with that of density, it is now measured in Gigahertz (GHz), i.e., 
your peers? billions of pulses per second.

(D)	 Cores
Core is a basic computation unit of the CPU. Earlier 
processors had only one computation unit, thereby 
capable of performing only  one task at a time. With the 
advent of multicore processor, it has become possible 
for the computer to execute multiple tasks, thereby 
increasing the system’s performance. CPU with two, 
four, and eight cores is called dual-core, quad-core and 
octa-core processor, respectively. 
1.5.2 Microcontrollers
The microcontroller is a small computing device which 
has a CPU, a fixed amount of RAM, ROM and other 
peripherals all embedded on a single chip as compared 
to microprocessor that has only a CPU on the chip. The 
structure of a microcontroller is shown in Figure 1.9. 
Keyboard, mouse, washing machine, digital camera, 
pendrive, remote controller, microwave are few examples 
of microcontrollers. As these are designed for specific 
tasks only, hence their size as well as cost is reduced. 

Because of the very small size of the 
microcontroller, it is embedded in another device 
or system to perform a specific functionality. For 

Clock CPU example, the microcontroller in a fully automatic 
Memory

washing machine is used to control the washing cycle 
Bus System without any human intervention. The cycle starts 

with the filling of water, after which the clothes are 
Input Output soaked and washed; thereafter the water is drained 

I/O-ports
and the clothes are spin dry. The simple use of 
microcontroller has permitted repetitive execution 

Figure 1.9: Structure of of tedious tasks automatically without any human 
microcontroller intervention, thereby saving precious time.

1.6 Data and Information
A computer is primarily for processing data. A computer 
system considers everything as data, be it instructions, 
pictures, songs, videos, documents, etc. Data can also be 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   10 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



Computer System 11

raw and unorganised facts that are processed to get 
meaningful information.

So understanding the concept of data along with 
its different types is crucial to understand the overall 
functioning of a computer. Sometimes people use the 
terms data, information and knowledge interchangeably, 
which is incorrect. 
1.6.1 Data and Its Types
A computer system has many input devices, which 
provide it with raw data in the form of facts, concepts, 
instructions, etc., Internally everything is stored in 
binary form (0 and 1), but externally, data can be input 
to a computer in the text form consisting of English 
alphabets A–Z, a–z, numerals 0 – 9, and special symbols 
like @, #, etc. Data can be input in other languages too 
or it can be read from the files. The input data may 
be from different sources, hence it may be in different 
formats. For example, an image is a collection of Red, 
Green, Blue (RGB) pixels, a video is made up of frames, 
and a fee receipt is made of numeric and non-numeric 
characters. Primarily, there are three types of data.
(A)	 Structured Data
Data which follows a strict record structure and is easy 
to comprehend is called structured data. Such data with 
pre-specified tabular format may be stored in a data file 
to access in the future. Table 1.3 shows structured data 
related to monthly attendance of students maintained 
by the school.

Table 1.3	 Structured data: Monthly attendance records of students
Roll No Name Month Attendance (in %)

R1 Mohan May 95
R2 Sohan May 75
R3 Sheen May 92
R4 Geet May 82
R5 Anita May 97
R1 Mohan July 98
R2 Sohan July 65
R3 Sheen July 85
R4 Geet July 94
R5 Anita July 85

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   11 08-Apr-19   11:36:16 AM



12 Computer Science – Class xi

Think and Reflect It is clear that such data is organised in row/column 
format and is easily understandable. Structured data 

Can you give some may be sorted in ascending or descending order. In the 
more examples of 
unstructured data? example, attendance data is sorted in increasing order 

on the column ‘month’. Other examples of structured 
data include sales transactions, online railway ticket 
bookings, ATM transactions, etc. 
(B)	 Unstructured Data
Data which are not organised in a pre-defined record 
format is called unstructured data. Examples include 
audio and video files, graphics, text documents, social 
media posts, satellite images, etc. Figure 1.10 shows a 
report card with monthly attendance record details sent 
to parents. Such data are unstructured as they consist 
of textual contents as well as graphics, which do not 
follow a specific format.

Attendance record for the month of July
School Logo

Attended:

Guardian’s Signature Principal’s Signature

Figure 1.10: Unstructured data: Monthly attendance record 

(C)	 Semi-structured Data
Data which have no well-defined structure but 
maintains internal tags or markings to separate data 
elements are called semi-structured data. Examples 
include email document, HTML page, comma separated 
values (csv file), etc. Figure 1.11 shows an example of 
semi-structured data containing student’s month-wise 
attendance details. In this example, there is no specific 

format for each attendance 
Name: Mohan  Month: July  Class: XI Attendance: 98 
Name: Sohan  Month: July  Class: XI Attendance: 65 record. Here, each data value 
Name: Sheen  Month: July  Class: XI Attendance: 85 is preceded by a tag (Name, 
Name: Geet  Month: May  Class: XI Attendance: 82
Name: Geet  Month: July  Class: XI Attendance: 94 Month, Class, Attendance) for 

Figure 1.11: Semi-structured data: Month-wise total the interpretation of the data 
attendance record maintained by the school value while processing.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   12 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer System 13

1.6.2 Data Capturing, Storage and Retrieval Activity 1.3
To process data, we need to first input or capture 
the data. This is followed by its storage in a file or a Visit some of the places 

like bank, automobile 
database so that it can be used in the future. Whenever showroom, shopping 
data is to be processed, it is first retrieved from the mall, tehsil office, etc., 
file or database so that we can perform further actions and find out 2 – 3 names 
on it. of tools or instruments 

used to capture data in 
(A)	 Data Capturing digital format.
It involves the process of gathering data from different 
sources in the digital form. This capturing may vary 
from simple instruments like keyboard, barcode readers 
used at shopping outlets (Figure 1.12), comments or 
posts over social media, remote sensors on an earth 
orbiting satellite, etc. Sometimes, heterogeneity among 
data sources makes data capturing a complex task. Figure 1.12: Capturing 
(B)	 Data Storage data using barcode reader
It is the process of storing the captured data for 
processing later. Now-a-days data is being produced at 
a very high rate, and therefore data storage has become 
a challenging task. However, the decrease in the cost 
of digital storage devices has helped in simplifying 
this task. There are numerous digital storage devices 
available in the market like as shown in Figure 1.7.

Data keeps on increasing with time. Hence, the 
storage devices also require to be upgraded periodically. 
In large organisations, computers with larger and 
faster storage called data servers are deployed to store 
vast amount of data. Such dedicated computers help 
in processing data efficiently. However, the cost (both 
hardware and software) of setting up a data server as 
well as its maintenance is high, especially for small 
organisations and startups.
(C)	 Data Retrieval 
It involves fetching data from the storage devices, for its 
processing as per the user requirement. As databases 
grow, the challenges involved in search and retrieval of 
the data in acceptable time, also increase. Minimising 
data access time is crucial for faster data processing.
1.6.3 Data Deletion and Recovery
One of the biggest threats associated with digital data is 
its deletion. The storage devices can malfunction or crash 
down resulting in the deletion of data stored. Users can 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   13 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



14 Computer Science – Class xi

Activity 1.4 accidentally erase data from storage devices, or a hacker 
or malware can delete the digital data intentionally.

Explore possible ways 
of recovering deleted Deleting digitally stored data means changing the 
data or data from a details of data at bit level, which can be very time-
corrupted device. consuming. Therefore, when any data is simply deleted, 

its address entry is marked as free, and that much 
space is shown as empty to the user, without actually 
deleting the data. 

In case data gets deleted accidentally or corrupted, 
there arises a need to recover the data. Recovery of the 
data is possible only if the contents or memory space 
marked as deleted have not been overwritten by some 
other data. Data recovery is a process of retrieving 
deleted, corrupted and lost data from secondary 
storage devices.

There are usually two security concerns associated 
with data. One is its deletion by some unauthorised 
person or software. These concerns can be avoided 
by limiting access to the computer system and using 
passwords for user accounts and files, wherever 
possible. There is also an option of encrypting files to 
protect them from unwanted modification.

The other concern is related to unwanted recovery of 
Activity 1.5 data by unauthorised user or software. Many a times, 

Create a test file and we discard our old, broken or malfunctioning storage 
then delete it using 
Shift+Delete from devices without taking care to delete data. We assume 
the keyboard. Now that the contents of deleted files are permanently 
recover the file using removed. However, if these storage devices fall into the 
the methods you have hands of mischief-mongers, they can easily recover 
explored in Activity 1.4.

data from such devices; this poses a threat to data 
confidentiality. This concern can be mitigated by using 
proper tools to delete or shred data before disposing off 
any old or faulty storage device.

1.7 Software 
Till now, we have studied about the physical 
components or the hardware of the computer system. 
But the hardware is of no use on its own. Hardware 
needs to be operated by a set of instructions. These 
sets of instructions are referred to as software. It is that 
component of a computer system, which we cannot 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   14 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer System 15

touch or view physically. It comprises the instructions 
and data to be processed using the computer hardware. 
The computer software and hardware complete any 
task together.

The software comprises a set of instructions which 
on execution deliver the desired outcome. In other 
words, each software is written for some computational 
purpose. Some examples of software include operating 
systems like Ubuntu or Windows 7/10, word processing 
tool like LibreOffice or Microsoft Word, video player like 
VLC Player, photo editors like GIMP and LibreOffice 
draw. A document or image stored on the hard disk or 
pen drive is referred to as a soft-copy. Once printed, the Hardware refers to the 

document or an image is called a hard-copy. physical components 
of the computer system 

1.7.1 Need of Software which can be seen and 
touched. For example, 

The sole purpose of a software is to make the computer RAM, keyboard, 
hardware useful and operational. A software knows how printer, monitor, CPU, 

to make different hardware components of a computer etc. On the other hand, 
software is a set of 

work and communicate with each other as well as with instructions and data 
the end-user. We cannot instruct the hardware of a that makes hardware 
computer directly. Software acts as an interface between functional to complete 

human users and the hardware. the desired task. 

Depending on the mode of interaction with hardware 
and functions to be performed, the software can be broadly 
classified into three categories viz. (i) System software, 
(ii) Programming tools and (iii) Application software.
1.7.2 System Software
The software that provides the basic functionality 
to operate a computer by interacting directly with its 
constituent hardware is termed as system software. A 
system software knows how to operate and use different 
hardware components of a computer. It provides services 
directly to the end user, or to some other software. 
Examples of system software include operating systems, 
system utilities, device drivers, etc.
(A)	 Operating System
As the name implies, the operating system is a system 
software that operates the computer. An operating 
system is the most basic system software, without 
which other software cannot work. The operating system 
manages other application programs and provides 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   15 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



16 Computer Science – Class xi

access and security to the users of the system. Some 
of the popular operating systems are Windows, Linux, 
Macintosh, Ubuntu, Fedora, Android, iOS, etc. 
(B)	 System Utilities
Software used for maintenance and configuration of the 
computer system is called system utility. Some system 
utilities are shipped with the operating system for 
example disk defragmentation tool, formatting utility, 
system restore utility, etc. Another set of utilities are 
those which are not shipped with the operating system 
but are required to improve the performance of the 
system, for example, anti-virus software, disk cleaner 
tool, disk compression software, etc.
(C)	 Device Drivers

Activity 1.6 As the name signifies, the purpose of a device driver is to 
ensure proper functioning of a particular device. When 

Ask your teacher to 
help you locate any two it comes to the overall working of a computer system, 
device drivers installed the operating system does the work. But everyday new 
on your computer. devices and components are being added to a computer 

system. It is not possible for the operating system alone 
to operate all of the existing and new devices, where each 
device has diverse characteristics. The responsibility 
for overall control, operation and management of a 
particular device at the hardware level is delegated to 
its device driver.

The device driver acts as an interface between the 
device and the operating system. It provides required 

services by hiding the details 
of operations performed at the 
hardware level of the device. Just 
like a language translator, a device 
driver acts as a mediator between 
the operating system and the 
attached device. The categorisation 
of software is shown in Figure 1.13.
1.7.3 Programming Tools
In order to get some work done 
by the computer, we need to give 
instructions which are applied on the 
input data to get the desired outcome.
Computer languages are developed 

Figure 1.13: Categorisation of software for writing these instructions. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   16 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer System 17

It is important to understand here that computers and Notes
humans understand completely different languages. 
While humans are able to write programs in high-level 
language, computers understand machine language. 
There is a continuous need for conversion from high 
level to machine level language, for which translators 
are needed. Also, to write the instruction, code editors 
(e.g., IDLE in Python) are needed. We will briefly describe Notes
here the programming languages, language translators 
and program development tools.
(A)	 Classification of Programming Languages
It is very difficult for a human being to write 
instructions in the form of 1s and 0s. So different types 
of computer programming languages are developed to 
simplify the coding. Two major categories of computer 
programming languages are low-level languages and 
high-level languages.

Low-level languages are  machine  dependent languages 
and include machine language and assembly language. 
Machine language uses 1s and 0s to write instructions 
which are directly understood and executed by the 
computer. But writing a code in machine language is 
difficult as one has to remember all operation codes 
and machine addresses. Also finding errors in the code 
written in machine language is difficult. 

To simplify the writing of code, assembly language 
was developed that allowed usage of English-like words 
and symbols instead of 1s and 0s. But one major 
drawback of writing a code in this language is that the 
code is computer specific, i.e., the code written for one 
type of CPU cannot be used for another type of CPU.

High level languages are machine independent and 
are simpler to write code into. Instructions are using 
English like sentences and each high level language 
follows a set of rules, similar to natural languages. 
However, these languages are not directly understood 
by the computer. Hence, translators are needed to 
translate high-level language codes into machine 
language. Examples of high level language include C++, 
Java, Python, etc.
(B)	 Language Translators
As the computer can understand only machine 
language, a translator is needed to convert program 
written in assembly or high level language to machine 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   17 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



18 Computer Science – Class xi

Code in high language. The program code written in assembly or 
level language high-level language is called source code. The source 
(Source Code)

code is converted by a translator into the machine 
understandable form called object (machine) code as 
depicted in Figure 1.14. 

Language 
translater As we have different types of computer languages, 

different translators are needed to convert the source 
code to machine code. The three types of translators 
used in computing systems are assembler, compiler 

Code in machine 
language and interpreter.

(Object Code) The translator used to convert the code written 
Figure 1.14: Translator to in assembly language to machine language is called 
convert source code into assembler. Each assembler can understand a specific 

object code microprocessor instruction set only and hence, the 
machine code is not portable.

We also need translators to convert codes written 
in high level language (source code) to machine 
understandable form (machine code) for execution by 
the computer. Compiler converts the source code into 
machine code. If the code follows all syntactic rules of 
the language, then it is executed by the computer. Once 
translated, the compiler is not needed. 

An interpreter translates one line at a time instead of 
the whole program at one go. Interpreter takes one line, 
converts it into executable code if the line is syntactically 
correct, and then it repeats these steps for all lines in 
the source code. Hence, interpreter is always needed 
whenever a source code is to be executed.
(C)	 Program Development Tools
Whenever we decide to write a program, we need a text 
editor. An editor is a software that allows us to create a 
text file where we type instructions and store the file as 
the source code. Then an appropriate translator is used 
to get the object code for execution. In order to simplify 
the program development, there are software called 
Integrated Development Environment (IDE) consisting 
of text editor, building tools and debugger. A program 
can be typed, compiled and debugged from the IDE 
directly. Besides Python IDLE, Netbeans, Eclipse, Atom, 
Lazarus are few other examples of IDEs. Debugger, as 
the name implies, is the software to detect and correct 
errors in the source code.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   18 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer System 19

1.7.4 Application Software
Activity 1.7

The system software provides the core functionality of With the help of your 
the computer system. However, different users need the teacher, install one 
computer system for different purposes depending upon application software in 
their requirements. Hence, a new category of software your computer.
is needed to cater to different requirements of the end-
users. This specific software that works on top of the 
system software is termed as application software. There 
are again two broad categories of application software — 
general purpose and customised application software.

A computer system 
(A)	  General Purpose Software can work without 
The application software developed for generic application software, 
applications, to cater to a bigger audience in general but it cannot work 
are called general purpose software. Such ready-made without system 
application software can be used by end users as per software. For example, 
their requirements. For example, spreadsheet tool Calc we can use a computer 

even if no word 
of LibreOffice can be used by any computer user to do processing software 
calculation or to create account sheet. Adobe Photoshop, is installed, but if no 
GIMP, Mozilla web browser, iTunes, etc., fall in the operating system is 
category of general purpose software. installed, we cannot 

work on the computer. 
(B)	 Customised Software In other words, the use 
These are custom or tailor-made application software, of computer is possible 
that are developed to meet the requirements of a specific in the absence of 
organisation or an individual. They are better suited to application software.

the needs of an individual or an organisation, considering 
that they are designed as per special requirements. Some 
examples of user-defined software include websites, 
school management software, accounting software, 
etc. It is similar to buying a piece of cloth and getting a 
tailor-made garment with the fitting, colour, and fabric 
of our choice.
1.7.5 Proprietary or Free and Open Source Software 
The developers of some application software provide Activity 1.8
their source code as well as the software freely to the 
public, with an aim to develop and improve further with With the help of your 

teacher, install one 
each other’s help. Such software is known as Free and free and open source  
Open Source Software (FOSS). For example, the source application software on 
code of operating system Ubuntu is freely accessible your computer.
for anyone with the required knowledge to improve or 
add new functionality. More examples of FOSS include 
Python, Libreoffice, Openoffice, Mozilla Firefox, etc. 
Sometimes, software are freely available for use but 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   19 21-May-19   4:32:01 PM



20 Computer Science – Class xi

Think and Reflect source code may not be available. Such software are 
called freeware. Examples of freeware are Skype, Adobe 

When a computer is 
turned on, who brings Reader, etc. When the software to be used has to be 
the OS into RAM from purchased from the vendor who has the copyright of the 
the secondary storage? software, then it is a proprietary software. Examples of 

proprietary software include Microsoft Windows, Tally, 
Quickheal, etc. A software can be freeware or open 
source or proprietary software depending upon the 
terms and conditions of the person or group who has 
developed and released that software.

1.8 Operating System

An operating system (OS) can be considered to be a 
resource manager which manages all the resources of a 
computer, i.e., its hardware including CPU, RAM, Disk, 
Network and other input-output devices. It also controls 

Types of User various application software and device drivers, manages 
Interface of 

Operating System system security and handles access by different users. 
It is the most important system software. Examples of 
popular OS are Windows, Linux, Android, Macintosh 
and so on.

Command-based 
Interface The primary objectives of an operating system are 

two-fold. The first is to provide services for building and 
running application programs. When an application 
program needs to be run, it is the operating system 

Graphical User which loads that program into memory and allocates 
Interface it to the CPU for execution. When multiple application 

programs need to be run, the operating system decides 
the order of the execution. 

Touch-based The second objective of an operating system is to 
Interface provide an interface to the user through which the user 

can interact with the computer. A user interface is a 
software component which is a part of the operating 
system and whose job is to take commands or inputs 

Voice-based from a user for the operating system to process.
Interface

1.8.1 OS User Interface
There are different types of user interfaces each of which 
provides a different functionality. Some commonly used 

Gesture-based 
Interface interfaces are shown in Figure 1.15.

(A)	 Command-based Interface
Figure 1.15: Types of user  Command-based interface requires a user to enter the 

interface of OS commands to perform different tasks like creating, 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   20 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer System 21

opening, editing or deleting a file, etc. The user has to Notes
remember the names of all such programs or specific 
commands which the operating system supports.

The primary input device used by the user for 
command based interface is the keyboard. Command 
based interface is often less interactive and usually 
allows a user to run a single program at a time.

Examples of operating systems with command-based 
interface include MS-DOS and Unix.
(B)	 Graphical User Interface
Graphical User Interface (GUI) lets users run programs 
or give instructions to the computer in the form of 
icons, menus and other visual options. Icons usually 
represent files and programs stored on the computer 
and windows represent running programs that the user 
has launched through the operating system. 

The input devices used to interact with the GUI 
commonly include the mouse and the keyboard. 
Examples of operating systems with GUI interfaces 
include Microsoft Windows, Ubuntu, Fedora and 
Macintosh, among others.
(C)	 Touch-based Interface
Today smartphones, tablets and PCs allow users to 
interact with the system simply using the touch input. 
Using the touchscreen, a user provides inputs to the 
operating system, which are interpreted by the OS as 
commands like opening an app, closing an app, dialing 
a number, scrolling across apps, etc. 

Examples of popular operating systems with touch-
based interfaces are Android and iOS. Windows 
8.1 and 10 also support touch-based interfaces on 
touchscreen devices. 
(D)	 Voice-based Interface
Modern computers have been designed to address the 
needs of all types of users including people with special 
needs and people who want to interact with computers 
or smartphones while doing some other task. For users 
who cannot use the input devices like the mouse, 
keyboard, and touchscreens, modern operating systems 
provide other means of human-computer interaction. 
Users today can use voice-based commands to make 
a computer work in the desired way. Some operating 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   21 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



22 Computer Science – Class xi

systems which provide voice-based control to users 
include iOS (Siri), Android (Google Now or “OK Google”), 
Microsoft Windows 10 (Cortana) and so on.
(E)	 Gesture-based Interface
Some smartphones based on Android and iOS as well 
as laptops let users interact with the devices using 
gestures like waving, tilting, eye motion and shaking. 
This technology is evolving faster and it has promising 
potential for application in gaming, medicine and 
other areas.
1.8.2 Functions of Operating System
Now let us explore the important services and tasks 
that an operating system provides for managing the 
computer system.
(A)	 Process Management
While a computer system is operational, different tasks 
are running simultaneously. A program is intended to 
carry out various tasks. A task in execution is known 

Operating system is called 
resource manager as it as process. We can activate a system monitor program 

manages different resources that provides information about the processes being 
like main memory, CPU, 
I/O devices, so that each executed on a computer. In some systems it can be 
resource is used optimally activated using Ctrl+Alt+Delete. It is the responsibility 

and system performance does of operating system to manage these processes and get 
not deteriorate.

multiple tasks completed in minimum time. As CPU is 
the main resource of computer system, its allocation 
among processes is the most important service of the 
operating system. Hence process management concerns 
the management of multiple processes, allocation 
of required resources, and exchange of information 
among processes.
(B)	 Memory Management
Primary or main memory of a computer system is 
usually limited. The main task of memory management 
is to give (allocate) and take (free) memory from running 
processes. Since there are multiple processes running 
at a time, there arises a need to dynamically (on-the-go) 
allocate and free memory to the processes. Operating 
system should do it without affecting other processes 
that are already residing in the memory and once the 
process is finished, it is again the responsibility of the 
operating system to take the memory space back for re-

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   22 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer System 23

utilisation. Hence, memory management concerns with Notes
management of main memory so that maximum memory 
is occupied or utilised by large number of processes 
while keeping track of each and every location within 
the memory as free or occupied. 

(C)	 File Management 
Data and programs are stored as files in the secondary 
storage of a computer system. File management involves 
the creation, updation, deletion and protection of these 
files in the secondary memory. Protection is a crucial 
function of an operating system, as multiple users can 
access and use a computer system. There must be a 
mechanism in place that will stop users from accessing 
files that belong to some other user and have not been 
shared with them. File management system manages 
secondary memory, while memory management system 
handles the main memory of a computer system. 

(D)	 Device Management 
A computer system has many I/O devices and hardware 
connected to it. Operating system manages these 
heterogeneous devices that are interdependent. The 
operating system interacts with the device driver and the 
related software for a particular device. The operating 
system must also provide the options for configuring 
a particular device, so that it may be used by an end 
user or some other device. Just like files, devices also 
need security measures and their access to different 
devices must be restricted by the operating system to 
the authorised users, software and other hardware only.

Summary

•	 A computing device, also referred as computer, 
processes the input data as per given instructions 
to generate desired output. 

•	 Computer system has four physical components 
viz. (i) CPU, (ii) Primary Memory, (iii) Input Device 
and (iv) Output Devices. They are referred to as 
hardware of computer.

•	 Computer system has two types of primary 
memories viz. (i) RAM, the volatile memory and 
(ii) ROM, the non-volatile memory.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   23 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



24 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes •	 System bus is used to transfer data, addresses 
and control signals between components of the 
computer system.

•	 A microprocessor is a small-sized electronic 
component inside a computer that performs basic 
arithmetic and logical operations on data. 

•	 Microcontroller is a small computing device which 
has a CPU, a fixed amount of RAM, ROM and other 
peripherals embedded on a single chip.

•	 Software is a set of instructions written to achieve 
the desired tasks and are mainly categorised 
as system software, programming tools and 
application software. 

•	 Hardware of a computer cannot function on its own. 
It needs software to be operational or functional.

•	 Operating system is an interface between the user 
and the computer and supervises the working of 
computer system, i.e., it monitors and controls the 
hardware and software of the computer system.

Exercise

1.	 Name the software required to make a computer 
functional. Write down its two primary services.

2.	 How does the computer understand a program 
written in high level language?

3.	 Why is the execution time of the machine code less 
than that of source code?

4.	 What is the need of RAM? How does it differ from 
ROM?

5.	 What is the need for secondary memory?
6.	 How do different components of the computer 

communicate with each other?
7.	 Draw the block diagram of a computer system. Briefly 

write about the functionality of each component.
8.	 What is the primary role of system bus? Why is 

data bus is bidirectional while address bus is 
unidirectional?

9.	Differentiate between proprietary software and 
freeware software. Name two software for each type.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   24 08-Apr-19   11:36:17 AM



Computer System 25

10.	Write the main difference between microcontroller Notes
and microprocessor. Why do smart home appliances 
have a microcontroller instead of microprocessor 
embedded in them?

11.	Mention the different types of data that you deal 
with while browsing the Internet.

12.	Categorise the following data as structured, semi-
structured and unstructured:
•	 Newspaper
•	 Cricket Match Score
•	 HTML Page
•	 Patient records in a hospital

13.	Name the input or output device used to do the 
following:
a)	To output audio 
b)	To enter textual data
c)	 To make hard copy of a text file
d)	To display the data or information 
e)	 To enter audio-based command
f)	 To build 3D models 
g)	 To assist a visually-impaired individual in 

entering data
14.	 Identify the category (system, application, 

programming tool) of the following software: 
a)	Compiler
b)	Assembler
c)	 Ubuntu
d)	Text editor

Explore Yourself

1.	 Ask your teacher to help you locate any two device 
drivers installed on your computer.

2.	 Write any two system software and two application 
software installed on your computer.

3.	 Which microprocessor does your personal computer 
have? Which generation does it belong to?

4.	 What is the clock speed of your microprocessor?
5.	 Name any two devices in your school or home that 

have a microcontroller. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   25 08-Apr-19   11:36:18 AM



26 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes 6.	 Check the size of RAM and HDD of a computer in 
your school. Make a table and write their size in 
Bytes, Kilobytes, Megabytes and Gigabytes.

7.	 List all secondary storage devices available at your 
school or home.

8.	 Which operating system is installed on your 
computer at home or school?

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 1.indd   26 08-Apr-19   11:36:18 AM



##2##
Chapter 2 
Encoding Schemes and 
Number System 

2.1 Introduction “We owe a lot to the 
Have you ever thought how the keys on the computer Indians, who taught us how 
keyboard that are in human recognisable form are to count, without which 
interpreted by the computer system? This section briefly no worthwhile scientific 
discusses text interpretation by the computer. discovery could have been 

We have learnt in the previous chapter that made.”
computer understands only binary language of 0s and 
1s. Therefore, when a key on the keyboard is pressed, it –Albert Einstein
is internally mapped to a unique code, which is further 
converted to binary.
Example 2.1	 When the key ‘A’ is pressed (Figure 2.1), it 
is internally mapped to a decimal value 65 (code value), 
which is then converted to its equivalent binary value 
for the computer to understand.

In this chapter
»» Introduction to 

Figure 2.1: Encoding of data entered using keyboard Encoding

Similarly, when we press alphabet ‘अ’ on hindi keyboard, »» UNICODE
internally it is mapped to a hexadecimal value 0905, »» Number System
whose binary equivalent is 0000100100000101. »» Conversion 

So what is encoding? The mechanism of converting Between Number 
data into an equivalent cipher using specific code is Systems

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   27 08-Apr-19   11:38:00 AM



28 Computer Science – Class xi

called encoding. It is important to understand why 
code value 65 is used for the key “A” and not any other 
value? Is it same for all the keyboards irrespective of 

Cipher means something 
converted to a coded form their make?
to hide/conceal it from Yes, it is same for all the keyboards. This has been 
others. It is also called possible because of standard encoding schemes where 
encryption (converted to each letter, numeral and symbol is encoded or assigned 
cipher) and sent to the 
receiver who in turn can a unique code. Some of the well-known encoding 
decrypt it to get back the schemes are described in the following sections.
actual content. 

2.1.1 American Standard Code for Information 
Interchange (ASCII)
In the early 1960s, computers had no way of 
communicating with each other due to different 
ways of representing keys of the keyboard. Hence, 
the need for a common standard was realised to 
overcome this shortcoming. Thus, encoding scheme 
ASCII was developed for standardising the character 
representation. ASCII is still the most commonly used 
coding scheme.

Initially ASCII used 7 bits to represent characters. 
Recall that there are only 2 binary digits (0 or 1). 
Therefore, total number of different characters on the 
English keyboard that can be encoded by 7-bit ASCII 
code is 27 = 128. Table 2.1 shows some printable 
characters for ASCII code. But ASCII is able to encode 
character set of English language only.

Table 2.1	 ASCII code for some printable characters 
Character Decimal Value Character Decimal Value Character Decimal Value

Space 32 @ 64 ` 96
! 33 A 65 a 97
“ 34 B 66 b 98
# 35 C 67 c 99
$ 36 D 68 d 100
% 37 E 69 e 101
& 38 F 70 f 102
‘ 39 G 71 g 103
( 40 H 72 h 104
) 41 I 73 i 105

Example 2.2	 Encode the word DATA and convert 
the encoded value into binary values which can be 
understood by a computer. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   28 08-Apr-19   11:38:00 AM



Encoding Schemes and Number System 29

•	 ASCII value of D is 68 and its equivalent 7-bit 
binary code = 1000100

•	 ASCII value of A is 65 and its equivalent 7-bit binary 
code = 1000001

•	 ASCII value of T is 84 and its equivalent 7-bit binary 
code = 1010100

•	 ASCII value of A is 65 and its equivalent 7-bit binary 
code = 1000001

Replace each alphabet in DATA with its ASCII code value 
to get its equivalent ASCII code and with 7-bit binary 
code to get its equivalent binary number as shown in 
Table 2.2.

Table 2.2 ASCII and Binary values for word DATA 
D A T A

ASCII Code 68 65 84 65
Binary Code 1000100 1000001 1010100 1000001 Think and Reflect

Do we need to install 
2.1.2 Indian Script Code for Information Interchange some additional tool 
(ISCII) or font to type in an 

Indian language using 
In order to facilitate the use of Indian languages on UNICODE?
computers, a common standard for coding Indian scripts 
called ISCII was developed in India during mid 1980s. 
It is an 8-bit code representation for Indian languages 
which means it can represent 28=256 characters. It 
retains all 128 ASCII codes and uses rest of the codes 
(128) for additional Indian language character set. 
Additional codes have been assigned in the upper region Activity 2.1
(160– 255) for the ‘aksharas’ of the language. Explore and list down 

two font names for 
2.1.3 UNICODE typing in any three 
There were many encoding schemes, for character Indian languages in 

UNICODE. 
sets of different languages. But they were not able 
to communicate with each other, as each of them 
represented characters in their own ways. Hence, text 
created using one encoding scheme was not recognised 
by another machine using different encoding scheme.

Therefore, a standard called UNICODE has been 
developed to incorporate all the characters of every Think and Reflect
written language of the world. UNICODE provides a 
unique number for every character, irrespective of Why a character in 

UTF 32 takes more 
device (server, desktop, mobile), operating system space than in UTF 16 
(Linux, Windows, iOS) or software application (different or UTF 8? 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   29 08-Apr-19   11:38:00 AM



30 Computer Science – Class xi

browsers, text editors, etc.). Commonly used UNICODE 
encodings are UTF-8, UTF-16 and UTF-32. It is a superset 
of ASCII, and the values 0–128 have the same character 
as in ASCII. Unicode characters for Devanagari script 
is shown in Table 2.3. Each cell of the table contains a 
character along with its equivalent hexadecimal value.

Table 2.3 Unicode table for the Devanagari script
ऀ ँ ं ः ऄ अ आ इ ई उ ऊ ऋ ऌ ऍ ऎ ए

0900 0901 0902 0903 0904 0905 0906 0907 0908 0909 090A 090B 090C 090D 090E 090F

ऐ ऑ ऒ ओ औ क ख ग घ ङ च छ ज झ ञ ट
0910 0911 0912 0913 0914 0915 0916 0917 0918 0919 091A 091B 091C 091D 091E 091F

ठ ड ढ ण त थ द ध न ऩ प फ ब भ म य
0920 0921 0922 0923 0924 0925 0926 0927 0928 0929 092A 092B 092C 092D 092E 092F

र ऱ ल ळ ऴ व श ष स ह ऺ ऻ ़ ऽ ा ि
0930 0931 0932 0933 0934 0935 0936 0937 0938 0939 093A 093B 093C 093D 093E 093F

ी ु ू ृ ॄ ॅ ॆ े ै ॉ ॊ ो ौ ् ॎ ॏ
0940 0941 0942 0943 0944 0945 0946 0947 0948 0949 094A 094B 094C 094D 094E 094F

ॐ ॑ ॒ ॓ ॔ ॕ ॖ ॗ क़ ख़ ग़ ज़ ड़ ढ़ फ़ य़
0950 0951 0952 0953 0954 0955 0956 0957 0958 0959 095A 095B 095C 095D 095E 095F

ॠ ॡ ॢ ॣ । ॥ ० १ २ ३ ४ ५ ६ ७ ८ ९
0960 0961 0962 0963 0964 0965 0966 0967 0968 0969 096A 096B 096C 096D 096E 096F

॰ ॱ ॲ ॳ ॴ ॵ ॶ ॷ ॸ ॹ ॺ ॻ ॼ ॽ ॾ ॿ
0970 0971 0972 0973 0974 0975 0976 0977 0978 0979 097A 097B 097C 097D 097E 097F

2.2 Number System

Till now, we have learnt that each key (representing 
character, special symbol, function keys, etc.) of the 
keyboard is internally mapped to an ASCII code following 
an encoding scheme. This encoded value is further 
converted to its equivalent binary representation so 
that the computer can understand it. In Figure 2.1, the 
code for character “A” belongs to the decimal number 
system and its equivalent binary value belongs to the 
binary number system. A number system is a method 
to represent (write) numbers.

Every number system has a set of unique characters 
or literals. The count of these literals is called the radix 
or base of the number system. The four different number 
systems used in the context of computer are shown in 
Figure 2.2. These number systems are explained in 
subsequent sections.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   30 08-Apr-19   11:38:00 AM



Encoding Schemes and Number System 31

0–9 and A–F

Figure 2.2: Four different number systems 

Number systems are also called positional number 
system because the value of each symbol (i.e., digit and 
alphabet) in a number depends upon its position within 
the number. Number may also have a fractional part 
similar to decimal numbers used by us. The symbol at 
the right most position in the integer part in a given 
number has position 0. The value of position (also called 
position value) in the integer part increases from right 
to left by 1. On the other hand, the first symbol in the 
fraction part of the number has position number –1, 
which decreases by 1 while reading fraction part from 
left to right. Each symbol in a number has a positional 
value, which is computed using its position value and 
the base value of the number system. The symbol at 
position number 3 in a decimal system with base 10 has 
positional value 103. Adding the product of positional 
value and the symbol 
value results in Digit 1 2 3 . 4 5

the given number. Position Number 2 1 0 –1 –2

Figure 2.3 shows Positional Value (10)2 (10)1 (10)0 (10)-1 (10)-2

the computation Add the product of positional value and corresponding digit to get 
of decimal number decimal number.

123.45 using its                 1 × 102 + 2 × 101 + 3 × 100 + 4 × 10-1 + 5 × 10-2 = (123.45)10

positional value. Figure 2.3: Computation of decimal number using its positional value

2.2.1 Decimal Number System
The decimal number system is used in our day-to-day 
life. It is known as base-10 system since 10 digits (0 to 
9) are used. A number is presented by its two values 
— symbol value (any digit from 0 to 9) and positional 
value (in terms of base value). Figure 2.4 shows the 
integer and fractional part of decimal number 237.25 
alongwith computation of the decimal number using 
positional values.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   31 08-Apr-19   11:38:01 AM



32 Computer Science – Class xi

Positive powers of 10 Negative powers of 10
(Integer part) (Fractional part)

2 3 7 . 2 5
2×102       + 3×101        + 7×100          2×10-1        + 5×10-2

200      + 30         + 7   + .2 .05 = (237.25)10

Integer part Fraction Part

Figure 2.4: Positional value for digits of decimal number represented as power of base 10 

2.2.2 Binary Number System
The ICs (Integrated Circuits) in a computer are made up 
of a large number of transistors which are activated by 

Base value of a number the electronic signals (low/high) they receive. The ON/
system is used to high and OFF/low state of a transistor is represented 
distinguish a number in using the two digits 1 and 0, respectively. These two 
one number system from digits 1 and 0 form the binary number system. This 
another number system. 
Base value is written as system is also referred as base-2 system as it has two 
the subscript of the given digits only. Some examples of binary numbers are 
number. For example, 1001011, 1011.101, 111111.01. A binary number can 
(70)8 represents 70 as be mapped to an equivalent decimal number that can 
octal number and (70)10 
denotes 70 as decimal be easily understood by the human.
number.   Table 2.4 Binary value for (0–9) digits of decimal 

number system 
Decimal Binary

0 0
1 1
2 10
3 11
4 100
5 101
6 110
7 111
8 1000
9 1001

2.2.3 Octal Number System 
With increase in the value of a decimal number, the 
number of bits (0/1) in its binary representation also 
increases. Sometimes, a binary number is so large that 
it becomes difficult to manage. Octal number system 
was devised for compact representation of the binary 
numbers. Octal number system is called base-8 system 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   32 08-Apr-19   11:38:01 AM



Encoding Schemes and Number System 33

as it has total eight digits (0-7), and Table 2.5 Decimal and binary 
positional value is expressed in powers equivalent of octal numbers 0 – 7 
of 8. Three binary digits (8=23) are Octal Digit Decimal 3 -bit Binary 
sufficient to represent any octal digit. Value Number
Table 2.5 shows the decimal and binary 0 0 000
equivalent of 8 octal digits. Examples of 1 1 001
octal numbers are (237.05)8, (13)8, and 2 2 010
(617.24)8. 3 3 011

2.2.4 Hexadecimal Number System 4 4 100
5 5 101

Hexadecimal numbers are also used 
for compact representation of binary 6 6 110

numbers. It consists of 16 unique 7 7 111

symbols (0 – 9, A–F), and is called base-
16 system. In hexadecimal system, each alphanumeric 
digit is represented as a group of 4 binary digits 
because 4 bits (24=16) are sufficient to represent 16 
alphanumeric symbols. Note here that the decimal 
numbers 10 through 15 are represented by the letters 
A through F. Examples of Hexadecimal numbers are 
(23A.05)16, (1C3)16, (619B.A)16. Table 2.6 shows decimal 
and binary equivalent of 16 alphanumeric symbols used 
in hexadecimal number system.

Table 2.6 Decimal and binary equivalent of 
hexadecimal numbers 0–9, A–F 

Hexadecimal Symbol Decimal Value 4-bit Binary Number
0 0 0000
1 1 0001
2 2 0010
3 3 0011
4 4 0100
5 5 0101
6 6 0110
7 7 0111
8 8 1000
9 9 1001
A 10 1010
B 11 1011
C 12 1100
D 13 1101
E 14 1110
F 15 1111

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   33 08-Apr-19   11:38:01 AM



34 Computer Science – Class xi

2.2.5 Applications of Hexadecimal Number System
•	 Main memory is made up of memory locations where 

each location has a unique address. Usually, size 
of a memory address is 16-bit or 32-bit. To access 
16-bit memory address, a programmer has to use 
16 binary bits, which is difficult to deal with. To 
simplify the address representation, hexadecimal 
and octal numbers are used. Let us consider a 16-
bit memory address 1100000011110001. Using 
the hexadecimal notation, this address is mapped 
to C0F1 which is more easy to remember. The 
equivalent octal representation for this 16-bit value 
is 140361.

•	 Hexadecimal numbers are also used for describing 
the colours on the webpage. Each colour is made 
up of three primary colours red, green and blue, 
popularly called RGB (in short). In most colour maps, 
each colour is usually chosen from a palette of 16 
million colours. Therefore, 24 bits are required for 
representing each colour having three components 
(8 bits for Red, 8 bits for Green, 8 bits for Blue 
component). It is difficult to remember 24-bit binary 
colour code. Therefore, colour codes are written 
in hexadecimal form for compact representation. 
For example, 24-bit code for RED colour is 
11111111,00000000,00000000. The equivalent 
hexadecimal notation is (FF,00,00), which can 
be easily remembered and used. Table 2.7 shows 

Table 2.7 Colour codes in decimal, binary examples of 
and hexadecimal numbers some colours 

Colour Name Decimal Binary Hexadecimal represented 
Black (0,0,0) (00000000,00000000,00000000) (00,00,00) with decimal, 

binary and 
White (255,255,255) (11111111,11111111,11111111) (FF,FF,FF) hexadecimal 
Yellow (255,255,0) (11111111,11111111,00000000) (FF,FF,00) numbers.
Grey (128,128,128) (10000000,10000000,10000000) (80, 80, 80)

2.3 Conversion between Number Systems 
In the previous section, we learnt about different 
number systems used in computers. Now, let us learn 
how to convert a number from one number system to 
another number system for better understanding of the 
number representation in computers. Decimal number 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   34 21-May-19   11:34:53 AM



Encoding Schemes and Number System 35

system is most commonly used by humans, but digital Activity 2.2
systems understand binary numbers; whereas Octal 
and hexadecimal number systems are used to simplify Convert the following 

decimal numbers in 
the binary representation for us to understand. the form understood by 

computer.
2.3.1 Conversion from Decimal to other Number 
Systems   (i) (593)10	 (ii) (326)10 	

(iii) (79)
To convert a decimal number to any other number 10

system (binary, octal or hexadecimal), use the steps 
given below.
Step 1:	Divide the given  number by the base value (b) of 

the number system in which it is to be converted
Step 2:	Note the remainder
Step 3:	Keep on dividing the quotient by the base value 

and note the remainder till the quotient is zero
Step 4:	Write the noted remainders in the reverse order 

(from bottom to top)

(A)	 Decimal to Binary Conversion
Since the base value of binary system is 2, the decimal 
number is repeatedly divided by 2 following the steps Activity 2.3
given in above till the quotient is 0. Record the remainder Express the following 
after each division and finally write the remainders in decimal numbers into 
reverse order in which they are computed. octal numbers.

In Figure 2.1 you saw that the binary equivalent of   (i) (913)10 	
65 is (1000001)2. Let us now convert a decimal value  (ii) (845)10 	

to its binary representation and verify that the binary (iii) (66)10

equivalent of (65)10 is (1000001)2.

Step 1: Divide the decimal number by 2.

2 65 Remainders Step 2: Write its remainder.

2 32 1
2 16 0 Step 3: Keep on dividing the quotient 

by the base value 2 and note the 
2 8 0 remainder till the quotient is zero. 
2 4 0
2 2 0
2 1 0
2 0 1

Step 4: Collect the remainders from bottom  (65)10 = (1000001)
to top to get the binary equivalent. 2

Figure 2.5: Conversion of a decimal number to its equivalent binary number 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   35 08-Apr-19   11:38:01 AM



36 Computer Science – Class xi

Example 2.3	 Convert (122)10 to binary number.
  			

2 122 Remainders
2 61 0
2 30 1
2 15 0
2 7 1
2 3 1
2 1 1

0 1
	

       Therefore, (122)10 = (1111010)2
(B)	 Decimal to Octal Conversion
Since the base value of octal is 8, the decimal number 
is repeatedly divided by 8 to obtain its equivalent 
octal number. 

Step 1: Divide the decimal number by 8

Step 2: Write its remainder
8 65 Remainders
8 8 1
8 1 0 Step 3: Keep on dividing the 

quotient by the base value 8 
0 1 and note the remainder till the 

quotient is zero
Step 4: Collect the remainder from bottom 
to top to get the octal equivalent (65)10 = (101)8

	 Figure 2.6: Conversion of a decimal number to its equivalent octal number
The octal equivalent of letter “A” by using its ASCII 

code value (65)10 is calculated as shown in Figure 2.6.
Example 2.4	 Convert (122)10 to octal number.

8 122 Remainders
8 15 2
8 1 7

0 1

	 Therefore, (122)10= (172)8 

(C)	 Decimal to Hexadecimal Conversion
Since the base value of hexadecimal is 16, the decimal 
number is repeatedly divided by 16 to obtain its 
equivalent hexadecimal number. The hexadecimal 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   36 08-Apr-19   11:38:01 AM



Encoding Schemes and Number System 37

equivalent of letter ‘A’ using its ASCII code (65)10 is 
calculated as shown in Figure 2.7.

Step 1: Divide the decimal number by 16

Step 2: Write its remainder
16 65 Remainders
16 4 1
16 0 4 Step 3: Keep on dividing the quotient 

by the base value 16 and note the 
remainder till the quotient is zero

Step 4: Collect the remainders from 
bottom to top to get the hexadecimal 
equivalent (65)10 = (14)16

Figure 2.7: Conversion of a decimal number to its equivalent hexadecimal number

Example 2.5	 Convert (122)10 to hexadecimal number.

16 122 Remainders
16 7 A (Hexadecimal symbol equivalent to 

decimal number 10)
 0 7

	 Therefore, (122)10=(7A)16

2.3.2 Conversion from other Number Systems to 
Decimal Number System Activity 2.4
We can use the following steps  to convert the given Convert the following 
number with base value b to its decimal equivalent, numbers into decimal 
where base value b can be 2, 8 and 16 for binary, octal numbers.
and hexadecimal number system, respectively.   (i) (110101)2 	
Step 1:	Write the position number for each alphanumeric  (ii) (1703)8 	

(iii) (COF5)
symbol in the given number 16

Step 2:	Get positional value for each symbol by raising 
its position number to the base value b symbol 
in the given number

Step 3:	Multiply each digit with the respective positional 
value  to get a decimal value

Step 4:	Add all these decimal values to get the equivalent 
decimal number

(A)	 Binary Number to Decimal Number
Since binary number system has base 2, the positional 
values are computed in terms of powers of 2. 
Using the above mentioned steps we can convert 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   37 08-Apr-19   11:38:01 AM



38 Computer Science – Class xi

a binary number to its equivalent decimal value as 
shown below: 

Example 2.6	 Convert (1101)2 into decimal number.
Digit 1 1 0 1

Position Number 3 2 1 0
Positional Value 23 22 21 20

Decimal Number 1 × 23     + 1 ×  22      + 0 ×   21         + 1 × 20      = 8 +  4 +  0  +  1  = (13)10

Note: Add the product of positional value and corresponding digit to get decimal number.

(B)	 Octal Number to Decimal Number
The following example shows how to compute the decimal 
equivalent of an octal number using base value 8.
Example 2.7	 Convert (257)8 into decimal number.

Why 3 bits in a Digit 2 5 7
binary number are Position 2 1 0
grouped together to Number
get octal number? Positional 82 81 80

The base value of octal Value
number system is 8. 
Convert value 8 in Decimal 2 × 82 5 × 81  +  7 ×  80 =128 + 40 + 7  =   (175)10

terms of exponent of Number
2, i.e., 8=23. Hence, 

three binary digits are (C)	 Hexadecimal Number to Decimal Number
sufficient to represent For converting a hexadecimal number into decimal 

all 8 octal digits. number, use steps given in this section with base value 
Simply stated, count all 
possible combinations 16 of hexadecimal number system. Use decimal value 
of three binary digits, equivalent to alphabet symbol of hexadecimal number 
which are 2x2x2=8. in the calculation, as shown in Table 2.6.
Therefore, 3 bits are 

sufficient to represent Example 2.8	 Convert (3A5)16 into decimal number.
any octal digit. Hence, Digit 3 A 5

3-bit groups in a binary 
number are formed to Position 2 1 0

Number
get equivalent octal 

number. Positional 162 161 160

Value
Decimal 3 × 162 10 × 161  +  5 × 160 =768 + 160 + 5  =  (933)10
Number

Note: Use Table 2.5 for decimal value of alphabets

2.3.3 Conversion from Binary Number to Octal/
Hexadecimal Number and Vice-Versa
A binary number is converted to octal or hexadecimal 
number by making groups of 3 and 4 bits, respectively, 
and replacing each group by its equivalent octal/
hexadecimal digit. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   38 21-May-19   11:41:57 AM



Encoding Schemes and Number System 39

(A)	 Binary Number to Octal Number
Given a binary number, an equivalent octal number 
represented by 3 bits is computed by grouping 3 bits Why 4 bits in a 
from right to left and replacing each 3-bit group by the binary number are 
corresponding octal digit. In case number of bits in a grouped together 
binary number is not multiple of 3, then add required to get hexadecimal 

number?
number of 0s on most significant position of the binary The base value of 
number. hexadecimal number 

Example 2.9	 Convert (10101100)2 to octal number. system is 16. Write 
value 16 in terms of 

Make group of 3-bits of the given  exponent of 2 i.e. 16 = 
24

binary number (right to left)   	         010    101    100 . Hence, four binary 
digits are sufficient 

Write octal number for  to represent all 16 
each 3-bit group			              2        5        4  hexadecimal symbols. 

Therefore, (10101100)2 = (254)8

(B)	 Octal Number to Binary Number
Each octal digit is an encoding for a 3-digit binary 
number. Octal number is converted to binary 
by replacing each octal digit by a group of three Think and Reflect
binary digits. While converting the 

Example 2.10	 Convert (705)8 to binary number. fractional part of 
a decimal number 

Octal digits		     		             7       0	   5   to another number 
system, why do we 

Write 3-bits binary  write the integer part 
value for each digit         	         111    000     101	 from top to bottom and 

not other way? 
Therefore, (705)8 = (111000101)2

(C)	 Binary Number to Hexadecimal Number
Given a binary number, its equivalent hexadecimal 
number is computed by making a group of 4 binary 
digits from right to left and substituting each 4-bit group 
by its corresponding hexadecimal alphanumeric symbol. 
If required, add 0 bit on the most significant position of 
the binary number to have number of bits in a binary 
number as multiple of 4.

Example 2.11	 Convert (0110101100)2 to hexadecimal 
number.
Make group of 4-bits of the given  
binary number (right to left)   		 0001  1010  1100
Write hexadecimal symbol  

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   39 21-May-19   4:33:42 PM



40 Computer Science – Class xi

for each group                                     1        A        C  
Therefore, (0110101100)2 = (1AC)16

(D)	 Hexadecimal Number to Binary Number
Activity 2.5 Each hexadecimal symbol is an encoding for a 4-digit 

Write binary binary number. Hence, the binary equivalent of a 
representation of the 
following numbers. hexadecimal number is obtained by substituting 
  (i) (F018) 4-bit binary equivalent of each hexadecimal digit and 

16	
 (ii) (172)16 combining them together (see Table 2.5).
(iii) (613)8 Example 2.12	 Convert (23D)16 to binary number.

Hexadecimal digits	   	       2 	         3          D
Write 4-bit binary value  
for each digit	  	   	    0010     0011      1101

Therefore, (23D)16 = (001000111101)2
2.3.4 Conversion of a Number with Fractional Part
Till now, we largely dealt with different conversions 
for whole number. In this section, we will learn about 
conversion of numbers with a fractional part. 

(A)	 Decimal Number with Fractional Part to another 
Number System
To convert the fractional part of a decimal number to 
another number system with base value b, repeatedly 
multiply the fractional part by the base value b till the 
fractional part becomes 0. Use integer part from top to 
bottom to get equivalent number in that number system. 
If the fractional part does not become 0 in successive 
multiplication, then stop after, say 10 multiplications. 
In some cases, fractional part may start repeating, then 
stop further calculation. 
Example 2.13	 Convert (0.25)10 to binary.
						           Integer part
		  0.25 × 2 = 0.50			   0
		  0.50 × 2 = 1.00			   1
Since the fractional part is 0, the multiplication is 
stopped. Write the integer part from top to bottom to get 
binary number for the fractional part.
Therefore, (0.25)10 = (0.01)2

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   40 08-Apr-19   11:38:01 AM



Encoding Schemes and Number System 41

Example 2.14	 Convert (0.675)10 to binary.
				       	    	      Integer part
		  0.675 × 2 =  1.350            	 1
        	0.350 × 2 =  0.700            	 0
  		  0.700 × 2 =  1.400            	 1
        	0.400 × 2 =  0.800            	 0
        	0.800 × 2 =  1.600            	 1
        	0.600 × 2 =  1.200            	 1
        	0.200 × 2 =  0.400            	 0
Since the fractional part (.400) is the repeating value in 
the calculation, the multiplication is stopped. Write the 
integer part from top to bottom to get binary number for 
the fractional part.

Therefore, (0.675)10=  (0.1010110)2
Example 2.15	 Convert (0.675)10 to octal.
						           Integer part
		  0.675 × 8 = 5.400       		  5
       	 0.400 × 8 = 3.200            	 3
        	0.200 × 8 = 1.600            	 1
       	 0.600 × 8 = 4.800            	 4
        	0.800 × 8 = 6.400            	 6
Since the fractional part (.400) is repeating, the 
multiplication is stopped. Write the integer part from 
top to bottom to get octal number for the fractional part.

Therefore, (0.675)10= (0.53146)8
Example 2.16	 Convert (0.675)10 to hexadecimal form.
	 Integer part
0.675 × 16 = 10.800	 A	 (Hexadecimal symbol for 10)
0.800 × 16 = 12.800	 C	 (Hexadecimal symbol for 12)
Since the fractional part (.800) is repeating, the 
multiplication is stopped. Write the integer part from 
top to bottom to get hexadecimal equivalent for the 
fractional part.

Therefore, (0.675)10=(0. AC)16

(B)	 Non-decimal Number with Fractional Part to 
Decimal Number System
Compute positional value of each digit in the given 
number using its base value. Add the product of 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   41 08-Apr-19   11:38:01 AM



42 COMPUTER SCIENCE – CLASS XI

positional value and the digit to get the equivalent 
decimal number with fractional part.

Example 2.17  Convert (100101.101)2 into decimal.
Digit 1 0 0 1 0 1 . 1 0 1

Fractional 25 24 23 22 21 20 2-1 2-2 2-3

Value
Decimal 125 +024 +023 +122 +021

 +120 + 12-1 +   02-2 +12-3

Value
                       =  32       +   0       +    0     +     4       +    0      +    1   +          0.5    +       0   +  0.125

                                                        37                                                                    0.625
                        = 37   +   0.625
Therefore, (100101.101)2= (37.625)10

Example 2.18  Convert (605.12)8 into decimal number.
Octal Digits 6 0 5 . 1 2

Positional Value 82 81 80 8-1 8-2

Decimal number
682 +  0 81 +  5 80 + 1 × 8-1 +   2 × 8-2

=         384           +        0       +       5            +                .125             +  .03125

389 0.15625
=   389   +   0.156225
     Therefore, (605.12)8 = (389.15625)10

(C) Fractional Binary Number to Octal or 
Hexadecimal Number
To convert the fractional binary number into octal or 
hexadecimal value, substitute groups of 3-bit or 4-bit in 
integer part by the corresponding digit. Similarly, make 
groups of 3-bit or 4-bit for fractional part starting from 
left to right, and substitute each group by its equivalent 
digit or symbol in Octal or Hexadecimal number system. 
Add 0s at the end of the fractional part to make a perfect 
group of 3 or 4 bits.
Example 2.19  Convert (10101100.01011)2 to octal 
number.
Make perfect group of 3 bits  010  101  100 . 010  110
Write octal symbol for each group    2      5     4    .    2     6

Therefore, (10101100.01011)2 = (254.26)8
Note: Make 3-bit groups from right to left for the integer 
part and left to right for the fractional part.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   16 17-Aug-2023   10:31:10 AM



Encoding Schemes and Number System 43

Example 2.20	 Convert (10101100.010111)2 to Notes
hexadecimal number
Make perfect group of 4 bits	 1010  1100 .  0101   1100
Write hexadecimal symbol  
for each group             		     A       C   .      5        C

Therefore, (10101100.010111)2 = (AC.5C)16

Summary

•	 Encoding scheme maps text into the codes that 
facilitate communication among computers.

•	 Textual data is encoded using ASCII, ISCII 
or Unicode.

•	 Unicode scheme is a character encoding standard 
which can encode all the characters of almost all 
languages of the world. 

•	 Computer being a digital system understands only 
binary numbers which are 0 and 1.

•	 Encoded text is converted to binary form for 
processing by the computer.

•	 Octal and hexadecimal number systems are used 
to simplify the binary coded representation as they 
allow grouping of 3 or 4 bits of binary numbers 
each, respectively. 

Exercise

1.	 Write base values of binary, octal and hexadecimal 
number system.

2.	 Give full form of ASCII and ISCII.
3.	 Try the following conversions.
		   (i) (514)8	 =	(?)10	 (iv)	(4D9)16	 =	(?)10
		 (ii) (220)8	 =	(?)2	 (v)	(11001010)2	 =	(?)10
		 (iii) (76F)16	 =	(?)10	 (vi)	(1010111)2	 =	(?)10

4.	 Do the following conversions from decimal number 
to other number systems.

            (i)   (54)10    =   (?)2    	 (iv)  (889)10  =    (?)8
           (ii)   (120)10  =   (?)2	  (v)  (789)10   =    (?)16
          (iii)   (76)10    =   (?)8   	 (vi)  (108)10  =    (?)16

5.	 Express the following octal numbers into their 
equivalent decimal numbers.

		  (i) 145    	 (ii) 6760 	 (iii) 455	 (iv) 10.75

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   43 08-Apr-19   11:38:02 AM



44 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes 6.	 Express the following decimal numbers into 
hexadecimal numbers. 

		  (i) 548	 (ii) 4052  	 (iii) 58	 (iv) 100.25
7.	 Express the following hexadecimal numbers into 

equivalent decimal numbers.
  		  (i) 4A2 	 (ii) 9E1A	 (iii) 6BD	 (iv) 6C.34
8.	 Convert the following binary numbers into octal 

and hexadecimal numbers.
(i) 1110001000    	(ii) 110110101 	 (iii)  1010100	
(iv) 1010.1001

9.	 Write binary equivalent of the following octal 
numbers.

		  (i) 2306	 (ii) 5610	 (iii)    742	 (iv) 65.203	
10.	Write binary representation of the following 

hexadecimal numbers.
		  (i) 4026 	 (ii) BCA1	 (iii)    98E	 (iv) 132.45
11.	How  does computer understand  the following text? 

(hint: 7 bit ASCII code).
        (i) HOTS	 (ii)   Main	 (iii) CaSe
12.	The hexadecimal number system uses 16 literals 

(0 – 9, A– F). Write down its base value.
13.	Let X be a number system having B symbols only. 

Write down the base value of this number system.
14.	Write the equivalent hexadecimal and binary values 

for each character of the phrase given below. 
          		  ‘‘ हम सब एक”
15.	What is the advantage of preparing a digital content 

in Indian language using UNICODE font?
16.	Explore and list the steps required to type in an 

Indian language using UNICODE.
17.	Encode the word ‘COMPUTER’ using ASCII and 

convert the encode value into binary values.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 2.indd   44 08-Apr-19   11:38:02 AM



##3##
Chapter 3 

Emerging Trends

3.1 Introduction “Computer science is no more 

Computers have been around for quite some time about computers than as-

now. New technologies and initiatives emerge with tronomy is about telescopes” 

each passing day. In order to understand the existing 
technologies and have a better view of the developments –Edsger Dijkstra
around us, we must keep an eye on the emerging trends. 
Many new technologies are introduced almost every day. 
Some of these do not succeed and fade away over time. 
Some of these new technologies prosper and persist over 
time, gaining attention from users. Emerging trends are 
the state-of-the-art technologies, which gain popularity 
and set a new trend among users. In this chapter, we 
will learn about some emerging trends that will make 
a huge impact (in the future) on digital economy and 
interaction in digital societies.

3.2 Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
Have you ever wondered how maps in your smartphone 
are able to guide you to take the fastest route to your 
destination by analysing real time data, such as traffic 
congestion? On uploading a photo on a social networking 
site, has it ever happened that your friends in the 
photograph were recognised and tagged automatically? 
These are some of the examples of application of In this chapter
Artificial Intelligence. The intelligent digital personal »» Introduction
assistants like Siri, Google Now, Cortana, Alexa are »» Artificial Intelligence 
all powered by AI. Artificial Intelligence endeavours to (AI) 
simulate the natural intelligence of human beings into »» Big Data 
machines, thus making them behave intelligently. An »» Internet of Things 
intelligent machine is supposed to imitate some of the (IoT)
cognitive functions of humans like learning, decision- »» Cloud Computing 
making and problem solving. In order to make machines »» Grid Computing
perform tasks with minimum human intervention, they 
are programmed to create a knowledge base and make »» Blockchains 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   45 08-Apr-19   11:41:14 AM



46 Computer Science – Class xi

decisions based on it. AI system can also learn from 
past experiences or outcomes to make new decisions.

A knowledge base is 3.2.1 Machine Learning
a store of information 
consisting of facts, Machine Learning is a subsystem of Artificial 
assumptions and rules Intelligence, wherein computers have the ability to learn 
which an AI system from data using statistical techniques, without being 
can use for decision explicitly programmed by a human being. It comprises 
making. algorithms that use data to learn on their own and 

make predictions. These algorithms called models, are 
first trained and tested using a training data and testing 
data, respectively. After successive trainings, once these 
models are able to give results to an acceptable level of 
accuracy, they are used to make predictions about new 
and unknown data.
3.2.2 Natural Language Processing (NLP) 

Activity 3.1 The predictive typing feature of search engine that 
helps us by suggesting the next word in the sentence 

Find out how NLP is 
helping differently- while typing keywords and the spell checking features 
abled persons? are examples of Natural Language Processing (NLP). 

It deals with the interaction between human and 
computers using human spoken languages, such as 
Hindi, English, etc.

In fact it is possible to search the web or operate or 
control our devices using our voice. All this has been 
possible by NLP. An NLP system can perform text-to-
speech and speech-to-text conversion as depicted in 
Figure 3.1. 

Machine translation is a rapidly emerging field 
where machines are already 
able to translate texts from one 
language to another with fair 
amount of correctness. Another 
emerging application area is 
automated customer  service 
where a computer software can 
interact with customers to serve 

Figure 3.1: Use of natural language processing their queries or complaints.
3.2.3 Immersive Experiences 
With the three-dimensional (3D) videography, the 
joy of watching movies in theatres has reached to 
a new level. Video games are also being developed to 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   46 08-Apr-19   11:41:14 AM



Emerging Trends 47

provide immersive experiences to the player. Immersive 
experiences allow us to visualise, feel and react by 
stimulating our senses. It enhances our interaction 
and involvement, making them more realistic and 
engaging. Immersive experiences have been used 
in the field of training, such as driving simulators 
(Figure 3.2), flight simulator and so on. Immersive 
experience can be achieved using virtual reality and Figure 3.2: Driving simulator
augmented reality.
(A)	 Virtual Reality 
Everything that we experience in our reality is perceived 
through our senses. From this came the idea that 
if we can present our senses with made-up or non-
real information, our perception of reality would also 
alter in response to that. Virtual Reality (VR) is a 
three-dimensional, computer-generated situation that 
simulates the real world. The user can interact with and 
explore that environment by getting immersed in it while 
interacting with the objects and other actions of the user. 
At present, it is achieved with the help of VR Headsets. 
In order to make the experience of VR more realistic, it Figure 3.3: Virtual Reality 

Headset
promotes other sensory information like sound, smell, 
motion, temperature, etc. It is a comparatively new field 
and has found its applications in gaming (Figure 3.3), 
military training, medical procedures, entertainment, 
social science and psychology, engineering and 
other areas where simulation is needed for a better 
understanding and learning.
(B)	 Augmented Reality 
The superimposition of computer generated perceptual 
information over the existing physical surroundings is 
called as Augmented Reality (AR). It adds components 
of the digital world to the physical world, along with 
the associated tactile and other sensory requirements, Figure 3.4: Location-based 
thereby making the environment interactive and digitally Augmented Reality
manipulable. Users can access information about the 
nearest places with reference to their current location. 
They can get information about places and choose on 

Unlike Virtual Reality, the 
the basis of user reviews. With help of location-based Augmented Reality does not 
AR App, travellers can access real-time information of create something new, it 
historical places just by pointing their camera viewfinder just alters or augments the 

perception of the underlying 
to subjects as depicted in Figure 3.4. Location-based physical world through 
AR apps are major forms of AR apps. additional information. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   47 08-Apr-19   11:41:16 AM



48 Computer Science – Class xi

3.2.4 Robotics 
A robot is basically a machine capable of carrying out one 

Robotics is an or more tasks automatically with accuracy and precision. 
interdisciplinary branch Unlike other machines, a robot is programmable by a 
of technology requiring computer, which means it can follow the instructions 
applications of mechanical 
engineering, electronics, given through computer programs. Robots were initially 
and computer science, conceptualised for doing repetitive industrial tasks 
among others. Robotics is 
primarily concerned with that are boring or stressful for humans or were labour-
the design, fabrication, intensive. Sensors are one of the prime components of 
operation, and application a robot. Robot can be of many types, such as wheeled 
of robots. robots, legged robots, manipulators and humanoids. 

Robots that resemble humans are known as humanoids. 
Robots are being used in industries, medical science, 
bionics, scientific research, military, etc. Some examples 
are: 
•	 NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover (MER) mission is 

a robotic space mission to study about the planet 
Mars (Figure 3.5).

Figure 3.5: NASA’s Mars Figure 3.6: Sophia is a Figure 3.7: Drone
Exploration Rover (MER) humanoid

•	 Sophia is a humanoid that uses artificial intelligence, 
visual data processing, facial recognition and also 
imitates human gestures and facial expressions, as 

Think and Reflect shown in Figure 3.6.
Can a drone be helpful •	 A drone is an unmanned aircraft which can be 
in the event of a natural remotely controlled or can fly autonomously through 
calamity? software-controlled flight plans in their embedded 

systems, working in conjunction with onboard 
sensors and GPS (Figure 3.7). They are being used 
in many fields, such as journalism, filming and 
aerial photography, shipping or delivery at short 
distances, disaster management, search and rescue 

Activity 3.2 operations, healthcare, geographic mapping and 
Find out what role are structural safety inspections, agriculture, wildlife 
robots playing in the monitoring or pooching, besides law-enforcement and 
medical field? border patrolling.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   48 08-Apr-19   11:41:17 AM



Emerging Trends 49

3.3 Big data 
With technology making an inroad into almost every 
sphere of our lives, data is being produced at a colossal 
rate. Today, there are over a billion Internet users, and 
a majority of the world’s 
web traffic is coming from 
smartphones. Figure 
3.8 shows that at the 
current pace, around 2.5 
quintillion bytes of data 
are created each day, and 
the pace is increasing with 
the continuous evolution 
of the Internet of Things 
(IoT).

This results in the 
generation of data sets 
of enormous volume and 
complexity called Big 
Data. Such data cannot 
be processed and analysed 
using traditional data 
processing tools as the data 
is not only voluminous, but 
also unstructured like our Figure 3.8: Sources of big data (numbers are 

approximate)
posts, instant messages 
and chats, photographs that we share through various 
sites, our tweets, blog articles, news items, opinion 
polls and their comments, audio/video chats, etc. 
Big Data not only represents voluminous data, it also 
involves various challenges like integration, storage, 
analysis, searching, processing, transfer, querying and 
visualisation of such data. Big data sometimes hold rich 
information and knowledge which is of high business 
value, and therefore there is a keen effort in developing 
software and methods to process and analyse big data. Think and Reflect

How are your digital 
3.3.1 Characteristics of Big Data activities contributing to 
Big data exhibits following five characteristics shown in generation of Big data?

Figure 3.9, that distinguish it from traditional data.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   49 08-Apr-19   11:41:17 AM



50 Computer Science – Class xi

(A)	 Volume
Volume The most prominent characteristic of big data is its 

enormous size. If a particular dataset is of such large 
Value

BIG Velocity size that it is difficult to process it with traditional DBMS 
DATA tools, it can be termed as big data.

(B)	 Velocity
Veracity Variety It represents the rate at which the data under 

consideration are being generated and stored. Big data 
Figure 3.9: Characteristics has an exponentially higher rate of generation than 

of big data traditional data sets. 
(C)	 Variety
It asserts that a dataset has varied data, such as 
structured, semi-structured and unstructured data. 
Some examples are text, images, videos, web-pages and 
so on. 
(D)	 Veracity
Big data can be sometimes inconsistent, biased, noisy 
or there can be abnormality in the data or issues 
with the data collection methods. Veracity refers to 
the trustworthiness of the data because processing 
such incorrect data can give wrong results or mislead 
the interpretations.
(E)	 Value
Big data is not only just a big pile of data, but also 
possess to have hidden patterns and useful knowledge 
which can be of high business value. But as there is cost 
of investment of resources in processing big data, we 
should make a preliminary enquiry to see the potential 
of the big data in terms of value discovery or else our 
efforts could be in vain.
3.3.2 Data Analytics 
“Data analytics is the process of examining data sets 
in order to draw conclusions about the information 
they contain, with the aid of specialised systems 
and software.”

Data analytics technologies and techniques are 
becoming popular day-by-day. They are used in 
commercial industries to enable organisations to make 
more informed business decisions. In the field of science 
and technology, it can be useful for researchers to verify 
or disprove scientific models, theories and hypotheses. 
Pandas is a library of the programming language 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   50 08-Apr-19   11:41:17 AM



Emerging Trends 51

Python that can be used as a tool to make data analysis 
much simpler.

3.4 Internet of Things (IoT)
The term computer network that we commonly use is 
the network of computers. Such a network consists 
of a laptop, desktop, server, or a portable device like 
tablet, smartphone, smart watch, 
etc., connected through wire or 
wireless. We can communicate 
between these devices using 
Internet or LAN. Now imagine what 
if our bulbs, fans and refrigerator 
also became a part of this network. 
How will they communicate with 
each other, and what will they 
communicate? Think about the 
advantages and tasks that can 
be accomplished if all these 
devices with smart connectivity 
features are able to communicate Figure 3.10: Internet of Things (IoT)
amongst themselves and we are 
also able to communicate with them using computers 
or smartphones.

The ‘Internet of Things’ is a network of devices 
that have an embedded hardware and software to 
communicate (connect and exchange data) with other 
devices on the same network as shown in Figure 3.10. 
At present, in a typical household, many devices have Activity 3.3
advanced hardware (microcontrollers) and software. Explore and list a few 
These devices are used in isolation from each other, with IoT devices available in 

the market. 
maximum human intervention needed for operational 
directions and input data. IoT tends to bring together 
these devices to work in collaboration and assist each 
other in creating an intelligent network of things. For 
example, if a microwave oven, an air conditioner, door 
lock, CCTV camera or other such devices are enabled 
to connect to the Internet, we can access and remotely 
control them on-the-go using our smartphone.
3.4.1 Web of Things (WoT) 
Internet of Things allows us to interact with different 
devices through Internet with the help of smartphones 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   51 08-Apr-19   11:41:18 AM



52 Computer Science – Class xi

Activity 3.4 or computers, thus creating a personal network. But to 
interact with ‘n’ number of different devices, we need 

We use GPS to 
navigate outdoors. VPS to install ‘n’ different apps. Wouldn’t it be convenient 
is another emerging to have one interface to connect all the devices? The 
trend that uses web is already being used as a system to communicate 
Augmented Reality. with each other. So, will it be possible to use the web 
Explore and find its 
other utilities. in such a way that all things can communicate with 

each other in the most efficient manner by integrating 
them together? Web of Things (WoT) allows use of web 
services to connect anything in the physical world, 
besides human identities on web. It will pave way for 
creating smart homes, smart offices, smart cities and 
so on.
3.4.2 Sensors 
What happens when you hold your mobile vertically 
or horizontally? The display also changes to vertical or 
horizontal with respect to the way we hold our mobile. 
This is possible with the help of two sensors, namely 
accelerometer and gyroscope (gyro). The accelerometer 
sensor in the mobile phones detects the orientation of 
the phone. The Gyroscope sensors, tracks rotation or 
twist of your hand and add to the information supplied 
by the accelerometer.

Sensors are very commonly used as monitoring 
and observing elements in real world applications. The 
evolution of smart electronic sensors is contributing in 
a large way to the evolution of IoT. It will lead to creation 
of new sensor-based, intelligent systems.

A smart sensor is a device that takes input from 
the physical environment and uses built-in computing 
resources to perform predefined functions upon detection 
of specific input and then process data before passing it on.
3.4.3 Smart Cities 
With rapid urbanisation, the load on our cities are 
increasing day-by-day, and there are challenges in 
management of resources like land water, waste, air 
pollution, health and sanitation, traffic congestions, 
public safety and security, besides the overall city 
infrastructures including road, rail, bridge, electricity, 

Think and Reflect subways, disaster management, sports facilities, etc. 
What are your ideas of These challenges are forcing many city planners around 
transforming your city the world to look for smarter ways to manage them and 
into a smart city? make cities sustainable and livable.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   52 08-Apr-19   11:41:18 AM



Emerging Trends 53

The idea of a 
smart city as shown 
in Figure 3.11 makes 
use of computer 
and communication 
technology along with 
IoT to manage and 
distribute resources 
efficiently. The smart 
building shown here 
uses sensors to detect 
earthquake tremors 
and then warn 
nearby buildings 
so that they can 
prepare themselves 
accordingly. The smart Figure 3.11: Smart city
bridge uses wireless sensors to detect any loose bolt, 
cable or crack. It alerts concerned authorities through 
SMS. The smart tunnel also uses wireless sensors to 
detect any leakage or congestion in the tunnel. This 
information can be sent as wireless signals across the 
network of sensor nodes to a centralised computer for 
further analysis.

Every sphere of life in a city like transportation 
systems, power plants, water supply networks, waste 
management, law enforcement, information systems, 
schools, libraries, hospitals and other community 
services work in unison to optimise the efficiency of city 
operations and services. 

3.5 Cloud Computing

Cloud computing is an emerging trend in the field 
of information technology, where computer-based 
services are delivered over the Internet or the cloud, 
and it is accessible to the user from anywhere using 
any device. The services comprise software, hardware 
(servers), databases, storage, etc. These resources are 
provided by companies called cloud service providers 
and usually charge on a pay per use basis, like the 
way we pay for electricity usage. We already use cloud 
services while storing our pictures and files as backup 
on Internet, or host a website on the Internet. Through 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   53 08-Apr-19   11:41:18 AM



54 Computer Science – Class xi

cloud computing, a user can run a bigger application 
or process a large amount of data without having the 
required storage or processing power on their personal 
computer as long as they are connected to the Internet. 
Besides other numerous features, cloud computing 
offers cost-effective, on-demand resources. A user can 
avail need-based resources from the cloud at a very 
reasonable cost. 
3.5.1 Cloud Services 
A better way to understand the cloud is to interpret 
everything as a service. A “service” corresponds to any 
facility provided by the cloud. There are three standard 

models to categorise different 
computing services delivered 
through cloud as shown in Figure 
3.12. These are Infrastructure 
as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a 
Service (PaaS), and Software as a 
Service (SaaS). 
(A)	  Infrastructure as a Service 
(IaaS)
The IaaS providers can offer 
different kinds of computing 
infrastructure, such as servers, 
virtual machines (VM), storage 
and backup facility, network 

Figure 3.12: Cloud computing components, operating systems 
or any other hardware or software. Using IaaS from 
the cloud, a user can use the hardware infrastructure 
located at a remote location to configure, deploy 
and execute any software application on that cloud 
infrastructure. They can outsource the hardware and 
software on a demand basis and pay as per the usage, 
thereby they can save the cost of software, hardware 
and other infrastructures as well as the cost of setting 
up, maintenance and security.
(B)	 Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
The facility provided by the cloud, where a user can 
install and execute an application without worrying 
about the underlying infrastructure and their setup. 
That is, PaaS provides a platform or environment 
to develop, test, and deliver software applications. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   54 08-Apr-19   11:41:18 AM



Emerging Trends 55

Suppose we have developed a web application using Activity 3.5
MySQL and Python. To run this application online, we 
can avail a pre-configured Apache server from cloud Name a few data 

centers in India along 
having MySQL and Python pre-installed. Thus, we are with the major services 
not required to install MySQL and Python on the cloud, that they provide. 
nor do we need to configure the web server (Apache, 
nginx). In PaaS, the user has complete control over the 
deployed application and its configuration. It provides 
a deployment environment for developers at a much 
reduced cost lessening the complexity of buying and 
managing the underlying hardware and software.
(C)	 Software as a Service (SaaS)
SaaS provides on-demand access to application software, 
usually requiring a licensing or subscription by the 
user. While using Google Doc, Microsoft Office 365, 
Drop Box, etc., to edit a document online, we use SaaS 
from cloud. A user is not concerned about installation 
or configuration of the software application as long 
as the required software is accessible. Like PaaS, a 
user is provided access to the required configuration 
settings of the application software, that they are using 
at present.

In all of the above standard service models, a user 
can use on-demand infrastructure or platform or 
software and is usually charged as per usage, thereby 
eliminating the need of a huge investment upfront for 
a new or evolving organisation. In order to utilise and 
harness the benefits of cloud computing, Government of 
India has embarked upon an ambitious initiative — “GI 
Cloud” which has been named as ‘MeghRaj’ (https://
cloud.gov.in). 

Users sharing their resources

3.6 Grid Computing
A grid is a computer network of geographically 
dispersed and heterogeneous computational 
resources as shown in Figure 3.13. Unlike Grid Resource
cloud, whose primary focus is to provide Management 
services, a grid is more application specific System

and creates a sense of a virtual supercomputer 
with an enormous processing power and 
storage. The constituent resources are called 
nodes. These different nodes temporarily come 
together to solve a single large task and to reach Users sharing their resources

a common goal. Figure 3.13: Grid computing

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   55 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM



56 Computer Science – Class xi

Think and Reflect Nowadays, countless computational nodes ranging 
from hand-held mobile devices to personal computers 

How can some of and workstations are connected to LAN or Internet. 
the emerging trends 
discussed in this Therefore, it is economically feasible to reuse or utilise 
chapter be used as their resources like memory as well as processing power. 
assistive tools for people The grid provides an opportunity to solve computationally 
with disabilities? intense scientific and research problems without 

actually procuring a costly hardware.
Grid can be of two types — (i) Data grid, used to 

manage large and distributed data having required 
multi-user access, and (ii) CPU or Processor grid, where 
processing is moved from one PC to another as needed 
or a large task is divided into subtasks and divided to 
various nodes for parallel processing.

Grid computing is different from IaaS cloud service. 
In case of IaaS cloud service, there is a service provider 
who rents the required infrastructure to the users. 
Whereas in grid computing, multiple computing nodes 
join together to solve a common computational problem.

To set up a grid, by connecting numerous nodes in 
terms of data as well as CPU, a middleware is required to 
implement the distributed processor architecture. The 
Globus toolkit (http://toolkit.globus.org/toolkit) is one 
such software toolkit used for building grids, and it is 
open source. It includes software for security, resource 
management, data management, communication, fault 
detection, etc.

3.7 Blockchains

Traditionally, we perform digital transactions by storing 
data in a centralised database and the transactions 
performed are updated one by one on the database. That 
is how the ticket booking websites or banks operate. 
However, since all the data are stored on a central 
location, there are chances of data being hacked or lost.

The blockchain technology works on the concept of 
decentralised and shared database where each computer 
has a copy of the database. A block can be thought as 
a secured chunk of data or valid transaction. Each 
block has some data called its header, which is visible 
to every other node, while only the owner has access to 
the private data of the block. Such blocks form a chain 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   56 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM



Emerging Trends 57

The request is 
Someone requests broadcast to all 

a transaction nodes in the 
network

If verified by all nodes, 
The transaction the block get added in the 

is complete already existing chain of 
blocks

Figure 3.14: Block chain technology

called blockchain as shown in Figure 3.14. We can 
define blockchain as a system that allows a group of 
connected computers to maintain a single updated and 
secure ledger. Each computer or node that participates 
in the blockchain receives a full copy of the database. It 
maintains an ‘append only’ open ledger which is updated 
only after all the nodes within the network authenticate 
the transaction. Safety and security of the transactions 
are ensured because all the members in the network 
keep a copy of the blockchain and so it is not possible 
for a single member of the network to make changes or 
alter data.

The most popular application of blockchains 
technology is in digital currency. However, due to its 
decentralised nature with openness and security, 
blockchains are being seen as one of the ways to ensure 
transparency, accountability and efficiency in business 
and as well as governance systems.

For example, in healthcare, better data sharing 
between healthcare providers would result in a higher 
probability of accurate diagnosis, more effective 
treatments, and the overall increased ability of healthcare 
organisations to deliver cost-effective care. Another 
potential application can be for  land registration records, 
to avoid various disputes arising out of land ownership Think and Reflect
claims and encroachments. A blockchain-based voting 

Name any two areas 
system can solve the problem of vote alterations and other than those given 
other issues. Since everything gets stored in the ledger, where the concept of 
voting can become more transparent and authentic. The blockchain technology 
blockchain technology can be used in diverse sectors, can be useful.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   57 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM



58 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes such as banking, media, telecom, travel and hospitality 
and other areas.

Summary

•	 Artificial intelligence (AI) endeavours to simulate 
the natural intelligence of human beings into 
machines thus making them intelligent.

•	 Machine learning comprises algorithms that use 
data to learn on their own and make predictions.

•	 Natural Language Processing (NLP) facilitates 
communicating with intelligent systems using a 
natural language.

•	 Virtual Reality (VR) allows a user to look at, explore 
and interact with the virtual surroundings, just 
like one can do in the real world.

•	 The superimposition of computer-generated 
perceptual information over the existing physical 
surroundings is called Augmented Reality.

•	 Robotics can be defined as the science or study of 
the technology primarily associated with the design, 
fabrication, theory and application of robots.

•	 Big data holds rich information and knowledge 
which can be of high business value. Five 
characteristics of big data are: Volume, Velocity, 
Variety, Veracity and Value.

•	 Data analytics is the process of examining data sets 
in order to draw conclusions about the information 
they contain.

•	 The Internet of Things (IoT) is a network of devices 
that have an embedded hardware and software to 
communicate (connect and exchange data) with 
other devices on the same network.

•	 A sensor is a device that takes input from the 
physical environment and uses built-in computing 
resources to perform predefined functions upon 
detection of specific input and then processes data 
before passing it on.

•	 Cloud computing allows resources located at 
remote locations to be made available to anyone 
anywhere. Cloud services can be Infrastructure as 
a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and 
Software as a Service (SaaS).

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   58 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM



Emerging Trends 59

•	 A grid is a computer network of geographically Notes
dispersed and heterogeneous computational 
resources.

•	 Blockchain is a system that allows a group of 
connected computers to maintain a single updated 
and secure ledger which is updated only after all the 
nodes in the network authenticate the transaction.

Exercise

1.	 List some of the cloud-based services that you are 
using at present.

2.	 What do you understand by the Internet of Things? 
List some of its potential applications.

3.	 Write short notes on the following:
a)	Cloud Computing 
b)	Big data and its Characteristics

4.	 Explain the following along with their applications.
a)	Artificial Intelligence
b)	Machine Learning

5.	 Differentiate between cloud computing and grid 
computing with suitable examples.

6.	 Justify the following statement:
“Storage of data is cost-effective and time saving in 

cloud computing.” 
7.	 What is on-demand service? How it is provided in 

cloud computing?
8.	 Write examples of the following:

a)	Government provided cloud computing platform
b)	Large scale private cloud service providers and 

the services they provide
9.	 A company interested in cloud computing is looking 

for a provider who offers a set of basic services, 
such as virtual server provisioning and on demand 
storage that can be combined into a platform for 
deploying and running customised applications. 
What type of cloud computing model fits these 
requirements?
a)	Platform as a Service
b)	Software as a Service
c)	 Application as a Service
d)	Infrastructure as a Service

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   59 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM



60 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes 10.	 If the government plans to make a smart school by 
applying IoT concepts, how can each of the following 
be implemented in order to transform a school into 
IoT-enabled smart school?
a)	e-textbooks
b)	Smart boards
c)	 Online Tests
d)	Wifi sensors on classrooms doors
e)	 Sensors in buses to monitor their location
f)	 Wearables (watches or smart belts) for 

attendance monitoring.
11.	Five friends plan to try a startup. However, they 

have a limited budget and limited computer 
infrastructure. How can they avail the benefits of 
cloud services to launch their startup?

12.	 Governments provide various scholarships to 
students of different classes. Prepare a report on how 
blockchain technology can be used to promote 
accountability, transparency and efficiency in 
distribution of scholarships?

13.	How are IoT and WoT related?
14.	Match the columns:
Column A Column B

1.	 You got a reminder to take A.	 Smart Parking
medication

2.	 You got an SMS alert that B.	 Smart 
you forgot to lock the door Wearable

3.	 You got an SMS alert that C.	 Home 
parking space is available Automation
near your block

4.	 You turned off your LED TV D.	 Smart Health
from your wrist watch

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 3.indd   60 08-Apr-19   11:41:19 AM



##4##
Chapter 4 

Introduction to 
Problem Solving

4.1 Introduction “Computer Science is a 
Today, computers are all around us. We use them science of abstraction 
for doing various tasks in a faster and more accurate -creating the right model for 
manner. For example, using a computer or smartphone, a problem and devising the 
we can book train tickets online. appropriate mechanizable 

India is a big country and we have an enormous techniques to solve it.”
railway network. Thus, railway reservation is a complex 
task. Making reservation involves information about –A. Aho and J. Ullman
many aspects, such as details of trains (train type, types 
of berth and compartments in each train, their schedule, 
etc.), simultaneous booking of tickets by multiple users 
and many other related factors.  

It is only due to the use of computers that today, 
the booking of the train tickets has become easy. Online 
booking of train tickets has added to our comfort by 
enabling us to book tickets from anywhere, anytime. 

We usually use the term computerisation to indicate 
the use of computer to develop software in order to 
automate any routine human task efficiently. Computers In this chapter  
are used for solving various day-to-day problems »» Introduction 
and thus problem solving is an essential skill that a »» Steps for Problem 
computer science student should know. It is pertinent Solving
to mention that computers themselves cannot solve a »» Algorithm
problem. Precise step-by-step instructions should be »» Representation of 
given by us to solve the problem. Thus, the success of a Algorithms
computer in solving a problem depends on how correctly »» Flow of Control
and precisely we define the problem, design a solution »» Verifying Algorithms
(algorithm) and implement the solution (program) using 

»» Comparison of 
a programming language. Thus, problem solving is the Algorithm
process of identifying a problem, developing an algorithm »» Coding
for the identified problem and finally implementing the 

»» Decomposition
algorithm to develop a computer program.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   61 21-May-19   11:45:27 AM



62 Computer Science – Class xi

4.2 Steps for Problem Solving

Suppose while driving, a vehicle starts making a strange 
GIGO (Garbage In Garbage 

Out) noise. We might not know how to solve the problem 
The correctness of the right away. First, we need to identify from where the 

output that a computer noise is coming? In case the problem cannot be solved 
gives depends upon the by us, then we need to take the vehicle to a mechanic. 

correctness of input 
provided. The mechanic will analyse the problem to identify the 

source of the noise, make a plan about the work to be 
done and finally repair the vehicle in order to remove 
the noise. From the above example, it is explicit that, 

finding the solution to a problem might consist 
of multiple steps. 

When problems are straightforward and easy, 
we can easily find the solution. But a complex 
problem requires a methodical approach to 
find the right solution. In other words, we have 
to apply problem solving techniques. Problem 
solving begins with the precise identification of 
the problem and ends with a complete working 
solution in terms of a program or software. 
Key steps required for solving a problem using 
a computer are shown in Figure 4.1 and are 

Figure 4.1:	 Steps for problem solving discussed in following subsections.
4.2.1 Analysing the problem
It is important to clearly understand a problem before 
we begin to find the solution for it. If we are not clear 
as to what is to be solved, we may end up developing 
a program which may not solve our purpose. Thus, 
we need to read and analyse the problem statement 
carefully in order to list the principal components of 
the problem and decide the core functionalities that 
our solution should have. By analysing a problem, we 
would be able to figure out what are the inputs that 
our program should accept and the outputs that it 
should produce. 

Algorithm
A set of exact steps 4.2.2 Developing an Algorithm 

which when followed, 
solve the problem It is essential to device a solution before writing a program 
or accomplish the code for a given problem. The solution is represented in 

required task. natural language and is called an algorithm. We can 
imagine an algorithm like a very well-written recipe for 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   62 08-Apr-19   12:34:19 PM



Introduction to Problem Solving 63

a dish, with clearly defined steps that, if followed, one Notes
will end up preparing the dish.

We start with a tentative solution plan and keep 
on refining the algorithm until the algorithm is able 
to capture all the aspects of the desired solution. For 
a given problem, more than one algorithm is possible 
and we have to select the most suitable solution. The 
algorithm is discussed in section 4.3.
4.2.3 Coding
After finalising the algorithm, we need to convert the 
algorithm into the format which can be understood by 
the computer to generate the desired solution. Different 
high level programming languages can be used for 
writing a program. 

It is equally important to record the details of the 
coding procedures followed and document the solution. 
This is helpful when revisiting the programs at a later 
stage. Coding is explained in detail in section 4.8.
4.2.4 Testing and Debugging
The program created should be tested on various 
parameters. The program should meet the requirements 
of the user. It must respond within the expected time. It 
should generate correct output for all possible inputs. 
In the presence of syntactical errors, no output will be 
obtained. In case the output generated is incorrect, then 
the program should be checked for logical errors, if any.

Software industry follows standardised testing 
methods like unit or component testing, integration 
testing, system testing, and acceptance testing while 
developing complex applications. This is to ensure 
that the software meets all the business and technical 
requirements and works as expected. The errors or 
defects found in the testing phases are debugged or 
rectified and the program is again tested. This continues 
till all the errors are removed from the program.

Once the software application has been developed, 
tested and delivered to the user, still problems in terms 
of functioning can come up and need to be resolved 
from time to time. The maintenance of the solution, 
thus, involves fixing the problems faced by the user, 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   63 08-Apr-19   12:34:19 PM



64 Computer Science – Class xi

Activity 4.1 answering the queries of the user and even serving the 
request for addition or modification of features.

What sequence of 
steps will you follow to 
compute the LCM of 4.3 Algorithm
two numbers? In our day-to-day life we perform activities by following 

certain sequence of steps. Examples of activities include 
getting ready for school, making breakfast, riding a 
bicycle, wearing a tie, solving a puzzle and so on. To 
complete each activity, we follow a sequence of steps. 
Suppose following are the steps required for an activity 
‘riding a bicycle’: 

1)	 remove the bicycle from the stand,
2)	 sit on the seat of the bicycle, 
3)	 start peddling,
4)	 use breaks whenever needed and
5)	 stop on reaching the destination.

Let us now find Greatest Common Divisor (GCD) of two 
numbers 45 and 54.
Note: GCD is the largest number that divides both the 
given numbers.
Step 1: Find the numbers (divisors) which can divide the 
given numbers

	 Divisors of 45 are: 1, 3, 5, 9, 15, and 45
	 Divisors of 54 are: 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 18, 27,  
	 and 54

Step 2: Then find the largest common number from these 
two lists.

The origin of the term   Therefore, GCD of 45 and 54 is 9 
Algorithm is traced to Hence, it is clear that we need to follow a sequence 

Persian astronomer and of steps to accomplish the task. Such a finite sequence 
mathematician, Abu of steps required to get the desired output is called 

Abdullah Muhammad 
ibn Musa Al-Khwarizmi an algorithm. It will lead to the desired result in a finite 

(c. 850 AD) as the amount of time, if followed correctly. Algorithm has a 
Latin translation of Al- definite beginning and a definite end, and consists of a 
Khwarizmi was called finite number of steps.

‘Algorithmi’.
4.3.1 Why do we need an Algorithm?
A programmer writes a program to instruct the computer 
to do certain tasks as desired. The computer then follows 
the steps written in the program code. Therefore, the 
programmer first prepares a roadmap of the program 
to be written, before actually writing the code. Without 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   64 11/10/2021   11:33:50 AM



Introduction to Problem Solving 65

a roadmap, the programmer may not be able to clearly Notes
visualise the instructions to be written and may end up 
developing a program which may not work as expected.

Such a roadmap is nothing but the algorithm which is 
the building block of a computer program. For example, 
searching using a search engine, sending a message, 
finding a word in a document, booking a taxi through 
an app, performing online banking, playing computer 
games, all are based on algorithms.

Writing an algorithm is mostly considered as a first 
step to programming. Once we have an algorithm to 
solve a problem, we can write the computer program 
for giving instructions to the computer in high level 
language. If the algorithm is correct, computer will run 
the program correctly, every time. So, the purpose of 
using an algorithm is to increase the reliability, accuracy 
and efficiency of obtaining solutions. 
(A)	 Characteristics of a good algorithm 

•	Precision — the steps are precisely stated or defined.
•	Uniqueness — results of each step are uniquely 

defined and only depend on the input and the result 
of the preceding steps.

•	Finiteness — the algorithm always stops after a 
finite number of steps.

•	Input — the algorithm receives some input.
•	Output — the algorithm produces some output.

(B)	 While writing an algorithm, it is required to 		
	 clearly identify the following:

•	The input to be taken from the user
•	Processing or computation to be performed to get 

the desired result
•	The output desired by the user

4.4 Representation of Algorithms

Using their algorithmic thinking skills, the software 
designers or programmers analyse the problem and 
identify the logical steps that need to be followed to reach 
a solution. Once the steps are identified, the need is to 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   65 08-Apr-19   12:34:19 PM



66 Computer Science – Class xi

write down these steps along with the required input 
and desired output. There are two common methods of 
representing an algorithm —flowchart and pseudocode. 
Either of the methods can be used to represent an 
algorithm while keeping in mind the following:

•	it showcases the logic of the problem solution, 
excluding any implementational details

•	it clearly reveals the flow of control during execution 
of the program

4.4.1 Flowchart — Visual Representation of Algorithms
A flowchart is a visual representation of an algorithm. 
A flowchart is a diagram made up of boxes, diamonds 
and other shapes, connected by arrows. Each shape 
represents a step of the solution process and the arrow 
represents the order or link among the steps. 

There are standardised symbols to draw flowcharts. 
Some are given in Table 4.1.

Table 4.1	Shapes or symbols to draw flow charts
Flowchart symbol Function Description

Start/End Also called “Terminator” symbol. It indicates where the 
 flow starts and ends.

Process Also called “Action Symbol,” it represents a process, 
 action, or a single step.

Decision A decision or branching point, usually a yes/no or true/
false question is asked, and based on the answer, the path 
gets split into two branches.

 
Input/Output Also called data symbol, this parallelogram shape is used 

 to input or output data
 Arrow Connector to show order of flow between shapes.

Example 4.1:	 Write an algorithm to find the square of a 
number. 

Before developing the algorithm, let us first identify the 
input, process and output:

•	 Input: Number whose square is required 
•	 Process: Multiply the number by itself to get 

its square
•	 Output: Square of the number 

Algorithm to find square of a number.
 Step 1: Input a number and store it to num
 Step 2: Compute num * num and store it in square 
 Step 3: Print square

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   66 21-May-19   4:35:17 PM



Introduction to Problem Solving 67

The algorithm to find square of a number can be Think and Reflect
represented pictorially using flowchart as shown in 
Figure 4.2. What will happen if an 

algorithm does not stop 
after a finite number 
of steps?

Activity 4.2
Draw a flowchart 
that represents the 
attainment of your 
career goal. 

Figure 4.2: Flowchart to calculate square of a 
number

Example 4.2:	 Draw a flowchart to solve the problem of 
a non-functioning light bulb

Figure 4.3: Flowchart to solve the problem of a non-functioning  
light bulb

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   67 08-Apr-19   12:34:19 PM



68 Computer Science – Class xi

4.4.2 Pseudocode 
A pseudocode (pronounced Soo-doh-kohd) is another 
way of representing an algorithm. It is considered as a 
non-formal language that helps programmers to write 
algorithm. It is a detailed description of instructions 
that a computer must follow in a particular order. It is 
intended for human reading and cannot be executed 
directly by the computer. No specific standard for writing 
a pseudocode exists. The word “pseudo” means “not 
real,” so “pseudocode” means “not real code”. Following 
are some of the frequently used keywords while writing 
pseudocode:

•	INPUT
•	COMPUTE
•	PRINT
•	INCREMENT
•	DECREMENT
•	IF/ELSE
•	WHILE
•	TRUE/FALSE

Example 4.3:	 Write an algorithm to display the 
sum of two numbers entered by 

Activity 4.3 user, using both pseudocode and 
Write a pseudocode for flowchart.
creating  a scoreboard Pseudocode for the sum of two numbers will be:
for a hockey match. 	 input num1

	input  num2
	 COMPUTE Result = num1 + num2
	 PRINT Result

The flowchart for this algorithms is given in Figure 4.4.

Result

Print Result

Figure 4.4: Flowchart to display sum of two numbers

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   68 08-Apr-19   12:34:19 PM



Introduction to Problem Solving 69

Example 4.4:	 Write an algorithm to calculate Notes
area and perimeter of a rectangle, 
using both pseudocode and flowchart.

Pseudocode for calculating area and perimeter of 
a rectangle.

		  input length
		  input breadth
		  compute Area = length * breadth
	 	print  Area
		  compute Perim = 2 * (length + breadth)
	 	print  Perim

The flowchart for this algorithm is given in Figure 4.5.

Figure 4.5: Flowchart to 
calculate area and perimeter of a rectangle

(A) Benefits of Pseudocode
Before writing codes in a high level language, a 
pseudocode of a program helps in representing the 
basic functionality of the intended program. By 
writing the code first in a human readable language, 
the programmer safeguards against leaving out any 
important step. Besides, for non-programmers, actual 
programs are difficult to read and understand, but 
pseudocode helps them to review the steps to confirm 
that the proposed implementation is going to achieve 
the desire output. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   69 08-Apr-19   12:34:20 PM



70 Computer Science – Class xi

4.5 Flow of Control

The flow of control depicts the flow of events as 
represented in the flow chart. The events can flow in 
a sequence, or on branch based on a decision or even 
repeat some part for a finite number of times.
4.5.1 Sequence
If we look at the examples 4.3 and 4.4, the statements 
are executed one after another, i.e., in a sequence. 
Such algorithms where all the steps are executed one 
after the other are said to execute in sequence. However, 
statements in an algorithm may not always execute in 
a sequence. We may sometimes require the algorithm 
to either do some routine tasks in a repeated manner 
or behave differently depending on the outcomes of 
previous steps. In this section, we are going to learn 
how to write algorithms for such situations.
4.5.2 Selection
Consider the map of a neighbourhood as shown in 
Figure 4.6. Let us assume that the pink building with 

Think and Reflect the red roof is the school; the yellow painted house at 
Can you list some of the the far end of the map is a house.
routine activities in your 
daily life where decision 
making is involved?

Figure 4.6: Decision making in real life

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   70 08-Apr-19   12:34:20 PM



Introduction to Problem Solving 71

With reference to Figure 4.6, let us answer the following Notes
questions :

•	Is there a predefined route for walking from home 
to school?

•	Can we have a different route while coming back? 
As seen from the map, there can be multiple routes 

between home and school. We might take the shortest 
route in the morning. But while coming back home 
in the afternoon, the shortest route might have heavy 
traffic. Therefore, we could take another route with 
less traffic. Hence, the above problem involves some 
decision-making based on certain conditions.
Let us look at some other examples where decision 
making is dependent on certain conditions. For example,
(i) Checking eligibility for voting.
     Depending on their age, a person will either be allowed 
to vote or not allowed to vote: 

•	If age is greater than or equal to 18, the person is 
eligible to vote

•	If age is less than 18, the person is not eligible 
to vote

(ii) Let us consider another example
     If a student is 8 years old and the student likes Maths
	 put the student in Group A
     Otherwise
	 Put the student in Group B

In which group will these students go as per the 
above condition?
								            Outcome

•	8-year-old Ravi who does not like Maths: 	Group B
•	8-year-old Priti who likes Maths: 	 Group A
•	7-year-old Anish who likes Maths: 	 Group B

In these examples, any one of the alternatives is selected 
based on the outcome of a condition. Conditionals are 
used to check possibilities. The program checks one or 
more conditions and perform operations (sequence of 
actions) depending on true or false value of the condition. 
These true or false values are called binary values. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   71 08-Apr-19   12:34:20 PM



72 Computer Science – Class xi

Conditionals are written in the algorithm as 
follows:
If <condition> then
     steps to be taken when the 
condition is true/fulfilled
There are situations where we also need to 

Figure 4.7:  Actions depending on true or take action when the condition is not fulfilled 
false of a condition (Figure 4.7). To represent that, we can write:

If <condition> is true then
     steps to be taken when the condition is 
true/fulfilled
otherwise
     steps to be taken when the condition is 
false/not fulfilled

In programming languages, 'otherwise' is represented 
using Else keyword. Hence, a true/false conditional is 
written using if-else block in actual programs.
Example 4.5:	 Let us write an algorithm to check whether 

a number is odd or even.
•	Input: Any number
•	Process: Check whether the number is even or not
•	Output: Message “Even” or “Odd” 

Pseudocode of the algorithm can be written as follows:
PRINT "Enter the Number"
INPUT number
IF number MOD 2 == 0 THEN
     PRINT "Number is Even"
ELSE
     PRINT "Number is Odd"

The flowchart representation of the algorithm in shown 
in Figure 4.8.

Figure 4.8: Flowchart to check whether a number is even or odd

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   72 08-Apr-19   12:34:20 PM



Introduction to Problem Solving 73

Example 4.6:	 Let us write a pseudocode and draw a Notes
flowchart where multiple conditions are 
checked to categorise a person as either 
child (<13), teenager (>=13 but <20) or 
adult (>=20),based on age specified:

•	 Input: Age
•	 Process: Check Age as per the given	 criteria
•	 Output: Print either “Child”, “Teenager”, “Adult” 

Pseudocode is as follows:
INPUT Age
if Age < 13 then
		  PRINT "Child"
	 else if Age < 20 then
		  PRINT "Teenager"
	 else
		  PRINT "Adult"

The flowchart representation of the algorithm in shown 
in Figure 4.9

Figure 4.9: Flowchart to check multiple conditions

Example 4.7:	 Algorithm for a card game called “Dragons 
and Wizards”. 

Make two teams DRAGONS and WIZARDS
The rules for the game are as follows: 

•	If the card drawn is a diamond or a club, Team 
DRAGONS gets a point

•	If the card drawn is a heart which is a number, 
Team WIZARDS gets a point

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   73 08-Apr-19   12:34:20 PM



74 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes •	If the card drawn is a heart that is not a number, 
Team DRAGONS gets a point

•	For any other card, Team WIZARDS gets a point
•	The team with highest point is the winner

Let us identify the following for a card:
Input: shape, value
Process: Increment in respective team scores by one 
based on the outcome of the card drawn, as defined in 
the rules.
Output: Winning team
Now let us write the conditionals for this game:

IF (shape is diamond) OR (shape is club)
     Team DRAGONS gets a point
ELSE IF (shape is heart) AND (value is 
number)
     Team WIZARDS gets a point
ELSE IF (shape is heart) AND (value is not a 
number)
     Team DRAGONS gets a point
ELSE
     Team WIZARDS gets a point

The pseudocode for the program can be as follows:
Note: Dpoint (for Dragon) and Wpoint (for Wizard) store 
points scored by the respective teams. 

INPUT shape
INPUT value
SET Dpoint = 0, Wpoint = 0
IF (shape is diamond) OR (shape is club) THEN
     INCREMENT Dpoint
ELSE IF (shape is heart) AND (value is 
number)THEN
     INCREMENT Wpoint
ELSE IF (shape is heart) AND (value is not a 
number)THEN
     INCREMENT Dpoint
ELSE	
     INCREMENT Wpoint
END IF
If Dpoint > Wpoint THEN
	 PRINT "Dragon team is the winner"
ELSE
	 PRINT "Wizard team is the winner"

4.5.3 Repetition
When giving directions to go someplace, we  say  something 
like, “walk 50 steps then turn right”. Or “Walk till the next 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   74 08-Apr-19   12:34:20 PM



Introduction to Problem Solving 75

crossing then take a right turn”. Consider some other 
examples like: Think and Reflect

•	Clap your hands five times Can you list some of 
•	Walk 10 steps ahead the routine activities 

in your daily life where 
•	Jump on the spot till you get tired repetition or iteration is 
These are the kind of statements we use, when involved? 

we want something to be done repeatedly, for a given 
number of times. Likewise, suppose 10 cards need to 
be withdrawn in the previous card game (example 4.7), 
then the pseudocode needs to be repeated 10 times to 
decide the winner. All these are examples of repetitions. 
In programming, repetition is also known as iteration 
or loop. A loop in an algorithm means execution of 
some program statements repeatedly till some specified 
condition is satisfied.
Example 4.8:	 Write pseudocode and draw a flowchart to 

accept 5 numbers and find their average.
The flowchart representation is shown in Figure 4.10.
Pseudocode will be as follows:
Step 1: Set count = 0, sum = 0
Step 2: While count < 5 , repeat steps 3 to 5
Step 3: Input a number to num
Step 4: sum = sum + num
Step 5: count = count + 1
Step 6: Compute average = sum/5
Step 7: Print average

In example 4.8, a 
counter called “count” 
keeps track of number 
of times the loop 
has been repeated. 
After every iterationof 
the loop, the value 
of count is incremented 
by 1 until it performs 
the set number of 
repetitions, given in 
the iteration condition.

There are situations 
when we are not aware 
beforehand about the 
number of times a set Figure 4.10: Flowchart to Calculate the Average of 5 Numbers

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   75 08-Apr-19   12:34:21 PM



76 Computer Science – Class xi

of statements need to be repeated. Such requirements 
of  unknown number of repetitions are handled using 
WHILE construct.
Example 4.9:	 Write pseudocode and draw flowchart to 

accept numbers till the user enters 0 and 
then find their average. 

Pseudocode is as follows:
Step 1: Set count = 0, sum = 0
Step 2: Input num
Step   3: While num is not equal to 0, repeat Steps 4 to 6
Step 4: sum = sum + num
Step 5: count = count + 1
Step 6:  Input num
Step 7: Compute average = sum/count
Step 8: Print average
The flowchart representation is shown in Figure 4.11.

Activity 4.4
Let us answer the 
following questions 
using the pesudocode 
given in example 4.9:
1)	 What will the sum 

when the input are 6, 
7, 4, 8, 2, 5, 0, 3, 1.

2)	 What will be the 
value of count?

3)	 Why did we use the 
input statement to Figure 4.11: Flowchart to accept numbers till the user enters 0
enter num twice?

4)	 Why did we divide In this example, we do not know how many numbers 
sum by count? a user is going to enter before entering 0. This is handled 

5)	 Can there be any by checking the condition repeatedly till the condition 
other approach? becomes false.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   76 08-Apr-19   12:34:21 PM



Introduction to Problem Solving 77

4.6 Verifying Algorithms Think and Reflect
Can you imagine what would happen if a banking software Why is verification of 
does not work correctly? Suppose functioning of the online algorithm an important 
money transfer module is not programmed correctly, and step in problem solving?
it credits into the account only half the amount transacted! 
What happens if the account is debited instead of being 
credited. Such a faulty software will mess up the working 
of the complete system and cause havoc! Today software 
are used in even more critical services — like in the 
medical field or in space shuttles. Such software needs to 
work correctly in every situation. Therefore, the software 
designer should make sure that the functioning of all the 
components are defined correctly, checked and verified in 
every possible way. 

When we were told that the formula for the sum of 
first N natural numbers is  N(N+1) , how did we verify it? 

2
Well, we can check this for small numbers, for which 
we can manually calculate the sum. Let N = 6, then the Activity 4.5
sum is 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 = 21 Write an algorithm 

Using formula we get sum = 6x(6+1)
2    to take as input the 

We can try with some more numbers this way to measurement of length 
and breadth in feet and 

ensure that the formula works correctly. inches (e.g., 5 ft 6 inch) 
In the same way, when we have written an algorithm, of a rectangular shape 

we want to verify that it is working as expected. To verify, and calculate its area 
we have to take different input values and go through and perimeter.

all the steps of the algorithm to yield the desired output 
for each input value and may modify or improve as per 
the need. The method of taking an input and running 
through the steps of the algorithm is sometimes called 
dry run. Such a dry run will help us to: 

1.	 Identify any incorrect steps in the algorithm
2.	Figure out missing details or specifics in the 

algorithm
It is important to decide the type of input value to 

be used for the simulation. In case all possible input 
values are not tested, then the program will fail. What if 
there is some other case for which it does not work? Let 
us look at some examples. 

Write an algorithm to calculate the time taken to go 
from place A to C (T_total) via B where time taken to 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   77 21-May-19   11:51:30 AM



78 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes go from A to B (T1) and B to C (T2) are given. That is, 
we want the algorithm to add time given in hours and 
minutes. One way to write the algorithm is:

PRINT value for T1
INPUT hh1 
INPUT mm1
PRINT value for T2
INPUT hh2 
INPUT mm2
hh_total = hh1 + hh2 (Add hours)
mm_total = mm1 + mm2 (Add mins)
Print T_total as hh_total, mm_total 

Now let us verify. Suppose the first example we take 
is T1 = 5 hrs 20 mins and T2 = 7 hrs 30 mins. On 
dry run, we get the result 12 hrs and 50 mins. This 
looks fine.

Now let us take another example where T1 = 4 hrs 50 
mins and T2 = 2 hrs 20 mins, and we end up getting the 
result as 6 hrs 70 mins which is not how we measure 
time. The result should have been 7 hrs 10 mins. 

With this second example we realise that our 
algorithm will work only when mm1 + mm2 (mm_total) 
< 60. For all other cases, it will give us output not the 
way we want. When mm_total >= 60, the algorithm should 
increase the sum of hours (hh_total) by 1 and reduce 
mm_total by 60, i.e., (mm_total  -  60). So the modified 
algorithm will be: 

PRINT value for T1
INPUT hh1 
INPUT mm1
PRINT value for T2
INPUT hh2 
INPUT mm2
hh_total = hh1 + hh2 (Add hours)
mm_total = mm1 + mm2 (Add mins)
hh_total = hh1 + hh2 (Add hours)
mm_total = mm1 + mm2 (Add mins)   
IF (mm_total >= 60) THEN
     hh_total = hh_total + 1
     mm_total = mm_total - 60
PRINT T_total as hh_total, mm_total 

Now we can simulate through algorithm for T1 = 4 
hrs 50 mins and T2 = 2 hrs 20 mins, and get T_total 
= 7 hrs and 10 mins, which means the algorithm is 
working correctly.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   78 21-May-19   11:55:04 AM



Introduction to Problem Solving 79

Suppose we develop some software without verifying Notes
the underlying algorithm and if there are errors in 
the algorithm, then the software developed will not 
run. Hence, it is important to verify an algorithm 
since the effort required to catch and fix a mistake 
is minimal.

4.7 Comparison of Algorithm

There can be more than one approach to solve a problem 
using computer and hence we can have more than one 
algorithm. Then one may ask which algorithm should 
be used?

Consider the problem of finding whether a given 
number is prime or not. Prime numbers are of great 
importance in computer science as they find application 
in databases, security, file compression or decompression, 
modulation or demodulation, etc. There can be four 
different ways to write algorithms to check whether a 
given number is prime or not as shown below:

(i)	 Starting with divisor 2, divide the given 
number (dividend) and check if there are any 
factors. Increase the divisor in each iteration 
and repeat the previous steps as long as 
divisor < dividend. If there is a factor, then the 
given number is not prime 

(ii)	 In (i), instead of testing all the numbers till the 
dividend, only test up to half of the given value 
(dividend) because the divisor can not be more 
than half of the dividend

(iii)	In method (i), only test up to the square root of 
the dividend (numbers)

(iv)	Given a prior list of prime number till 100, divide 
the given number by each number in the list. If 
not divisible by any number, then the number is 
a prime else it is not prime

All these four methods can check if a given number 
is prime or not. Now the question is which of these 
methods is better or efficient?

Algorithm (i) requires large number of calculations 
(means more processing time) as it checks for all the 
numbers as long as the divisor is less than the number. 
If the given number is large, this method will take more 
time to give the output. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   79 08-Apr-19   12:34:21 PM



80 Computer Science – Class xi

Algorithm (ii) is more efficient than (i) as it checks for 
divisibility till half the number, and thus it reduces the 

The spirit of time for computation of the prime number. Algorithm 
problem solving by (iii) is even more efficient as it checks for divisibility till 
decomposition is to 

‘divide and conquer’. square root of the number, thereby further reducing the 
In words of Howard time taken.

Raffa, a famous As algorithm (iv) uses only the prime numbers smaller 
mathematician: than the given number for divisibility, it further reduces 

“Decompose a complex the calculations. But in this method we require to store 
problem into simpler 

problems get one’s thinking the list of prime numbers first. Thus it takes additional 
straight in these simpler memory even though it requires lesser calculations.

problems, put these Hence, algorithms can be compared and analysed 
analyses together with 

logical glue” on the basis of the amount of processing time they 
need to run and the amount of memory that is needed 
to execute the algorithm. These are termed as time 
complexity and space complexity, respectively. The 
choice of an algorithm over another is done depending 
on how efficient they are in terms of proecssing time 
required (time complexity) and the memory they utilise 
(space complexity).

4.8 Coding

Once an algorithm is finalised, it should be coded in 
a high-level programming language as selected by the 
programmer. The ordered set of instructions are written 
in that programming language by following its syntax. 
Syntax is the set of rules or grammar that governs the 
formulation of the statements in the language, such as 
spellings, order of words, punctuation, etc.

The machine language or low level language 
consisting of 0s and 1s only is the ideal way to write a 
computer program. Programs written using binary digits 
are directly understood by the computer hardware, 
but they are difficult to deal with and comprehend 
by humans. This led to the invention of high-level 
languages which are close to natural languages and are 
easier to read, write, and maintain, but are not directly 
understood by the computer hardware. An advantage of 
using high-level languages is that they are portable, i.e., 
they can run on different types of computers with little 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   80 08-Apr-19   12:34:21 PM



Introduction to Problem Solving 81

or no modifications. Low-level programs can run on Notes
only one kind of computer and have to be rewritten in 
order to run on another type of system. A wide variety of 
high-level languages, such as FORTRAN, C, C++, Java, 
Python, etc., exist.

A program written in a high-level language is called 
source code. We need to translate the source code into 
machine language using a compiler or an interpreter, 
so that it can be understood by the computer. We have 
learnt about the compiler and interpreter in Chapter 1.

There are multiple programming languages available 
and choosing the one suitable for our requirements 
requires us to consider many factors. It depends on 
the platform (OS) where the program will run. We need 
to decide whether the application would be a desktop 
application, a mobile application or a web application. 
Desktop and mobile applications are generally developed 
for a particular operating system and for certain 
hardware whereas the web applications are accessed 
in different devices using web browsers and may use 
resources available over cloud.

Besides, programs are developed not only to work on 
a computer, mobile or a web browser, but it may also be 
written for embedded systems like digital watch, mp3 
players, traffic signals or vehicles, medical equipments 
and other smart devices. In such cases, we have to look 
for other specialised programming tools or sometimes 
write programs in assembly languages.

4.9 Decomposition

Sometimes a problem may be complex, that is, its 
solution is not directly derivable. In such cases, we need 
to decompose it into simpler parts. Let us look at the 
Railway reservation system we talked about earlier. The 
complex task of designing a good railway reservation 
system is seen as designing the different components of 
the system and then making them work with each other 
effectively.

The basic idea of solving a complex problem by 
decomposition is to 'decompose' or break down a 
complex problem into smaller sub problems as shown 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   81 08-Apr-19   12:34:21 PM



82 Computer Science – Class xi

in Figure 4.12. These sub problems are relatively easier 
to solve than the original problem. Finally, the sub-
problems are combined in a logical way to obtain the 
solution for the bigger, main problem.

Trains' information Reservation  information Information about  
— days, timings, — booking open or close, staff, security, 

stations, classes and available or waiting List, railway 
births cancellation and refund infrastructure

Billing service Other details about 
Food service railways

Figure 4.12: Railway reservation system

Breaking down a complex problem into sub problems 
also means that each sub problem can be examined in 
detail. Each sub problem can be solved independently 
and by different persons (or teams). Having different 
teams working on different sub problems can also 
be advantageous because specific sub problems 
can be assigned to teams who are experts in solving 
such problems. 

There are many real life problems which can 
be solved using decomposition. Examples include 
solving problems in mathematics and science, events 
management in school, weather forecasting, delivery 
management system, etc. 

Once the individual sub problems are solved, it is 
necessary to test them for their correctness and integrate 
them to get the complete solution.  

Summary
•	An algorithm is defined as a step-by-step procedure 

designed to perform an operation which will lead to 
the desired result, if followed correctly.

•	Algorithms have a definite beginning and a definite 
end, and a finite number of steps.

•	A good algorithm, which is precise, unique and 
finite, receives input and produces an output.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   82 08-Apr-19   12:34:21 PM



Introduction to Problem Solving 83

•	In order to write effective algorithms we need to Notes
identify the input, the process to be followed and 
the desired output.

•	A flowchart is a type of diagram that represents 
the algorithm graphically using boxes of various 
kinds, in an order connected by arrows.

•	An algorithm where all the steps are executed 
one after the other is said to execute in sequence.

•	Decision making involves selection of one of the 
alternatives based on outcome of a condition.

•	An algorithm may have a certain set of steps, 
which are repeating for a finite number of times, 
such an algorithm is said to be iterative.

•	There can be more than one approach to solve a 
problem and hence we can have more than one 
algorithm for a particular problem.

•	The choice of algorithm should be made on the 
basis of time and space complexity.

Exercise

	 1.	 Write pseudocode that reads two numbers and 
divide one by another and display the quotient.

	 2.	 Two friends decide who gets the last slice of a cake 
by flipping a coin five times. The first person to 
win three flips wins the cake. An input of 1 means 
player 1 wins a flip, and a 2 means player 2 wins 
a flip. Design an algorithm to determine who takes 
the cake?

	 3.	 Write the pseudocode to print all multiples of 5 
between 10 and 25 (including both 10 and 25).

	 4.	 Give an example of a loop that is to be executed a 
certain number of times.

	 5.	 Suppose you are collecting money for something. 
You need ` 200 in all. You ask your parents, uncles 
and aunts as well as grandparents. Different people 
may give either ̀  10, ̀  20 or even ̀  50. You will collect 
till the total becomes 200. Write the algorithm.

	 6.	 Write the pseudocode to print the bill depending 
upon the price and quantity of an item. Also print 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   83 08-Apr-19   12:34:21 PM



84 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes Bill GST, which is the bill after adding 5% of tax in 
the total bill.

	 7.	 Write pseudocode that will perform the following:
a)	 Read the marks of three subjects: Computer 

Science, Mathematics and Physics, out of 100
b)	 Calculate the aggregate marks
c)	 Calculate the percentage of marks

	 8.	 Write an algorithm to find the greatest among two 
different numbers entered by the user.

	 9.	 Write an algorithm that performs the following: 
		  Ask a user to enter a number. If the number is 

between 5 and 15, write the word GREEN. If the 
number is between 15 and 25, write the word BLUE. 
if the number is between 25 and 35, write the word 
ORANGE. If it is any other number, write that ALL 
COLOURS ARE BEAUTIFUL.

	10.	Write an algorithm that accepts four numbers as 
input and find the largest and smallest of them.

	11.	 Write an algorithm to display the total water bill charges 
of the month depending upon the number of units 
consumed by the customer as per the following criteria:
•	for the first 100 units @ 5 per unit
•	for next 150 units @ 10 per unit
•	more than 250 units @ 20 per unit

Also add meter charges of 75 per month to calculate 
the total water bill .

	12.	What are conditionals? When they are required in a 
program?

	13.	Match the pairs  
Flowchart Symbol Functions

Flow of Control
 

Process Step

Start/Stop of the 
 Process

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   84 08-Apr-19   12:34:21 PM



Introduction to Problem Solving 85

Notes
Data

 Decision Making

	14.	Following is an algorithm for going to school or 
college. Can you suggest improvements in this to 
include other options?
Reach_School_Algorithm
a)	Wake up
b)	Get ready
c)	Take lunch box
d)	Take bus
e)	Get off the bus
f)	Reach school or college

	15.	Write a pseudocode to calculate the factorial 
of a number ( Hint: Factorial of 5, written as 
5! =5 × 4 × 3 × 2×1)  .

	16.	Draw a flowchart to check whether a given number 
is an Armstrong number. An Armstrong number of 
three digits is an integer such that the sum of the 
cubes of its digits is equal to the number itself. For 
example, 371 is an Armstrong number since 3**3 + 
7**3 + 1**3 = 371.

	17.	Following is an algorithm to classify numbers as 
“Single Digit”, “Double Digit” or “Big”.
Classify_Numbers_Algo
INPUT Number
IF Number < 9
     "Single Digit"
Else If Number < 99
     "Double Digit"
Else
     "Big"
Verify for (5, 9, 47, 99, 100 200) and correct the 
algorithm if required

	18.	For some calculations, we want an algorithm that 
accepts only positive integers upto 100.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   85 08-Apr-19   12:34:21 PM



86 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes Accept_1to100_Algo
INPUT Number
IF (0<= Number) AND (Number <= 100)
     ACCEPT
Else
     REJECT

a)	 On what values will this algorithm fail?
b)	 Can you improve the algorithm? 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 4.indd   86 08-Apr-19   12:34:21 PM



##5##
Chapter 5

Getting Started with 
Python

5.1 Introduction to Python “Computer programming 
We have written algorithms for different problems in is an art, because it applies 
Chapter 4. Let us now move a step further and create accumulated knowledge 
programs using any version of Python 3. But before to the world, because it 
learning about Python programming language, let us requires skill and ingenuity, 
understand what is a programming language and how and especially because 
it works. it produces objects of 

An ordered set of instructions to be executed by a beauty. A programmer who 
computer to carry out a specific task is called a program, subconsciously views himself 
and the language used to specify this set of instructions as an artist will enjoy what he 
to the computer is called a programming language. does and will do it better.”

As we know that computers understand the language 
of 0s and 1s which is called machine language or low – Donald Knuth
level language. However, it is difficult for humans to 
write or comprehend instructions using 0s and 1s. This 
led to the advent of high-level programming languages 
like Python, C++, Visual Basic, PHP, Java that are easier 
to manage by humans but are not directly understood 
by the computer. In this chapter

A program written in a high-level language is called 
source code. Recall from Chapter 1 that language »» Introduction to 
translators like compilers and interpreters are needed Python 
to translate the source code into machine language. »» Python Keywords
Python uses an interpreter to convert its instructions »» Identifiers
into machine language, so that it can be understood 

»» Comments
by the computer. An interpreter processes the program 
statements one by one, first translating and then »» Data Types
executing. This process is continued until an error »» Operators
is encountered or the whole program is executed »» Expressions
successfully. In both the cases, program execution »» Statement
will stop. On the contrary, a compiler translates the »» Input and Output
entire source code, as a whole, into the object code. »» Type Conversion
After scanning the whole program, it generates error 

»» Debugging
messages, if any.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   87 08-Apr-19   12:35:10 PM



88 Computer Science – Class xi

5.1.1 Features of Python 
•	 Python is a high level language. It is a free and 

open source language.
•	 It is an interpreted language, as Python programs 

are executed by an interpreter. 
•	 Python programs are easy to understand as 

Downloading Python they have a clearly defined syntax and relatively 
The latest version of simple structure.

Python 3 is available on •	 Python is case-sensitive. For example, NUMBER 
the official website: and number are not same in Python.

https://www.python.org/ •	 Python is portable and platform independent, 
means it can run on various operating systems and 
hardware platforms.

•	 Python has a rich library of predefined functions.
•	 Python is also helpful in web development. Many 

popular web services and applications are built 
using Python.

•	 Python uses indentation for blocks and 
nested blocks.

5.1.2 Working with Python 
To write and run (execute) a Python program, we need 
to have a Python interpreter installed on our computer 
or we can use any online Python interpreter. The 
interpreter is also called Python shell. A sample screen 
of Python interpreter is shown in Figure 5.1:

Figure 5.1:  Python interpreter or shell

In the above screen, the symbol >>> is the Python 
prompt, which indicates that the interpreter is ready 
to take instructions. We can type commands or 
statements on this prompt to execute them using a 
Python interpreter.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   88 08-Apr-19   12:35:10 PM



Getting Started with Python 89

5.1.3 Execution Modes 
There are two ways to use the Python interpreter:

a)	 Interactive mode 
b)	 Script mode
Interactive mode allows execution of individual 

statement instantaneously. Whereas, Script mode 
allows us to write more than one instruction in a file 
called Python source code file that can be executed. 
(A)	 Interactive Mode
To work in the interactive mode, we can simply type a 
Python statement on the >>> prompt directly. As soon as 
we press enter, the interpreter executes the statement 
and displays the result(s), as shown in Figure 5.2.

Figure 5.2:  Python interpreter in interactive mode
Working in the interactive mode is convenient for 

testing a single line code for instant execution. But in 
the interactive mode, we cannot save the statements for 
future use and we have to retype the statements to run 
them again.
(B)	 Script Mode
In the script mode, we can write a Python program in 
a file, save it and then use the interpreter to execute it. 
Python scripts are saved as files where file name has 
extension “.py”. By default, the Python scripts are saved 
in the Python installation folder. To execute a script, we 
can either: 

a)	 Type the file name along with the path at the 
prompt. For example, if the name of the file is 
prog5-1.py, we type prog5-1.py. We can otherwise 
open the program directly from IDLE as shown in 
Figure 5.3. 

b)	 While working in the script mode, after saving the 
file, click [Run]->[Run Module] from the menu as 
shown in Figure 5.4.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   89 08-Apr-19   12:35:11 PM



90 Computer Science – Class xi

c)	 The output appears on shell as shown in 
Figure 5.5.

Program 5-1	 Write a program to show print statement 
in script mode.

Figure 5.3:  Python source code file (prog5-1.py)

Figure 5.4:  Execution of Python in Script mode using IDLE

Figure 5.5:  Output of a program executed in script mode

5.2 Python Keywords

Keywords are reserved words. Each keyword has a 
specific meaning to the Python interpreter, and we can 
use a keyword in our program only for the purpose for 
which it has been defined. As Python is case sensitive, 
keywords must be written exactly as given in Table 5.1.

Table 5.1	 Python keywords

False class finally is return
None continue for lambda try

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   90 21-May-19   11:57:33 AM



Getting Started with Python 91

True def from nonlocal while Notes
and del global not with
as elif if or yield
assert else import pass  
break except in raise  

5.3  Identifiers

In programming languages, identifiers are names used 
to identify a variable, function, or other entities in a 
program. The rules for naming an identifier in Python 
are as follows: 

•	 The name should begin with an uppercase or a 
lowercase alphabet or an underscore sign (_). This 
may be followed by any combination of characters 
a–z, A–Z, 0–9 or underscore (_). Thus, an identifier 
cannot start with a digit.

•	 It can be of any length. (However, it is preferred to 
keep it short and meaningful). 

•	 It should not be a keyword or reserved word given 
in Table 5.1.

•	 We cannot use special symbols like !, @, #, $, %, 
etc., in identifiers.

For example, to find the average of marks obtained 
by a student in three subjects, we can choose the 
identifiers as marks1, marks2, marks3 and avg rather 
than a, b, c, or A, B, C.

avg = (marks1 + marks2 + marks3)/3
Similarly, to calculate the area of a rectangle, we can 

use identifier names, such as area, length, breadth 
instead of single alphabets as identifiers for clarity and 
more readability.

area = length * breadth

5.4 Variables

A variable in a program is uniquely identified by a name 
(identifier). Variable in Python refers to an object — an 
item or element that is stored in the memory. Value 
of a variable can be a string (e.g., ‘b’, ‘Global Citizen’), 
numeric (e.g., 345) or any combination of alphanumeric 
characters (CD67). In Python we can use an assignment 
statement to create new variables and assign specific 
values to them. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   91 08-Apr-19   12:35:11 PM



92 Computer Science – Class xi

gender   = 'M'
message  = "Keep Smiling"
price    = 987.9

Program 5-2	 Write a program to display values of 
variables in Python.

#Program 5-2 
#To display values of variables
message = "Keep Smiling"
print(message)
userNo = 101
print('User Number is', userNo)

Output:
Keep Smiling
User Number is 101

In the program 5-2, the variable message holds string 
type value and so its content is assigned within double 
quotes " " (can also be within single quotes ' '), whereas 
the value of variable userNo is not enclosed in quotes as 
it is a numeric value.

Variable declaration is implicit in Python, means 
variables are automatically declared and defined when 
they are assigned a value the first time. Variables 
must always be assigned values before they are used 
in expressions as otherwise it will lead to an error in 
the program. Wherever a variable name occurs in an 
expression, the interpreter replaces it with the value of 
that particular variable.
Program 5-3	 Write a Python program to find the area 

of a rectangle given that its length is 10 
units and breadth is 20 units.

#Program 5-3 
#To find the area of a rectangle
length = 10
breadth = 20
area = length * breadth
print(area)

Output:
200

5.5 Comments

Comments are used to add a remark or a note in the 
source code. Comments are not executed by interpreter. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   92 08-Apr-19   12:35:11 PM



Getting Started with Python 93

They are added with the purpose of making the source 
code easier for humans to understand. They are used 
primarily to document the meaning and purpose of 
source code and its input and output requirements, 
so that we can remember later how it functions and 
how to use it. For large and complex software, it may 
require programmers to work in teams and sometimes, 
a program written by one programmer is required to be 
used or maintained by another programmer. In such 
situations, documentations in the form of comments 
are needed to understand the working of the program.

In Python, a comment starts with # (hash sign). 
Everything following the # till the end of that line is 
treated as a comment and the interpreter simply ignores 
it while executing the statement.

Example 5.1	
#Variable amount is the total spending on 
#grocery In the context of Object 
amount = 3400 Oriented Programming 
#totalMarks is sum of marks in all the tests (OOP), objects are a 
#of Mathematics representation of the real 
totalMarks = test1 + test2 + finalTest world, such as employee, 

student, vehicle, box, 
Program 5-4	 Write a Python program to find the sum of book, etc. In any object 

two numbers. oriented programming 
language like C++, JAVA, 

#Program 5-4 etc., each object has two 
#To find the sum of two numbers things associated with 
num1 = 10 it: (i) data or attributes 

and (ii) behaviour or 
num2 = 20 methods. Further there 
result = num1 + num2 are concepts of class and 
print(result) class hierarchies from 

Output: which objects can be 
instantiated. However, 

30 OOP concepts are not in 
5.6 Everything is an Object the scope of our present 

discussions.
Python treats every value or data item whether numeric, Python also comes under 
string, or other type (discussed in the next section) as the category of object 
an object in the sense that it can be assigned to some oriented programming. 

However, in Python, the 
variable or can be passed to a function as an argument. definition of object is 

Every object in Python is assigned a unique identity loosely casted as some 
(ID) which remains the same for the lifetime of that object. objects may not have 
This ID is akin to the memory address of the object. The attributes or others may 

not have methods. 
function id() returns the identity of an object.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   93 08-Apr-19   12:35:11 PM



94 Computer Science – Class xi

Example 5.2	
>>> num1 = 20
>>> id(num1)
1433920576		  #identity of num1
>>> num2 = 30 - 10      
>>> id(num2)		
1433920576		  #identity of num2 and num1 	
					     #are same as both 
refers to 					     #object 20

5.7 Data Types 
Every value belongs to a specific data type in Python. 
Data type identifies the type of data values a variable 
can hold and the operations that can be performed on 
that data. Figure 5.6 enlists the data types available 
in Python.

Dictionaries

Figure 5.6:  Different data types in Python

5.7.1 Number
Number data type stores numerical values only. It is 
further classified into three different types: int, float 
and complex.

Table 5.2	 Numeric data types

Type/ Class Description Examples
int integer numbers –12, –3, 0, 125, 2

float real or floating point numbers –2.04, 4.0, 14.23

complex complex numbers 3 + 4j, 2 – 2j

Boolean data type (bool) is a subtype of integer. It 
is a unique data type, consisting of two constants, True 
and False. Boolean True value is non-zero, non-null 
and non-empty. Boolean False is the value zero.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   94 15-Jun-21   11:13:29 AM



Getting Started with Python 95

Let us now try to execute few statements in interactive Notes
mode to determine the data type of the variable using 
built-in function type().
Example 5.3	

>>> num1 = 10
>>> type(num1)
<class 'int'>

>>> num2 = -1210
>>> type(num2)
<class 'int'>

>>> var1 = True
>>> type(var1)
<class 'bool'>

>>> float1 = -1921.9
>>> type(float1)
<class 'float'>
>>> float2 = -9.8*10**2
>>> print(float2, type(float2))
-980.0000000000001 <class 'float'>

>>> var2 = -3+7.2j
>>> print(var2, type(var2))
(-3+7.2j) <class 'complex'>

Variables of simple data types like integers, float, 
boolean, etc., hold single values. But such variables are 
not useful to hold a long list of information, for example, 
names of the months in a year, names of students in a 
class, names and numbers in a phone book or the list of 
artefacts in a museum. For this, Python provides data 
types like tuples, lists, dictionaries and sets.
5.7.2 Sequence
A Python sequence is an ordered collection of items, 
where each item is indexed by an integer. The three 
types of sequence data types available in Python are 
Strings, Lists and Tuples. We will learn about each of 
them in detail in later chapters. A brief introduction to 
these data types is as follows:
(A)	 String 
String is a group of characters. These characters may be 
alphabets, digits or special characters including spaces. 
String values are enclosed either in single quotation 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   95 08-Apr-19   12:35:11 PM



96 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes marks (e.g., ‘Hello’) or in double quotation marks (e.g., 
“Hello”). The quotes are not a part of the string, they are 
used to mark the beginning and end of the string for the 
interpreter. For example,  

>>> str1 = 'Hello Friend'
>>> str2 = "452"

We cannot perform numerical operations on 
strings, even when the string contains a numeric 
value, as in str2.
(B)	 List 
List is a sequence of items separated by commas and 
the items are enclosed in square brackets [ ].
Example 5.4	

#To create a list
>>> list1 = [5, 3.4, "New Delhi", "20C", 45] 	
#print the elements of the list list1	
>>> print(list1)     
[5, 3.4, 'New Delhi', '20C', 45]

(C)	 Tuple 
Tuple is a sequence of items separated by commas and 
items are enclosed in parenthesis ( ). This is unlike list, 
where values are enclosed in brackets [ ]. Once created, 
we cannot change the tuple.

Example 5.5	
#create a tuple tuple1
>>> tuple1 = (10, 20, "Apple", 3.4, 'a')    
#print the elements of the tuple tuple1
>>> print(tuple1)   
(10, 20, "Apple", 3.4, 'a')

5.7.3 Set
Set is an unordered collection of items separated by commas 
and the items are enclosed in curly brackets { }. A set is 
similar to list, except that it cannot have duplicate entries. 
Once created, elements of a set cannot be changed.
Example 5.6	

#create a set
>>> set1 = {10,20,3.14,"New Delhi"}   
>>> print(type(set1))
<class 'set'>
>>> print(set1)
{10, 20, 3.14, "New Delhi"}   		
#duplicate elements are not included in set

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   96 08-Apr-19   12:35:11 PM



Getting Started with Python 97

>>> set2 = {1,2,1,3}
>>> print(set2)
{1, 2, 3}      

5.7.4 None
None is a special data type with a single value. It is 
used to signify the absence of value in a situation. None 
supports no special operations, and it is neither same 
as False nor 0 (zero).
Example 5.7	

>>> myVar = None
>>> print(type(myVar))
<class 'NoneType'>
>>> print(myVar)
None

5.7.5 Mapping
Mapping is an unordered data type in Python. Currently, 
there is only one standard mapping data type in Python 
called dictionary. 
(A) Dictionary 
Dictionary in Python holds data items in key-value pairs. 
Items in a dictionary are enclosed in curly brackets { }. 
Dictionaries permit faster access to data. Every key is 
separated from its value using a colon (:) sign. The key 
: value pairs of a dictionary can be accessed using the 
key. The keys are usually strings and their values can 
be any data type. In order to access any value in the 
dictionary, we have to specify its key in square brackets 
[ ].
Example 5.8	

#create a dictionary
>>> dict1 = {'Fruit':'Apple', 
'Climate':'Cold', 'Price(kg)':120}   
>>> print(dict1)
{'Fruit': 'Apple', 'Climate': 'Cold', 
'Price(kg)': 120}
>>> print(dict1['Price(kg)'])
120

5.7.6 Mutable and Immutable Data Types
Sometimes we may require to change or update the 
values of certain variables used in a program. However, 
for certain data types, Python does not allow us to 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   97 11/10/2021   10:40:08 AM



98 Computer Science – Class xi

change the values once a variable of that type has been 
created and assigned values.

Variables whose values can be changed after they 
are created and assigned are called mutable. Variables 
whose values cannot be changed after they are created 
and assigned are called immutable. When an attempt is 
made to update the value of an immutable variable, the 
old variable is destroyed and a new variable is created 
by the same name in memory.

Python data types can be classified into mutable and 
immutable as shown in Figure 5.7.

		  Figure 5.7: Classification of data types

Let us now see what happens when an attempt is 
made to update the 
value of a variable.
>>> num1 = 300

This statement 
will create an object 
with value 300 
and the object is 
referenced by the 
identifier num1 as 
shown in Figure 5.8.

Figure 5.8:  Object and its identifier >>> num2 = num1
The statement 

num2 = num1 will 
make num2 refer to 
the value 300, also 
being referred by 
num1, and stored 
at memory location 
number, say 1000. 
So, num1 shares the 
referenced location 
with num2 as shown 

Figure 5.9:  Variables with same value have same identifier in Figure 5.9. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   98 11/10/2021   10:53:15 AM



Getting Started with Python 99

In this manner 
P y t h o n 
makes the 
a s s i g n m e n t 
effective by 
copying only 
the reference, 
and not the 
data:

>>> num1 
= num2 + 		  Figure 5.10:  Variables with different values have different identifiers
100    

This statement 1 num1 = num2 + 100 links the 
variable num1 to a new object stored at memory location 
number say 2200 having a value 400. As num1 is an Python 
integer, which is an immutable type, it is rebuilt, as compares strings 
shown in Figure 5.10. lexicographically, using 

ASCII value of the 
characters. If the first 

5.7.7 Deciding Usage of Python Data Types character of both the 
It is preferred to use lists when we need a simple iterable strings are same, the 

second character is 
collection of data that may go for frequent modifications. compared, and so on. 
For example, if we store the names of students of a class 
in a list, then it is easy to update the list when some 
new students join or some leave the course. Tuples are 
used when we do not need any change in the data. For 
example, names of months in a year. When we need 
uniqueness of elements and to avoid duplicacy it is 
preferable to use sets, for example, list of artefacts in a 
museum. If our data is being constantly modified or we 
need a fast lookup based on a custom key or we need 
a logical association between the key : value pair, it is 
advised to use dictionaries. A mobile phone book is a 
good application of dictionary.

5.8 Operators

An operator is used to perform specific mathematical 
or logical operation on values. The values that the 
operators work on are called operands. For example, 
in the expression 10 + num, the value 10, and the 
variable num are operands and the + (plus) sign is an 
operator. Python supports several kinds of operators 
whose categorisation is briefly explained in this section.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   99 08-Apr-19   12:35:12 PM



100 Computer Science – Class xi

5.8.1 Arithmetic Operators
Python supports arithmetic operators that are used to 
perform the four basic arithmetic operations as well as 
modular division, floor division and exponentiation.

Table 5.3	 Arithmetic Operators in Python

Operator Operation Description Example (Try in Lab)
+ Addition Adds the two numeric values on >>> num1 = 5

either side of the operator >>> num2 = 6
>>> num1 + num2

This operator can also be used to 11
concatenate two strings on either >>> str1 = "Hello"
side of the operator >>> str2 = "India"

>>> str1 + str2
'HelloIndia'

- Subtraction Subtracts the operand on the right >>> num1 = 5
from the operand on the left >>> num2 = 6

>>> num1 - num2
-1

* Multiplication Multiplies the two values on both >>> num1 = 5
side of the operator >>> num2 = 6

>>> num1 * num2
30

Repeats the item on left of the >>> str1 = 'India'
operator if first operand is a >>> str1 * 2
string and second operand is an 'IndiaIndia'
integer value

/ Division Divides the operand on the left >>> num1 = 8
by the operand on the right and >>> num2 = 4
returns the quotient >>> num2 / num1

0.5
% Modulus Divides the operand on the left >>> num1 = 13

by the operand on the right and >>> num2 = 5
returns the remainder >>> num1 % num2

3
// Floor Division Divides the operand on the left >>> num1 = 13

by the operand on the right and >>> num2 = 4
returns the quotient by removing >>> num1 // num2
the decimal part. It is sometimes 3
also called integer division. >>> num2 // num1

0
** Exponent Performs exponential (power) >>> num1 = 3

calculation on operands. That is, >>> num2 = 4
raise the operand on the left to the >>> num1 ** num2
power of the operand on the right 81

5.8.2  Relational Operators
Relational operator compares the values of the operands 
on its either side and determines the relationship among 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   100 08-Apr-19   12:35:12 PM



Getting Started with Python 101

them. Assume the Python variables num1 = 10, num2 
= 0, num3 = 10, str1 = "Good", str2 = 
"Afternoon" for the following examples:

Table 5.4	 Relational operators in Python

Operator Operation Description Example (Try in Lab)
== Equals to If the values of two operands are >>> num1 == num2

equal, then the condition is True, False
otherwise it is False >> str1 == str2

False
!= Not equal to If values of two operands are not >>> num1 != num2

equal, then condition is True, True
otherwise it is False >>> str1 != str2

True
>>> num1 != num3
False

> Greater than If the value of the left-side operand >>> num1 > num2
is greater than the value of the right- True
side operand, then condition is True, >>> str1 > str2
otherwise it is False True

< Less than If the value of the left-side operand >>> num1 < num3
is less than the value of the right- False
side operand, then condition is True, >>> str2 < str1
otherwise it is False True

>= Greater than If the value of the left-side operand is >>> num1 >= num2
or equal to greater than or equal to the value of True

the right-side operand, then condition >>> num2 >= num3
is True, otherwise it is False False

>>> str1 >= str2
True

<= Less than or If the value of the left operand is less >>> num1 <= num2
equal to than or equal to the value of the right False

operand, then is True otherwise it is >>> num2 <= num3
False True

>>> str1 <= str2
False

5.8.3 Assignment Operators
Assignment operator assigns or changes the value of 
the variable on its left.

Table 5.5	 Assignment operators in Python

Operator Description Example (Try in Lab)
= Assigns value from right-side operand to left- >>> num1 = 2

side operand >>> num2 = num1
>>> num2
2
>>> country = 'India'
>>> country
'India'

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   101 08-Apr-19   12:35:12 PM



102 Computer Science – Class xi

+= It adds the value of right-side operand to the >>> num1 = 10
left-side operand and assigns the result to the >>> num2 = 2
left-side operand >>> num1 += num2
Note: x += y is same as x = x + y >>> num1

12
>>> num2
2
>>> str1 = 'Hello'
>>> str2 = 'India'
>>> str1 += str2
>>> str1
'HelloIndia'

-= It subtracts the value of right-side operand from >>> num1 = 10
the left-side operand and assigns the result to >>> num2 = 2
left-side operand >>> num1 -= num2
Note: x -= y is same as x = x - y >>> num1

8

*= It multiplies the value of right-side operand >>> num1 = 2
with the value of left-side operand and assigns >>> num2 = 3
the result to left-side operand >>> num1 *= 3
Note: x *= y is same as x = x * y

>>> num1
6
>>> a = 'India'
>>> a *= 3
>>> a
'IndiaIndiaIndia'

/= It divides the value of left-side operand by the >>> num1 = 6
value of right-side operand and assigns the >>> num2 = 3
result to left-side operand >>> num1 /= num2
Note: x /= y is same as x = x / y >>> num1

2.0

%= It performs modulus operation using two >>> num1 = 7
operands and assigns the result to left-side >>> num2 = 3
operand >>> num1 %= num2
Note: x %= y is same as x = x % y >>> num1

1

//= It performs floor division using two operands >>> num1 = 7
and assigns the result to left-side operand >>> num2 = 3
Note: x //= y is same as x = x // y >>> num1 //= num2

>>> num1
2

**= It performs exponential (power) calculation on >>> num1 = 2
operators and assigns value to the left-side >>> num2 = 3
operand >>> num1 **= num2
Note: x **= y is same as x = x ** y >>> num1

8

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   102 08-Apr-19   12:35:12 PM



Getting Started with Python 103

5.8.4 Logical Operators
There are three logical operators supported by Python. 
These operators (and, or, not) are to be written in 
lower case only. The logical operator evaluates to either 
True or False based on the logical operands on either 
side. Every value is logically either True or False. By 
default, all values are True except None, False, 0 
(zero), empty collections "", (), [], {}, and few other special 
values. So if we say num1 = 10, num2 = -20, then 
both num1 and num2 are logically True.

Table 5.6	 Logical operators in Python

Operator Operation Description Example (Try in Lab)
and Logical AND If both the operands are >>> True and True

True, then condition True
becomes True >>> num1 = 10

>>> num2 = -20
>>> bool(num1 and num2)
True
>>> True and False
False
>>> num3 = 0
>>> bool(num1 and num3)
False
>>> False and False
False

or Logical OR If any of the two operands >>> True or True
are True, then condition True
becomes True >>> True or False

True
>>> bool(num1 or num3)
True
>>> False or False
False

not Logical NOT Used to reverse the logical >>> num1 = 10
state of its operand >>> bool(num1)

True
>>> not num1
>>> bool(num1)
False

5.8.5 Identity Operators
Identity operators are used to determine whether the 
value of a variable is of a certain type or not. Identity 
operators can also be used to determine whether two 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   103 08-Apr-19   12:35:12 PM



104 Computer Science – Class xi

variables are referring to the same object or not. There 
are two identity operators.

Table 5.7	 Identity operators in Python

Operator Description Example (Try in Lab)
is Evaluates True if the variables on either >>> num1 = 5

side of the operator point towards the same >>> type(num1) is int
memory location and False otherwise. True
var1 is var2 results to True if id(var1) is >>> num2 = num1
equal to id(var2) >>> id(num1)

1433920576
>>> id(num2)
1433920576
>>> num1 is num2
True

is not Evaluates to False if the variables on >>> num1 is not num2
either side of the operator point to the same False
memory location and True otherwise. var1 
is not var2 results to True if id(var1) is not 
equal to id(var2)

5.8.6  Membership Operators
Membership operators are used to check if a value is a 
member of the given sequence or not.

Table 5.8	 Membership operators in Python
Operator Description Example (Try in Lab)

in Returns True if the variable/value is found in the >>> a = [1,2,3]
specified sequence and False otherwise >>> 2 in a

True
>>> '1' in a
False

not in Returns True if the variable/value is not found in >>> a = [1,2,3]
the specified sequence and False otherwise >>> 10 not in a

True
>>> 1 not in a
False

5.9 Expressions 
An expression is defined as a combination of constants, 
variables, and operators. An expression always 
evaluates to a value. A value or a standalone variable 
is also considered as an expression but a standalone 
operator is not an expression. Some examples of valid 
expressions are given below.
  (i) 100 (iv) 3.0 + 3.14  
 (ii) num  (v) 23/3 -5 * 7(14 -2) 
(iii) num – 20.4 (vi) "Global" + "Citizen"

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   104 08-Apr-19   12:35:12 PM



Getting Started with Python 105

5.9.1 Precedence of Operators
Evaluation of the expression is based on precedence of 
operators. When an expression  contains different kinds 
of operators, precedence determines which operator 
should be applied first. Higher precedence operator is 
evaluated before the lower precedence operator. Most 
of the operators studied till now are binary operators. 
Binary operators are operators with two operands. 
The unary operators need only one operand, and they 
have a higher precedence than the binary operators. 
The minus (-) as well as + (plus) operators can act as 
both unary and binary operators, but not is a unary 
logical operator.

#Depth is using - (minus) as unary operator
Value = -Depth        
#not is a unary operator, negates True
print(not(True))      

The following table lists precedence of all operators 
from highest to lowest.

Table 5.9	 Precedence of all operators in Python
Order of Operators Description

Precedence
1 **    Exponentiation (raise to the power)
2 ~ ,+, -    Complement, unary plus and unary minus 
3 * ,/, %, //    Multiply, divide, modulo and floor division
4 +, -    Addition and subtraction
5 <= , < , > , >=, == , != Relational and Comparison operators
6 =, %=, /=, //=, -=, +=, Assignment operators

*=, **=     
7 is, is not    Identity operators

8 in, not in    Membership operators
9 not
10 and Logical operators
11 or

Note:
a)	 Parenthesis can be used to override the precedence of 

operators. The expression within () is evaluated first.
b)	 For operators with equal precedence, the expression is 

evaluated from left to right.

Example 5.9	 How will Python evaluate the following 
                    expression? 

                             20 + 30 * 40

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   105 15-Jun-21   3:10:07 PM



106 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes        Solution:
             = 20 + (30 * 40)  	 #Step 1 	  
#precedence of * is more than that of + 
             = 20 + 1200     	 #Step 2
             = 1220         	 #Step 3
Example 5.10	 How will Python evaluate the following 

expression? 
                                    20 - 30 + 40
       Solution:

The two operators (–) and (+) have equal precedence. 
Thus, the first operator, i.e., subtraction is applied 
before the second operator, i.e., addition (left to right).
                                = (20 – 30) + 40      #Step 1
                               = -10 + 40                 #Step 2
                               = 30                            #Step 3
Example 5.11	 How will Python evaluate the following 

expression? 
                         (20 + 30) * 40
       Solution:
                       = (20 + 30) * 40                # Step 1 
	 #using parenthesis(), we have forced precedence 
of + to be more than that of * 
                      = 50 * 40                            # Step 2
            = 2000                                 # Step 3

Example 5.12	 How will the following expression be 
evaluated in Python?

		                 15.0 / 4 + (8 + 3.0)
       Solution:
                     = 15.0 / 4 + (8.0 + 3.0)	 #Step 1
           = 15.0 / 4.0 + 11.0    	 #Step 2
  		             =  3.75 + 11.0                  	 #Step 3
           = 14.75               	 #Step 4

5.10  Statement

In Python, a statement is a unit of code that the Python 
interpreter can execute.
Example 5.13	

>>> x = 4		      #assignment statement
>>> cube = x ** 3   #assignment statement
>>> print (x, cube) #print statement
4 64

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   106 08-Apr-19   12:35:12 PM



Getting Started with Python 107

Notes
5.11 Input and Output 
Sometimes, a program needs to interact with the user’s 
to get some input data or information from the end user 
and process it to give the desired output. In Python, we 
have the input() function for taking the user input. 
The input() function prompts the user to enter data. 
It accepts all user input as string. The user may enter 
a number or a string but the input() function treats 
them as strings only. The syntax for input() is: 

input ([Prompt])
Prompt is the string we may like to display on the 

screen prior to taking the input, and it is optional. When 
a prompt is specified, first it is displayed on the screen 
after which the user can enter data. The input() takes 
exactly what is typed from the keyboard, converts it into 
a string and assigns it to the variable on left-hand side 
of the assignment operator (=). Entering data for the 
input function is terminated by pressing the enter key.
Example 5.14	

>>> fname = input("Enter your first name: ")
Enter your first name: Arnab
>>> age = input("Enter your age: ")
Enter your age: 19
>>> type(age)
<class 'str'>

The variable fname will get the string ‘Arnab’, entered 
by the user. Similarly, the variable age will get the string 
‘19’. We can typecast or change the datatype of the string 
data accepted from user to an appropriate numeric 
value. For example, the following statement will convert 
the accepted string to an integer. If the user enters any 
non-numeric value, an error will be generated.
Example 5.15	

#function int() to convert string to integer
>>> age = int( input("Enter your age:"))
Enter your age: 19
>>> type(age)
<class 'int'>

Python uses the print() function to output data to 
standard output device — the screen. We will learn about 
function in Chapter 7. The function print() evaluates the 
expression before displaying it on the screen. The print() 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   107 08-Apr-19   12:35:12 PM



108 Computer Science – Class xi

outputs a complete line and then moves to the next line 
for subsequent output. The syntax for print() is: 

print(value [, ..., sep = ' ', end = '\n'])
Observe that a plus 

sign does not add any •	 sep: The optional parameter sep is a separator 
space between the two between the output values. We can use a 
strings while a comma character, integer or a string as a separator. The 

inserts a space between default separator is space. 
two strings in a print 

statement. •	 end: This is also optional and it allows us to 
specify any string to be appended after the last 
value. The default is a new line.

Example 5.16	
Statement Output

print("Hello") Hello
print(10*2.5) 25.0
print("I" + "love" + "my" + Ilovemycountry
"country")
print("I'm", 16, "years old") I'm 16 years old

The third print function in the above example is 
concatenating strings, and we use + (plus) between 
two strings to concatenate them. The fourth print 
function also appears to be concatenating strings but 
uses commas (,) between strings. Actually, here we are 
passing multiple arguments, separated by commas to 
the print function. As arguments can be of different 
types, hence the print function accepts integer (16) 
along with strings here. But in case the print statement 
has values of different types and ‘+’ is used instead of 
comma, it will generate an error as discussed in the 
next section under explicit conversion.

5.12 Type Conversion

Consider the following program
num1 = input("Enter a number and I'll double 
it: ")
num1 = num1 * 2
print(num1) 

The program was expected to display double the value 
of the number received and store in variable num1. So if 
a user enters 2 and expects the program to display 4 as 
the output, the program displays the following result:

Enter a number and I'll double it: 2
22

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   108 08-Apr-19   12:35:12 PM



Getting Started with Python 109

This is because the value returned by the input Notes
function is a string ("2") by default. As a result, in 
statement num1 = num1 * 2, num1 has string value and 
* acts as repetition operator which results in output as 
"22". To get 4 as output, we need to convert the data 
type of the value entered by the user to integer. Thus, 
we modify the program as follows:  

num1 = input("Enter a number and I'll double 
it: ")
num1 = int(num1)	 #convert string input to 	  	
 				   #integer
num1 = num1 * 2
print(num1) 

Now, the program will display the expected output 
as follows:

Enter a number and I'll double it: 2
4

Let us now understand what is type conversion and 
how it works. As and when required, we can change 
the data type of a variable in Python from one type to 
another. Such data type conversion can happen in two 
ways: either explicitly (forced) when the programmer 
specifies for the interpreter to convert a data type 
to another type; or implicitly, when the interpreter 
understands such a need by itself and does the type 
conversion automatically. 
5.12.1 Explicit Conversion
Explicit conversion, also called type casting happens 
when data type conversion takes place because the 
programmer forced it in the program. The general form 
of an explicit data type conversion is:

(new_data_type) (expression)
With explicit type conversion, there is a risk of loss 

of information since we are forcing an expression to be 
of a specific type. For example, converting a floating 
value of x = 20.67 into an integer type, i.e., int(x) 
will discard the fractional part .67. Following are some 
of the functions in Python that are used for explicitly 
converting an expression or a variable to a different type.

Table 5.10	 Explicit type conversion functions in Python

Function Description
int(x) Converts x to an integer
float(x) Converts x to a floating-point number

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   109 08-Apr-19   12:35:12 PM



110 Computer Science – Class xi

str(x) Converts x to a string representation
chr(x) Converts ASCII value of x to character
ord(x) returns the character associated with the 

ASCII code x
Program 5-5	 Program of explicit type conversion from 

int to float.
#Program 5-5
#Explicit type conversion from int to float
num1 = 10
num2 = 20
num3 = num1 + num2
print(num3)
print(type(num3))
num4 = float(num1 + num2)
print(num4)
print(type(num4))

Output:
30
<class 'int'>
30.0
<class 'float'>

Program 5-6	 Program of explicit type conversion from 
float to int.

#Program 5-6
#Explicit type conversion from float to int
num1 = 10.2
num2 = 20.6
num3 = (num1 + num2)
print(num3)
print(type(num3))
num4 = int(num1 + num2)
print(num4)
print(type(num4))

Output:
30.8
<class 'float'>
30
<class 'int'>

Program 5-7	 Example of type conversion between 
numbers and strings.

#Program 5-7
#Type Conversion between Numbers and Strings
priceIcecream = 25
priceBrownie = 45
totalPrice = priceIcecream + priceBrownie
print("The total is Rs." + totalPrice )

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   110 15-Jun-21   11:15:29 AM



Getting Started with Python 111

		  Figure 5.11:  Output of program 5-7

On execution, program 5-7 gives an error as shown 
in Figure 5.11, informing that the interpreter cannot 
convert an integer value to string implicitly. It may 
appear quite intuitive that the program should convert 
the integer value to a string depending upon the usage. 
However, the interpreter may not decide on its own 
when to convert as there is a risk of loss of information. 
Python provides the mechanism of the explicit type 
conversion so that one can clearly state the desired 
outcome. Program 5-8 works perfectly using explicit 
type casting:
Program 5-8	 Program to show explicit type casting.

#Program 5-8
#Explicit type casting
priceIcecream = 25
priceBrownie = 45
totalPrice = priceIcecream + priceBrownie
print("The total in Rs." + str(totalPrice))

Output:
The total in Rs.70

Similarly, type casting is needed to convert float to 
string. In Python, one can convert string to integer or 
float values whenever required.
Program 5-9	 Program to show explicit type conversion. 

#Program 5-9
#Explicit type conversion
icecream = '25'
brownie = '45'
#String concatenation
price = icecream + brownie
print("Total Price Rs." + price)
#Explicit type conversion - string to integer

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   111 08-Apr-19   12:35:13 PM



112 Computer Science – Class xi

price = int(icecream)+int(brownie)
print("Total Price Rs." + str(price))

Output:
Total Price Rs.2545
Total Price Rs.70

5.12.2 Implicit Conversion
Implicit conversion, also known as coercion, happens 
when data type conversion is done automatically by 
Python and is not instructed by the programmer.
Program 5-10	Program to show implicit conversion from 

int to float. 
#Program 5-10
#Implicit type conversion from int to float

num1 = 10           #num1 is an integer
num2 = 20.0         #num2 is a float
sum1 = num1 + num2  #sum1 is sum of a float 
and an integer
print(sum1)
print(type(sum1))

Output:
30.0
<class 'float'>

In the above example, an integer value stored in 
variable num1 is added to a float value stored in variable 
num2, and the result was automatically converted to 
a float value stored in variable sum1 without explicitly 
telling the interpreter. This is an example of implicit data 
conversion. One may wonder why was the float value 
not converted to an integer instead? This is due to type 
promotion that allows performing operations (whenever 
possible) by converting data into a wider-sized data type 
without any loss of information.

5.13 Debugging

A programmer can make mistakes while writing a 
program, and hence, the program may not execute or 
may generate wrong output. The process of identifying 
and removing such mistakes, also known as bugs or 
errors, from a program is called debugging. Errors 
occurring in programs can be categorised as:

i)	Syntax errors
ii)	Logical errors
iii)	Runtime errors

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   112 08-Apr-19   12:35:13 PM



Getting Started with Python 113

5.13.1  Syntax Errors
Like other programming languages, Python has its 
own rules that determine its syntax. The interpreter 
interprets the statements only if it is syntactically (as 
per the rules of Python) correct. If any syntax error is 
present, the interpreter shows error message(s) and stops 
the execution there. For example, parentheses must 
be in pairs, so the expression (10 + 12) is syntactically 
correct, whereas (7 + 11 is not due to absence of right 
parenthesis. Such errors need to be removed before the 
execution of the program
5.13.2  Logical Errors 
A logical error is a bug in the program that causes 
it to behave incorrectly. A logical error produces an 
undesired output but without abrupt termination of the 
execution of the program. Since the program interprets 
successfully even when logical errors are present in it, it 
is sometimes difficult to identify these errors. The only 
evidence to the existence of logical errors is the wrong 
output. While working backwards from the output of 
the program, one can identify what went wrong. 

For example, if we wish to find the average of two 
numbers 10 and 12 and we write the code as 10 + 12/2, 
it would run successfully and produce the result 16. 
Surely, 16 is not the average of 10 and 12. The correct 
code to find the average should have been (10 + 12)/2 
to give the correct output as 11. 

Logical errors are also called semantic errors as they 
occur when the meaning of the program (its semantics) 
is not correct. 
5.13.3 Runtime Error
A runtime error causes abnormal termination of 
program while it is executing. Runtime error is when the 
statement is correct syntactically, but the interpreter 
cannot execute it. Runtime errors do not appear until 
after the program starts running or executing.

For example, we have a statement having division 
operation in the program. By mistake, if the denominator 
entered is zero then it will give a runtime error like 
“division by zero”. 

Let us look at the program 5-11 showing two types 
of runtime errors when a user enters non-integer value 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   113 08-Apr-19   12:35:13 PM



114 Computer Science – Class xi

or value ‘0’. The program generates correct output when 
the user inputs an integer value for num2.
Program 5-11	  Example of a program which generates 

runtime error.
#Program 5-11
#Runtime Errors Example
num1 = 10.0
num2 = int(input("num2 = "))
#if user inputs a string or a zero, it leads 
to runtime error
print(num1/num2)

		  Figure 5.11:  Output of program 5-11

Summary
•	 Python is an open-source, high level, interpreter-

based language that can be used for a multitude of 
scientific and non-scientific computing purposes.

•	 Comments are non-executable statements in 
a program.

•	 An identifier is a user defined name given to a 
variable or a constant in a program.

•	 The process of identifying and removing errors 
from a computer program is called debugging.

•	 Trying to use a variable that has not been assigned 
a value gives an error.

•	 There are several data types in Python — integer, 
boolean, float, complex, string, list, tuple, sets, 
None and dictionary. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   114 08-Apr-19   12:35:13 PM



Getting Started with Python 115

•	 Datatype conversion can happen either explicitly Notes
or implicitly.

•	 Operators are constructs that manipulate the 
value of operands. Operators may be unary 
or binary.

•	 An expression is a combination of values, variables 
and operators.

•	 Python has input() function for taking user 
input.

•	 Python has print() function to output data to a 
standard output device.

Exercise

1.	 Which of the following identifier names are invalid 
and why?    
   i Serial_no.   v Total_Marks
  ii 1st_Room  vi total-Marks
 iii Hundred$ vii _Percentage
 iv Total Marks viii True

2.	 Write the corresponding Python assignment 
statements: 
a)	 Assign 10 to variable length and 20 to variable 

breadth. 
b)	 Assign the average of values of variables length and 

breadth to a variable sum.
c)	 Assign a list containing strings ‘Paper’, ‘Gel Pen’, 

and ‘Eraser’ to a variable  stationery. 
d)	 Assign the strings ‘Mohandas’, ‘Karamchand’, and 

‘Gandhi’ to variables first, middle and last. 
e)	 Assign the concatenated value of string 

variables first, middle and last to 
variable fullname. Make sure to incorporate 
blank spaces appropriately between different parts 
of names.

3.	 Write logical expressions corresponding to the 
following statements in Python and evaluate the 
expressions (assuming variables num1, num2, num3, 
first, middle, last are already having meaningful 
values): 
a)	 The sum of 20 and –10 is less than 12. 
b)	  num3 is not more than 24.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   115 08-Apr-19   12:35:13 PM



116 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes c)	 6.75 is between the values of integers num1 and 
num2.

d)	 The string ‘middle’ is larger than the string ‘first’ and 
smaller than the string  ‘last’. 

e)	 List Stationery is empty.
4.	 Add a pair of parentheses to each expression so 

that it evaluates to True. 
a) 0 == 1 == 2 
b) 2 + 3 == 4 + 5 == 7 
c) 1 < -1 == 3 > 4   

5.	 Write the output of the following:
a) num1 = 4

num2 = num1 + 1
num1 = 2
print (num1, num2)  

b) num1, num2 = 2, 6
num1, num2 = num2, num1 + 2
print (num1, num2)

c) num1, num2 = 2, 3
num3, num2 = num1, num3 + 1
print (num1, num2, num3)

6.	 Which data type will be used to represent the 
following data values and why?

a) Number of months in a year  
b) Resident of Delhi or not	
c) Mobile number
d) Pocket money
e) Volume of a sphere
f) Perimeter of a square
g) Name of the student
h) Address of the student

7.	 Give the output of the following when num1 = 4, 
num2 = 3, num3 = 2

a) num1 += num2 + num3
print (num1)

b) num1 = num1 ** (num2 + num3)
print (num1)

c) num1 **= num2 + num3
d) num1 = '5' + '5'

print(num1)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   116 08-Apr-19   12:35:13 PM



Getting Started with Python 117

e) print(4.00/(2.0+2.0)) Notes
f) num1 = 2+9*((3*12)-8)/10

print(num1)

g) num1 = 24 // 4 // 2
print(num1)

h) num1 = float(10)
print (num1)

i) num1 = int('3.14')
print (num1)

j) print('Bye'  == 'BYE')
k) print(10 != 9 and 20 >= 20)
l) print(10 + 6 * 2 ** 2 != 9//4 -3 and 29 

>= 29/9)
m) print(5 % 10 + 10 < 50 and 29 <= 29) 
n) print((0 < 6) or (not(10 == 6) and 

(10<0)))

8.	Categorise the following as syntax error, logical 
error or runtime error:
a) 25 / 0
b) num1 = 25; num2 = 0; num1/num2 

9.	A dartboard of radius 10 units and the wall it is 
hanging on are represented using a two-dimensional 
coordinate system, with the board’s center at 
coordinate (0,0). Variables x and y store the 
x-coordinate and the y-coordinate of a dart that 
hits the dartboard. Write a Python expression using 
variables x and y that evaluates to True if the dart 
hits (is within) the dartboard, and then evaluate the 
expression for these dart coordinates:

a) (0,0)
b) (10,10)
c) (6, 6) 
d) (7,8)

10.	Write a Python program to convert temperature in 
degree Celsius to degree Fahrenheit. If water boils 
at 100 degree C and freezes as 0 degree C, use the 
program to find out what is the boiling point and 
freezing point of water on the Fahrenheit scale. 

		  (Hint: T(°F) = T(°C) × 9/5 + 32)
11.	Write a Python program to calculate the amount 

payable if money has been lent on simple interest. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   117 08-Apr-19   12:35:13 PM



118 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes Principal or money lent = P, Rate of interest = R% 
per annum and Time = T years. Then Simple Interest 
(SI) = (P x R x T)/ 100. 

		  Amount payable = Principal + SI. 
		  P, R and T are given as input to the program.
12.	Write a program to calculate in how many days a 

work will be completed by three persons A, B and 
C together. A, B, C take x days, y days and z days 
respectively to do the job alone. The formula to 
calculate the number of days if they work together 
is xyz/(xy + yz + xz) days where x, y, and z are given 
as input to the program.

13.	Write a program to enter two integers and perform 
all arithmetic operations on them.

14.	Write a program to swap two numbers using a 
third variable.

15.	Write a program to swap two numbers without 
using a third variable.

16.	Write a program to repeat the string ‘‘GOOD 
MORNING” n times. Here ‘n’ is an integer 
entered by the user.

17.	Write a program to find average of three numbers.
18.	The volume of a sphere with radius r is 4/3πr3. Write 

a Python program to find the volume of spheres with 
radius 7cm, 12cm, 16cm, respectively.

19.	Write a program that asks the user 
to enter their name and age. Print a 
message addressed to the user that tells the user 
the year in which they will turn 100 years old.

20.	The formula E = mc2 states that the 
equivalent energy (E) can be calculated as the 
mass (m) multiplied by the speed of light (c = about 
3×108 m/s) squared. Write a program that accepts 
the mass of an object and determines its energy.

21.	Presume that a ladder is put upright against 
a wall. Let variables length and angle store 
the length of the ladder and the angle that 
it forms with the ground as it leans against 
the wall. Write a Python program to compute 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   118 08-Apr-19   12:35:13 PM



Getting Started with Python 119

the height reached by the ladder on the Notes
wall for the following values of length and angle:
a) 16 feet and 75 degrees 
b) 20 feet and 0 degrees 
c) 24 feet and 45 degrees
d) 24 feet and 80 degrees

Case Study-based Question
Schools use “Student Management Information System” 
(SMIS) to manage student-related data. This system 
provides facilities for:

•	 recording and maintaining personal details of 
students.

•	 maintaining marks scored in assessments and 
computing results of students.

•	 keeping track of student attendance.
•	 managing many other student-related data. Let us 

automate this process step by step.
Identify the personal details of students from your 
school identity card and write a program to accept these 
details for all students of your school and display them 
in the following format.

Documentation Tips
It is a fact that a properly documented program is 
easy to read, understand and is flexible for future 
development. Therefore, it is important that one pays 
extra attention to documentation while coding. Let us 
assess the documentation done by us in our case study 
program and also find out whether our friends also pay 
similar attention to documentation or not.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   119 08-Apr-19   12:35:13 PM



120 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes Following is a checklist of good documentation 
points:
•  Objective of the program is clearly stated in the 

beginning.
• Objective of each function is clearly mentioned in 

the beginning of each  function.
• Comments are inserted at the proper place so as 

to enhance the understandability and readability 
of the program.
(Note: Over commenting doesn’t help)

• Variables and function names are meaningful and 
appropriate.

• Single letter variable names are not used. 
• Program name is meaningful. 

(Note: It is not proper to use your name as program 
name, for example, ‘raman. py’ or ‘namya.py’ to denote 
your program code. It is more appropriate to use the 
program name as ‘bankingProject.py’ for a banking 
related program or ‘admProcess’ for an admission 
related program.)

•  Program code is properly indented.
• Same naming conventions are used throughout 

the program. 
(Note: Some of the naming conventions are firstNum, 
first_num, to denote the variable having first number).

Let’s do this exercise for our peer’s case studies as 
well and provide a feedback to them.

A relevant peer feedback helps in improving the 
documentation of the projects. It also helps in identifying 
our mistakes and enriches us with better ideas used 
by others.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 5.indd   120 08-Apr-19   12:35:13 PM



##6##
Chapter 6

Flow of Control

6.1  Introduction “Don't you hate code that's 
In Figure 6.1, we see a bus carrying the children to not properly indented? 
school. There is only one way to reach the school. The Making it [indenting] part of 
driver has no choice, but to follow the road one milestone the syntax guarantees that all 
after another to reach the school. We learnt in Chapter code is properly indented.” 
5 that this is the concept of sequence, where Python 
executes one statement after another from beginning to –  G. van Rossum
the end of the program. These are the kind of programs 
we have been writing till now.

In this chapter

Figure 6.1: Bus carrying students to school »» Introduction to Flow 
of Control

Let us consider a program 6-1 that executes in 
sequence, that is, statements are executed in an order »» Selection
in which they are written. »» Indentation

The order of execution of the statements in a program »» Repetition
is known as flow of control. The flow of control can be »» Break and Continue 
implemented using control structures. Python supports Statements
two types of control structures—selection and repetition. »» Nested Loops

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   121 08-Apr-19   12:37:51 PM



122 Computer Science – Class xi

Program 6-1	 Program to print the difference of two 
numbers.

#Program 6-1
#Program to print the difference of two input numbers
num1 = int(input("Enter first number: "))
num2 = int(input("Enter second number: "))
diff = num1 - num2
print("The difference of",num1,"and",num2,"is",diff)

Output:
Enter first number 5
Enter second number 7
The difference of 5 and 7 is -2 

6.2 Selection

Now suppose we have `10 to buy a pen. On visiting the 
stationery shop, there are a variety of pens priced at 
`10 each. Here, we have to decide which pen to buy. 
Similarly, when we use the direction services of a digital 

map, to reach from one place to 
another, we notice that sometimes 
it shows more than one path like 
the least crowded path, shortest 
distance path, etc. We decide 
the path as per our priority. A 
decision involves selecting from 
one of the two or more possible 
options. In programming, this 
concept of decision making or 
selection is implemented with the 
help of if..else statement.

Now, suppose we want to 
display the positive difference of 
the two numbers num1 and num2 
given at program 6-1. For that, 
we need to modify our approach. 
Look at the flowchart shown in 

Figure 6.2: Flow chart depicting decision making Figure 6.2 that subtracts the 
smaller number from the bigger 

number so that we always get a positive difference. This 
selection is based upon the values that are input for the 
two numbers num1 and num2.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   122 08-Apr-19   12:37:52 PM



Flow of Control 123

The syntax of if statement is: Notes
if condition:
     statement(s)

In the following example, if the age entered by the 
user is greater than 18, then print that the user is 
eligible to vote. If the condition is true, then the indented 
statement(s) are executed. The indentation implies that 
its execution is dependent on the condition. There is no 
limit on the number of statements that can appear as a 
block under the if statement. 
Example 6.1	

age = int(input("Enter your age "))
if age >= 18:
    print("Eligible to vote")

A variant of if statement called if..else statement 
allows us to write two alternative paths and the control 
condition determines which path gets executed. The 
syntax for if..else statement is as follows.

if condition:
     statement(s)
else:
     statement(s)

Let us now modify the example on voting with the 
condition that if the age entered by the user is greater 
than 18, then to display that the user is eligible to vote. 
Otherwise display that the user is not eligible to vote.

age = int(input("Enter your age: "))
if age >= 18:
     print("Eligible to vote")
else:
     print("Not eligible to vote")

Now let us use the same concept to modify program 
6-1, so that it always gives a positive difference as the 
output. From the flow chart in Figure 6.2, it is clear that 
we need to decide whether num1 > num2 or not and 
take action accordingly.

We have to specify two blocks of statements since 
num1 can be greater than num2 or vice-versa as shown 
in program 6-2.

Many a times there are situations that require 
multiple conditions to be checked and it may lead to 
many alternatives. In such cases we can chain the 
conditions using if..elif (elif means else..if).

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   123 08-Apr-19   12:37:52 PM



124 Computer Science – Class xi

Program 6-2	 Program to print the positive difference 
of two numbers.

#Program 6-2
#Program to print the positive difference of two numbers
num1 = int(input("Enter first number: "))
num2 = int(input("Enter second number: "))
if num1 > num2:
     diff = num1 - num2
else:
     diff = num2 - num1
print("The difference of",num1,"and",num2,"is",diff)

Output:
Enter first number: 5
Enter second number: 6
The difference of 5 and 6 is 1

The syntax for a selection structure using elif is as 
shown below.

if condition:
     statement(s)
elif condition:
     statement(s)
elif condition:
     statement(s)
else:
     statement(s)

Example 6.2	 Check whether a number is positive, 
negative, or zero.

number = int(input("Enter a number: ")
if number > 0:
     print("Number is positive")
elif number < 0:
     print("Number is negative")
else:
     print("Number is zero")

Example 6.3	 Display the appropriate message as per 
the colour of signal at the road crossing.

signal = input("Enter the colour: ")
if signal == "red" or signal == "RED":                
     print("STOP")
elif signal == "orange" or signal == 
"ORANGE":    

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   124 08-Apr-19   12:37:52 PM



Flow of Control 125

     print("Be Slow")
elif signal == "green" or signal == "GREEN":     
     print("Go!")

Number of elif is dependent on the number of 
conditions to be checked. If the first condition is false, 
then the next condition is checked, and so on. If one of 
the conditions is true, then the corresponding indented 
block executes, and the if statement terminates.

Let us write a program to create a simple calculator 
to perform basic arithmetic operations on two numbers. 
The program should do the following:

•	 Accept two numbers from the user.
•	 Ask user to input any of the operator (+, -, *, /). 

An error message is displayed if the user enters 
anything else.

•	 Display only positive difference in case of the 
operator "-".

•	 Display a message “Please enter a value other 
than 0” if the user enters the second number as 
0 and operator ‘/’ is entered.

Program 6-3	 Write a program to create a simple 
calculator  performing only four basic 
operations.

#Program to create a four function calculator
result = 0
val1 = float(input("Enter value 1: "))
val2 = float(input("Enter value 2: "))
op = input("Enter any one of the operator (+,-,*,/): ")
if op == "+":
    result = val1 + val2
elif op == "-":
    if val1 > val2:
        result = val1 - val2
    else:
        result = val2 - val1
elif op == "*":
        result = val1 * val2
elif op == "/":
    if val2 == 0:
        print("Error! Division by zero is not allowed. Program 
terminated")
    else:
        result = val1/val2
else:
    print("Wrong input,program terminated")
print("The result is ",result)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   125 08-Apr-19   12:37:52 PM



126 Computer Science – Class xi

 Output:
Enter value 1: 84
Enter value 2: 4
Enter any one of the operator (+,-,*,/): /
The result is 21.0

In the program, for the operators "-" and "/", there 
exists an if..else condition within the elif block. 
This is called nested if. We can have many levels of 
nesting inside if..else statements.

6.3 Indentation

In most programming languages, the statements within 
a block are put inside curly brackets. However, Python 
uses indentation for block as well as for nested block 
structures. Leading whitespace (spaces and tabs) at 
the beginning of a statement is called indentation. 
In Python, the same level of indentation associates 
statements into a single block of code. The interpreter 
checks indentation levels very strictly and throws up 
syntax errors if indentation is not correct. It is a common 
practice to use a single tab for each level of indentation.

In the program 6-4, the if-else statement has two 
blocks of statements and the statements in each block 
are indented with the same amount of spaces or tabs.

Program 6-4	 Program to find the larger of the two 
pre-specified numbers.

#Program 6-4
#Program to find larger of the two numbers
num1 = 5
num2 = 6
if num1 > num2:				         #Block1
   	 print("first number is larger")         
		  print("Bye")
else: 						           #Block2
		  print("second number is larger")   
		  print("Bye Bye")

 Output:
second number is larger
Bye Bye

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   126 08-Apr-19   12:37:52 PM



Flow of Control 127

6.4 Repetition  
Often, we repeat a tasks, for example, payment of 
electricity bill, which is done every month. Figure 6.3 
shows the life cycle of butterfly that involves four 
stages, i.e., a butterfly lays eggs, turns into a 
caterpillar, becomes a pupa, and finally matures 
as a butterfly. The cycle starts again with laying 
of eggs by the butterfly.

This kind of repetition is also called iteration. 
Repetition of a set of statements in a program 
is made possible using looping constructs. 
To understand further, let us look at the 
program 6-5. Figure 6.3:  Iterative process 

occurring in nature
Program 6-5	 Write a program to print the first 

five natural numbers. 	
#Program 6-5
#Print first five natural numbers
print(1)
print(2)
print(3)
print(4)
print(5)

Output: 
1
2
3
4
5

What should we do if we are asked to print the 
first 100,000 natural numbers? Writing 100,000 print 
statements would not be an efficient solution. It would 
be tedious and not the best way to do the task. Writing a 
program having a loop or repetition is a better solution. 
The program logic is given below:

1.	 Take a variable, say count, and set its value to 1.  
2.	 Print the value of count. 
3.	 Increment the variable (count += 1).

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   127 08-Apr-19   12:37:52 PM



128 Computer Science – Class xi

4.	 Repeat steps 2 and 3 as long as count has a value 
less than or equal to 100,000 (count <= 100,000).

Looping constructs provide the facility to execute a 
set of statements in a program repetitively, based on a 
condition. The statements in a loop are executed again 
and again as long as particular logical condition remains 
true. This condition is checked based on the value of 
a variable called the loop’s control variable. When the 
condition becomes false, the loop terminates. It is the 
responsibility of the programmer to ensure that this 
condition eventually does become false so that there is 
an exit condition and it does not become an infinite loop. 
For example, if we did not set the condition count <= 
100000, the program would have never stopped. There 
are two looping constructs in Python - for and while.
6.4.1 The ‘For’ Loop
The for statement is used to iterate over a range of 
values or a sequence. The for loop is executed for each 
of the items in the range. These values can be either 

numeric, or, as we shall see in later 
chapters, they can be elements of a data 
type like a string, list, or tuple.

With every iteration of the loop, the 
control variable checks whether each 
of the values in the range have been 
traversed or not. When all the items in 
the range are exhausted, the statements 
within loop are not executed; the control 
is then transferred to the statement 
immediately following the for loop. While 
using for loop, it is known in advance 
the number of times the loop will execute. 
The flowchart depicting the execution of 
a for loop is given in Figure 6.4.
(A)	 Syntax of the For Loop
for <control-variable> in <sequence/
items in range>:

Figure 6.4: Flow chart of for loop 	 <statements inside body of the 		
	  loop>

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   128 08-Apr-19   12:37:52 PM



Flow of Control 129

Program 6-6	 Program to print the characters in the 
string ‘PYTHON’ using for  loop.

#Program 6-6
#Print the characters in word PYTHON using for loop
for letter in 'PYTHON':
     print(letter)

Output: 
P
Y
T
H
O
N

Program 6-7	 Program to print the numbers in a given 	
sequence using for loop.

#Program 6-7
#Print the given sequence of numbers using for loop
count = [10,20,30,40,50]
for num in count:
     print(num)

Output:
10
20
30
40
50

Program 6-8	 Program to print even numbers in a given 
sequence using for loop.

#Program 6-8
#Print even numbers in the given sequence
numbers = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
for num in numbers:
     if (num % 2) == 0:
          print(num,'is an even Number')

Output:
2  is an even Number
4  is an even Number

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   129 08-Apr-19   12:37:52 PM



130 Computer Science – Class xi

6  is an even Number
8  is an even Number
10 is an even Number

Note: Body of the loop is indented with respect to the for statement.
(B)	 The Range() Function
The range() is a built-in function in Python. Syntax of 
range() function is:
		  range([start], stop[, step])

It is used to create a list containing a sequence of 
integers from the given start value upto stop value 
(excluding stop value), with a difference of the given 
step value. We will learn about functions in the next 
chapter. To begin with, simply remember that function 
takes parameters to work on. In function range(), start, 
stop and step are parameters.

The start and step parameters are optional. If start 
value is not specified, by default the list starts from 0. If 
step is also not specified, by default the value increases 
by 1 in each iteration. All parameters of range() function 
must be integers. The step parameter can be a positive 
or a negative integer excluding zero. 
Example 6.4	

#start and step not specified
>>> list(range(10)) 
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]

#default step value is 1
>>> list(range(2, 10))  
[2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]       

#step value is 5
>>> list(range(0, 30, 5)) 	
[0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25]  	    

#step value is -1. Hence, decreasing 	
#sequence is generated
>>> list (range (0, -9, -1)) 	
[0, -1, -2, -3, -4, -5, -6, -7, -8]  

The function range() is often used in for loops for 
generating a sequence of numbers.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   130 11/10/2021   11:00:33 AM



Flow of Control 131

Program 6-9	 Program to print the multiples of 10 for 	
numbers in a given range.

#Program 6-9
#Print multiples of 10 for numbers in a given range
for num in range(5):
     if num > 0:
          print(num * 10)

Output:
10
20
30
40

6.4.2 The ‘While’ Loop
The while statement executes a block of code repeatedly 
as long as the control condition of the loop is true. The 
control condition of the while 
loop is executed before any 
statement inside the loop is 
executed. After each iteration, Initialisation

the control condition is tested Statement

again and the loop continues as 
long as the condition remains 
true. When this condition becomes 
false, the statements in the body 
of loop are not executed and the 
control is transferred to the 
statement immediately following 
the body of while loop. If the Statements following 
condition of the while loop is the while loop
initially false, the body is not 
executed even once.

The statements within the 
body of the while loop must Figure 6.5:  Flow chart of while Loop
ensure that the condition 
eventually becomes false; otherwise the loop will become 
an infinite loop, leading to a logical error in the program. 
The flowchart of while loop is shown in Figure 6.5.
Syntax of while Loop

while test_condition:
	 body of while

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   131 08-Apr-19   12:37:53 PM



132 Computer Science – Class xi

Program 6-10	  Program to print first 5 natural numbers 
  using while loop.

#Program 6-10
#Print first 5 natural numbers using while loop
count = 1
while count <= 5:
     print(count)
     count += 1

Output:
1
2
3
4
5

Program 6-11	  Program to find the factors of a whole 
   number  using while loop.

#Program 6-11
#Find the factors of a number using while loop
num = int(input("Enter a number to find its factor: "))
print (1, end=' ')   #1 is a factor of every number
factor = 2  
while factor <= num/2 :
     if num % factor == 0:
#the optional parameter end of print function specifies the delimeter 
#blank space(' ') to print next value on same line 
          print(factor, end=' ') 
     factor += 1
print (num, end=' ') #every number is a factor of itself

Output:
Enter a number to find its factors : 6
1 2 3 6

Note: Body of the loop is indented with respect to the while 
statement. Similarly, the statements within if are indented 
with respect to positioning of if statement. 

6.5 Break and Continue Statement

Looping constructs allow programmers to repeat tasks 
efficiently. In certain situations, when some particular 
condition occurs, we may want to exit from a loop (come 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   132 08-Apr-19   12:37:53 PM



Flow of Control 133

out of the loop forever) or skip 
some statements of the loop 
before continuing further in 
the loop. These requirements 
can be achieved by using break 
and continue statements, 
respectively. Python provides 
these statements as a tool 
to give more flexibility to the 
programmer to control the 
flow of execution of a program.
6.5.1  Break Statement
The break statement alters 
the normal flow of execution Figure 6.5: Flowchart for using break statement in loop
as it terminates the current 
loop and resumes execution of the statement following 
that loop.

Program 6-12	  Program to demonstrate use of break 
statement.

#Program 6-12
#Program to demonstrate the use of break statement in loop
num = 0
for num in range(10):
     num = num + 1
     if num == 8:
          break
     print('Num has value ' + str(num))
print('Encountered break!! Out of loop')

Output:
Num has value 1
Num has value 2
Num has value 3
Num has value 4
Num has value 5
Num has value 6
Num has value 7
Encountered break!! Out of loop

Note: When value of num becomes 8, the break statement is 
executed and the for loop terminates. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   133 08-Apr-19   12:37:53 PM



134 Computer Science – Class xi

Program 6-13	Find the sum of all the positive numbers 
entered by the user. As soon as the user 
enters a negative number, stop taking 
in any further input from the user and 
display the sum.

#Program 6-13
#Find the sum of all the positive numbers entered by the user 
#till the user enters a negative number. 
entry = 0
sum1 = 0
print("Enter numbers to find their sum, negative number ends the 
loop:")
while True: 
#int() typecasts string to integer    
     entry = int(input())
     if (entry < 0):
          break
     sum1 += entry
print("Sum =", sum1)

Output:
Enter numbers to find their sum, negative number ends the loop:
3
4
5
-1
Sum = 12

Program 6-14	  Program to check if the input number is 
  prime or not.

#Program 6-14
#Write a Python program to check if a given number is prime or not.
num = int(input("Enter the number to be checked: "))
flag = 0     			     #presume num is a prime number
if num > 1 :
     for i in range(2, int(num / 2)):
          if (num % i == 0):
               flag = 1     #num is a not prime number
               break       #no need to check any further

     if flag == 1:
          print(num , "is not a prime number")
     else:
          print(num , "is a prime number")

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   134 11/10/2021   4:44:01 PM



Flow of Control 135

else :
          print("Entered number is <= 1, execute again!")

Output 1:
Enter the number to be checked: 20
20 is not a prime number

Output 2:
Enter the number to check: 19
19 is a prime number

Output 3:
Enter the number to check: 2
2 is a prime number

Output 4:		    
Enter the number to check: 1
Entered number is <= 1,  execute again!

6.5.2 Continue Statement
When a continue statement 
is encountered, the control 
skips the execution of 
remaining statements inside 
the body of the loop for the 
current iteration and jumps 
to the beginning of the loop 
for the next iteration. If the 
loop’s condition is still true, 
the loop is entered again, 
else the control is transferred 
to the statement immediately 
following the loop.Figure 6.7 
shows the flowchart of continue 
statement. Figure 6.6: Flow chart of continue statement

Program 6-15	  Program to demonstrate the use of 
    continue statement.

#Program 6-15
#Prints values from 0 to 6 except 3
num = 0
for num in range(6):
     num = num + 1
     if num == 3:

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   135 08-Apr-19   12:37:53 PM



136 Computer Science – Class xi

          continue
     print('Num has value ' + str(num))
print('End of loop')

Output:
Num has value 1
Num has value 2
Num has value 4
Num has value 5
Num has value 6
End of loop

Observe that the value 3 is not printed in the output, 
but the loop continues after the continue statement to 
print other values till the for loop terminates.

6.6 Nested Loops

A loop may contain another loop inside it. A loop inside 
another loop is called a nested loop.

Program 6-16	  Program to demonstrate working of 
    nested for loops.

#Program 6-16
#Demonstrate working of nested for loops
for var1 in range(3):
    print( "Iteration " + str(var1 + 1) + " of outer loop")
    for var2 in range(2):    #nested loop
        print(var2 + 1)
    print("Out of inner loop")
print("Out of outer loop")

Output:
Iteration 1 of outer loop
1
2
Out of inner loop
Iteration 2 of outer loop
1
2
Out of inner loop
Iteration 3 of outer loop
1
2
Out of inner loop
Out of outer loop

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   136 08-Apr-19   12:37:53 PM



Flow of Control 137

Python does not impose any restriction on how 
many loops can be nested inside a loop or on the levels 
of nesting. Any type of loop (for/while) may be nested 
within another loop (for/while).
Program 6-17	  Program to print the pattern for a number 

  input by the user.

#Program 6-17
#Program to print the pattern for a number input by the user
#The output pattern to be generated is
#1
#1 2
#1 2 3
#1 2 3 4
#1 2 3 4 5
num = int(input("Enter a number to generate its pattern = "))
for i in range(1,num + 1):
     for j in range(1,i + 1):
          print(j, end = " ")
     print()

Output:
Enter a number to generate its pattern = 5
1 
1 2 
1 2 3 
1 2 3 4 
1 2 3 4 5

Program 6-18	 Program to find prime numbers between 
2 to 50 using nested for loops.

#Program 6-18
#Use of nested loops to find the prime numbers between 2 to 50
 
num = 2
for i in range(2, 50):
     j= 2
     while ( j <= (i/2)):
          if (i % j == 0):     #factor found
               break           #break out of while loop
          j += 1
     if ( j > i/j) :           #no factor found

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   137 21-May-19   12:17:09 PM



138 Computer Science – Class xi

          print ( i, "is a prime number")
print ("Bye Bye!!")

Output:
2 is a prime number
3 is a prime number
5 is a prime number
7 is a prime number
11 is a prime number
13 is a prime number
17 is a prime number
19 is a prime number
23 is a prime number
29 is a prime number
31 is a prime number
37 is a prime number
41 is a prime number
43 is a prime number
47 is a prime number
Bye Bye!!

Program 6-19	 Write a program to calculate the factorial 
of a given number.

#Program 6-19
#The following program uses a for loop nested inside an if..else 
#block to calculate the factorial of a given number

num = int(input("Enter a number: "))
fact = 1
# check if the number is negative, positive or zero
if num < 0:
    print("Sorry, factorial does not exist for negative numbers")
elif num == 0:
    print("The factorial of 0 is 1")
else:
    for i in range(1, num + 1):	
        fact = fact * i
    print("factorial of ", num, " is ", fact)

Output:
Enter a number: 5
Factorial of  5  is  120

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   138 08-Apr-19   12:37:53 PM



Flow of Control 139

Summary Notes

•	 The if statement is used for selection or decision 
making.

•	 The looping constructs while and for allow 
sections of code to be executed repeatedly under 
some condition.

•	 for statement iterates over a range of values or 
a sequence.

•	 The statements within the body of for loop are 
executed till the range of values  is exhausted.

•	 The statements within the body of a while are 
executed over and over until the condition of the 
while is false.

•	 If the condition of the while loop is initially false, the 
body is not executed even once.

•	 The statements within the body of the while loop 
must ensure that the condition eventually becomes 
false; otherwise, the loop will become an infinite loop, 
leading to a logical error in the program.

•	 The break statement immediately exits a loop, 
skipping the rest of the loop’s body. Execution continues 
with the statement immediately following the body of 
the loop. When a continue statement is encountered, 
the control jumps to the beginning of the loop for the 
next iteration.

•	 A loop contained within another loop is called a 
nested loop.

Exercise

1.	 What is the difference between else and elif 
construct of if statement?

2.	 What is the purpose of range() function? Give one 
example.

3.	 Differentiate between break and continue 
statements using examples.

4.	 What is an infinite loop? Give one example.
5.	 Find the output of the following program segments:

(i) a = 110
while a > 100:
     print(a)
     a -= 2

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   139 08-Apr-19   12:37:53 PM



140 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes (ii) for i in range(20,30,2):
     print(i)

(iii) country = 'INDIA'
for  i in country:
     print (i)

(iv) i = 0; sum = 0
while i < 9:
     if i % 4 == 0:
          sum = sum + i
     i = i + 2
print (sum)

(v) for x in range(1,4):
     for y in range(2,5):
          if x * y > 10:
               break
          print (x * y)

(vi) var = 7                 
while var > 0:              
     print ('Current variable value: ', var)
     var = var -1
     if var == 3:
          break
     else:
          if var == 6:
               var = var -1
               continue
     print ("Good bye!")

 
Programming Exercises 
1.	 Write a program that takes the name and age of the 

user as input and displays a message whether the 
user is eligible to apply for a driving license or not. 
(the eligible age is 18 years).

2.	 Write a function to print the table of a given number. 
The number has to be entered by the user.

3.	 Write a program that prints minimum and maximum 
of five numbers entered by the user.

4.	 Write a program to check if the year entered by the 
user is a leap year or not.

5.	 Write a program to generate the sequence: –5, 10, 
–15, 20, –25….. upto n, where n is an integer input 
by the user.

6.	 Write a program to find the sum of 1+ 1/8 + 
1/27......1/n3, where n is the number input by the 
user.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   140 08-Apr-19   12:37:53 PM



Flow of Control 141

7.	 Write a program to find the sum of digits of an Notes
integer number, input by the user.

8.	 Write a function that checks whether an input 
number is a palindrome or not. 

[Note: A number or a string is called palindrome if it 
appears same when written in reverse order also. For 
example, 12321 is a palindrome while 123421 is not a 
palindrome] 

9.	 Write a program to print the following patterns:

i)           * ii)                        1
        * * *                     2 1 2
      * * * * *                  3 2 1 2 3 
        * * *               4 3 2 1 2 3 4 
          *            5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 

iii)        1 2 3 4 5  iv)                        *
          1 2 3 4                      *   *
             1 2 3                    *       * 
                1 2                      *   *
                   1                        *   

10.	  Write a program to find the grade of a student when 
 grades are allocated as given in the table below. 

Percentage of Marks Grade
Above 90% A
80% to 90% B
70% to 80% C
60% to 70% D
Below 60% E

        Percentage of the marks obtained by the student is input 
to the program.

Case Study-based Questions
Let us add more functionality to our SMIS developed in 
Chapter 5.
6.1 Write a menu driven program that has options to

•	 accept the marks of the student in five major 
subjects in Class X and display the same.

•	 calculate the sum of the marks of all subjects. 
Divide the total marks by number of subjects 
(i.e. 5), calculate percentage = total marks/5 
and display the percentage. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   141 08-Apr-19   12:37:53 PM



142 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes •	 Find the grade of the student as per the 
following criteria:

Criteria Grade
percentage > 85 A
percentage < 85 && percentage >= 75 B
percentage < 75 && percentage >= 50 C
percentage > 30 && percentage <= 50 D
percentage <30 Reappear 

Let’s peer review the case studies of others based on 
the parameters given under “DOCUMENTATION TIPS” 
at the end of Chapter 5 and provide a feedback to them.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 6.indd   142 08-Apr-19   12:37:53 PM



##7##
Chapter 7

Functions

7.1 Introduction “Once you succeed in writing 
Till now we have written some programs and might the programs for [these] 
have realised that as the problem gets complex, the complicated algorithms, they 
number of lines in a program increase, which makes the usually run extremely fast. 
program look bulky and difficult to manage. Consider The computer doesn’t need 
the following problem statement: to understand the algorithm, 

There is a company that manufactures tents as per its task is only to run the 
user’s requirements. The shape of the tent is cylindrical programs.”
surmounted by a conical top.

– R. Tarjan

Figure 7.1:	Shape of a tent

The company performs the following tasks to fix the 
selling price of each tent. 

1.	 Accept user requirements for the tent, such as
a)	 height 
b)	 radius 
c)	 slant height of the conical part In this chapter

2.	 Calculate the area of the canvas used »» Introduction to 
3.	 Calculate the cost of the canvas used for making Functions

the tent »» User Defined      
4.	 Calculate the net payable amount by the customer Functions

that is inclusive of the 18% tax »» Scope of a Variable
The company has created a computer program for »» Python Standard 

quick and accurate calculation for the payable amount Library
as shown in program 7-1.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   143 08-Apr-19   12:23:12 PM



144 Computer Science – Class xi

Program 7-1	 Program to calculate the payable amount 
for the tent.

#Program 7-1
#Program to calculate the payable amount for the tent without 
#functions

print( "Enter values for the cylindrical part of the tent in 
meters\n")
h = float(input("Enter height of the cylindrical part: "))
r = float(input("Enter radius: "))

l = float(input("Enter the slant height of the conical part in 
meters: "))
csa_conical = 3.14*r*l         #Area of conical part
csa_cylindrical = 2*3.14*r*h   #Area of cylindrical part

# Calculate area of the canvas used for making the tent
canvas_area = csa_conical + csa_cylindrical
print("The area of the canvas is",canvas_area,"m^2")

#Calculate cost of the canvas
unit_price = float(input("Enter the cost of 1 m^2 canvas: "))
total_cost= unit_price * canvas_area
print("The total cost of canvas = ",total_cost)

#Add tax to the total cost to calculate net amount payable by the 
#customer
tax = 0.18 * total_cost;
net_price = total_cost + tax
print("Net amount payable = ",net_price)

Another approach to solve the above problem is 
to divide the program into different blocks of code as 
shown in Figure 7.2. 

Figure 7.2:	Calculation of the cost of the tent

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   144 08-Apr-19   12:23:12 PM



Functions 145

The process of dividing a computer program into 
separate independent blocks of code or separate 
sub-problems with different names and specific 
functionalities is known as modular programming. 
In this chapter, we will learn about the benefits of 
this approach.

7.2 Functions 
In programming, the use of function is one of the 
means to achieve modularity and reusability. Function 
can be defined as a named group of instructions that 
accomplish a specific task when it is invoked. Once 
defined, a function can be called repeatedly from 
different places of the program without writing all the 
codes of that function everytime, or it can be called from 
inside another function, by simply writing the name of 
the function and passing the required parameters, if 
any (Section 7.3). The programmer can define as many 
functions as desired while writing the code. The program 
7-1 is rewritten using user defined functions as shown 
in program 7-2.
Program 7-2	 Program to calculate the payable 

amount 	 for the tent using user 
defined functions.

#Program 7-2
#Program to calculate the cost of tent
#function definition 
def cyl(h,r):
     area_cyl = 2*3.14*r*h    #Area of cylindrical part
     return(area_cyl)

#function definition
def con(l,r):
     area_con = 3.14*r*l      #Area of conical part
     return(area_con)

#function definition
def post_tax_price(cost):     #compute payable amount for the tent
     tax = 0.18 * cost;
     net_price = cost + tax
     return(net_price)

print("Enter values of cylindrical part of the tent in meters:")
h = float(input("Height: "))
r = float(input("Radius: "))

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   145 08-Apr-19   12:23:12 PM



146 Computer Science – Class xi

csa_cyl = cyl(h,r)  #function call 

l = float(input("Enter slant height of the conical area in meters: "))
csa_con = con(l,r)  #function call

#Calculate area of the canvas used for making the tent
canvas_area = csa_cyl + csa_con
print("Area of canvas = ",canvas_area," m^2")

#Calculate cost of canvas
unit_price = float(input("Enter cost of 1 m^2 canvas in rupees: "))
total_cost = unit_price * canvas_area
print("Total cost of canvas before tax = ",total_cost)
print("Net amount payable (including tax) = ",post_tax_price(total_
cost))

If we compare program 7-1 and 7-2, it is evident that 
program 7-2 looks more organised and easier to read.
7.2.1 The Advantages of Function
Suppose in further the company decides to design 
another type of tent whose base is rectangular, while 
the upper part remains the same. In such a scenario, 
some part of the existing code can be reused by calling 
the function con(l,r). If the company develops other 
products or provides services, and where 18% tax rate 
is to be applied, the programmer can use the function 
post_tax_price(cost)directly.

Thus, following are the advantages of using functions 
in a program: 

•	 Increases readability, particularly for longer code 
as by using functions, the program is better 
organised and easy to understand.

•	 Reduces code length as same code is not required 
to be written at multiple places in a program. This 
also makes debugging easier.

•	 Increases reusability, as function can be called from 
another function or another program. Thus, we can 
reuse or build upon already defined functions and 
avoid repetitions of writing the same piece of code. 

•	 Work can be easily divided among team members 
and completed in parallel.	                                                                      

7.3 User Defined Functions

Taking advantage of reusability feature of functions, 
there is a large number of functions already available 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   146 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



Functions 147

in Python under standard library (section 7.5). We can 
directly call these functions in our program without 
defining them. However, in addition to the standard 
library functions, we can define our own functions while 
writing the program. Such functions are called user 
defined functions. Thus, a function defined to achieve 
some task as per the programmer's requirement is 
called a user defined function.
7.3.1 Creating User Defined Function
A function definition begins with def (short for define).
The syntax for creating a user defined function is 
as follows:

•	 The items enclosed in "[ ]" are called parameters 
and they are optional. Hence, a function may or 
may not have parameters. Also, a function may or 
may not return a value.

•	 Function header always ends with a colon (:).
•	 Function name should be unique. Rules for naming 

identifiers also applies for function naming.
•	 The statements outside the function indentation 

are not considered as part of the function.
Program 7-3	 Write a user defined function to add 2 		

numbers and display their sum.
#Program 7-3
#Function to add two numbers
#The requirements are listed below:
	 #1. We need to accept 2 numbers from the user. 
	 #2. Calculate their sum
	 #3. Display the sum.

#function definition
def addnum():
    fnum = int(input("Enter first number: "))
    snum = int(input("Enter second number: "))
    sum = fnum + snum
    print("The sum of ",fnum,"and ",snum,"is ",sum)
    
#function call
addnum()

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   147 15-Jun-21   11:16:13 AM



148 Computer Science – Class xi

In order to execute the function addnum(), we need 
to call it. The function can be called in the program by 
writing function name followed by () as shown in the 
last line of program 7-3.

Output:
Enter first number: 5
Enter second number: 6
The sum of 5 and 6 is 11

7.3.2 Arguments and Parameters
In the above example, the numbers were accepted from 
the user within the function itself, but it is also possible 
for a user defined function to receive values at the time 
of being called. An argument is a value passed to the 
function during the function call which is received in 
corresponding parameter defined in function header.

Program 7-4	 Write a program using a user defined 
function that displays sum of first n 
natural numbers, where n is passed as 
an argument.  

#Program 7-4
#Program to find the sum of first n natural numbers
#The requirements are:
	 #1. n be passed as an argument
	 #2. Calculate sum of first n natural numbers 
	 #3. Display the sum

#function header
def sumSquares(n):       #n is the parameter
     sum = 0
     for i in range(1,n+1): 
          sum = sum + i
     print("The sum of first",n,"natural numbers is: ",sum)
     
 num = int(input("Enter the value for n: "))
 #num is an argument referring to the value input by the user
 sumSquares(num) 		   #function call 

Argument
Let us assume that the user has 

num
input 5 during the execution of the 

Parameter 5
program 7-4. So, num refers to the value 

n 5. It is then used as an argument in 
the function:   

Figure 7.3:	Both argument and parameter         sumSquares(num)
refers to the same value

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   148 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



Functions 149

Since the function is called, the control is transferred 
to execute the function 

     def sumSquares(n):
where parameter n also refers to the value 5 which 

num is referring to as shown in Figure 7.3.
Since both num and n are referring to the same value, 

they are bound to have the same identity. We can use 
the id() function to find the identity of the object that 
the argument and parameter are referring to. Let us 
understand this with the help of the following example.
Program 7-5	 Write a program using user defined 

function that accepts an integer and 
increments the value by 5. Also display 
the id of argument (before function call), 
id of parameter before increment and 
after increment.

#Program 7-5
#Function to add 5 to a user input number
#The requirements are listed below:
	 #1. Display the id()of argument before function call.
	 #2. The function should have one parameter to accept the argument
	 #3. Display the value and id() of the parameter.
	 #4. Add 5 to the parameter
	 #5. Display the new value and id()of the parameter to check
      #whether the parameter is assigned a new memory location or   
      #not.
def incrValue(num): 
    #id of Num before increment
    print("Parameter num has value:",num,"\nid =",id(num))         
    num = num + 5 
    #id of Num after increment
    print("num incremented by 5 is",num,"\nNow id is ",id(num))  
number = int(input("Enter a number: "))
print("id of argument number is:",id(number))         #id of Number
incrValue(number)

Output:
Enter a number: 8
id of argument number is: 1712903328 number and num 
Parameter num has value: 8 					     have the same id
id = 1712903328							     
num incremented by 5 is 13 					  The id of Num has changed.
Now id is 1712903408

Let us understand the above output through illustration 
(see Figure 7.4):

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   149 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



150 Computer Science – Class xi

id
1712903328

Number

8
Before
increment Num

id
1712903328

id
1712903328

Number
8

id
After Num 1712903408 5 added
increment to 8

13

Figure 7.4:	ID of argument and parameter before and after increment

Both argument and parameter can have the same 
name as shown in program 7-6.

Program 7-6	 Write a program using a user defined 
function myMean() to calculate the mean 
of floating values stored in a list.

#Program 7-6
#Function to calculate mean
#The requirements are listed below:
	 #1. The function should have 1 parameter (list containing floating   
      #point values)
	 #2. To calculate mean by adding all the numbers and dividing by     
      #total number of elements
		
def myMean(myList): #function to compute means of values in list 
     total = 0
     count = 0 
     for i in myList:
          total = total + i           #Adds each element i to total
          count = count + 1           #Counts the number of elements
     mean = total/count               #mean is calculated
     print("The calculated mean is:",mean)    
myList = [1.3,2.4,3.5,6.9]
#Function call with list "myList" as an argument
myMean(myList)

Output:
The calculated mean is: 3.5250000000000004

Program 7-7	 Write a program using a user defined 
function calcFact() to calculate and 
display the factorial of a number num 
passed as an argument.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   150 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



Functions 151

#Program 7-7
#Function to calculate factorial
#The requirements are listed below:
	 #1. The function should accept one integer argument from user.
	 #2. Calculate factorial. For example:
	 #3. Display factorial

def calcFact(num):
     fact = 1
     for i in range(num,0,-1):
          fact = fact * i
     print("Factorial of",num,"is",fact)
     
num = int(input("Enter the number: "))
calcFact(num)

Output:
Enter the number: 5
Factorial of 5 is 120

Note: Since multiplication is commutative 5! = 5*4*3*2*1 = 
1*2*3*4*5

(A) String as Parameters
In programs 7-5 to 7-7, the arguments passed are of 
numeric type only. However, in some programs, user 
may need to pass string values as an argument, as 
shown in program 7-8.
Program 7-8	 Write a program using a user defined 	

function that accepts the first name and 
lastname as arguments, concatenate 
them to get full name and displays the 
output as:

Hello full name
For example, if first name is Gyan and lastname is

 Vardhan, the output should be:
Hello Gyan Vardhan

#Program 7-8
#Function to display full name
#The requirements are listed below:
	  #1. The function should have 2 parameters to accept first name and 	
	      #last name.
	  #2. Concatenate names using + operator with a space between first  
       #name and last name.
	  #3. Display full name.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   151 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



152 Computer Science – Class xi

def fullname(first,last): 
#+ operator is used to concatenate strings
     fullname = first + " " + last      
     print("Hello",fullname)  
#function ends here
first = input("Enter first name: ")
last = input("Enter last name: ")
#function call 
fullname(first,last) 		

Output:
Enter first name: Gyan
Enter last name: Vardhan
Hello Gyan Vardhan

(B) Default Parameter
Python allows assigning a default value to the parameter. 
A default value is a value that is predecided and assigned 
to the parameter when the function call does not have 
its corresponding argument.

Program 7-9	 Write a program that accepts numerator 
and denominator of a fractional number 
and calls a user defined function 
mixedFraction() when the fraction 
formed is not a proper fraction. The 
default value of denominator is 1. The 
function displays a mixed fraction only 
if the fraction formed by the parameters 
does not evaluate to a whole number.

#Program 7-9
#Function to display mixed fraction for an improper fraction
#The requirements are listed below:
	 #1. Input numerator and denominator from the user.
	 #2. Check if the entered numerator and denominator form a proper   
      #fraction.
	 #3. If they do not form a proper fraction, then call   
      #mixedFraction().
	 #4. mixedFraction()display a mixed fraction only when the fraction 
      #does not evaluate to a whole number.

def mixedFraction(num,deno = 1):
     remainder = num % deno
#check if the fraction does not evaluate to a whole number
     if remainder!= 0:           
          quotient = int(num/deno)
          print("The mixed fraction=", quotient,"(",remainder, "/", 
deno,")")
     else:

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   152 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



Functions 153

          print("The given fraction evaluates to a whole number")
#function ends here
num = int(input("Enter the numerator: "))
deno = int(input("Enter the denominator: "))
print("You entered:",num,"/",deno)
if num > deno:    #condition to check whether the fraction is 
improper
     mixedFraction(num,deno)      #function call
else:
     print("It is a proper fraction")

Output: 
Enter the numerator: 17
Enter the denominator: 2
You entered: 17 / 2
The mixed fraction =  8 ( 1 / 2 )

In the above program, the denominator entered is 2, 
which is passed to the parameter "deno" so the default 
value of the argument deno is overwritten.

Let us consider the following function call:
mixedFraction(9)

Here, num will be assigned 9 and deno will use the 
default value 1.
Note: 

•	 A function argument can also be an expression, such as 
		  mixedFraction(num+5,deno+5)

In such a case, the argument is evaluated before calling 
the function so that a valid value can be assigned to the 
parameter.

•	 The parameters should be in the same order as that of 
the arguments.

The default parameters must be the trailing parameters 
in the function header that means if any parameter is 
having default value then all the other parameters to its 
right must also have default values. For example, 

def mixedFraction(num,deno = 1)
def mixedFraction(num = 2,deno = 1)

Let us consider few more function definition headers:
#incorrect as default must be the last 
#parameter
def calcInterest(principal = 1000, rate,  
time = 5):   
#correct
def calcInterest(rate,principal = 1000,   
time = 5): 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   153 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



154 Computer Science – Class xi

7.3.3 Functions Returning Value 
A function may or may not return a value when called. 
The return statement returns the values from the 
function. In the examples given so far, the function 
performs calculations and display result(s).They do 
not return any value. Such functions are called void 
functions. But a situation may arise, wherein we need 
to send value(s) from the function to its calling function. 
This is done using return statement.

The return statement does the following:
•	 returns the control to the calling function.
•	 return value(s) or None.

Program 7-10	 Write a program using user defined 
function calcPow() that accepts base 
and exponent as arguments and returns 
the value Baseexponent  where Base and 
exponent are integers.

#Program 7-10
#Function to calculate and display base raised to the power exponent
#The requirements are listed below:
	  #1. Base and exponent are to be accepted as arguments.
	  #2. Calculate Baseexponent

	  #3. Return the result (use return statement )
	  #4. Display the returned value.
def calcpow(number,power):		  #function definition
     result = 1
     for i in range(1,power+1):
          result = result * number
     return result
    
base = int(input("Enter the value for the Base: "))
expo = int(input("Enter the value for the Exponent: "))
answer = calcpow(base,expo)		  #function call		
print(base,"raised to the power",expo,"is",answer) 

Output:
Enter the value for the Base: 5
Enter the value for the Exponent: 4
5 raised to the power 4 is 625

So far we have learnt that a function may or may 
not have parameter(s) and a function may or may not 
return any value(s). In Python, as per our requirements, 
we can have the function in either of the following ways:

•	 Function with no argument and no return value
•	 Function with no argument and with return value(s)
•	 Function with argument(s) and no return value 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   154 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



Functions 155

•	 Function with argument(s) and return value(s)

7.3.4 Flow of Execution 
Flow of execution can be defined as the order in which 
the statements in a program are executed. The Python 
interpreter starts executing the instructions in a 
program from the first statement. The statements are 
executed one by one, in the order of appearance from 
top to bottom.

When the interpreter encounters a function definition, 
the statements inside the function are not executed 
until the function is called. Later, when the interpreter 
encounters a function call, there is a little deviation 
in the flow of execution. In that case, instead of going 
to the next statement, the control jumps to the called 
function and executes the statement of that function. 
After that, the control comes back the point of function 
call so that the remaining statements in the program 
can be executed. Therefore, when we read a program, 
we should not simply read from top to bottom. Instead, 
we should follow the flow of control or execution. It is 
also important to note that a function must be defined 
before its call within a program.
Program 7-11	 Program to understand the low of 		  

 execution using functions.
#Program 7-11
#print using functions
helloPython()                            #Function Call

def helloPython():                       #Function definition
     print("I love Programming")

     
	 On executing the above code the following error is 
produced:

Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "C:\NCERT\Prog 7-11.py", line 3, in <module>
    helloPython()                            #Function Call
NameError: name 'helloPython' is not defined

The error ‘function not defined’ is produced even 
though the function has been defined. When a function 
call is encountered, the control has to jump to the 
function definition and execute it. In the above program, 
since the function call precedes the function definition, 
the interpreter does not find the function definition and 
hence an error is raised.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   155 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



156 Computer Science – Class xi

 That is why, the function definition should be made 
before the function call as shown below:

def helloPython(): #Function definition            
     print("I love Programming")
     
helloPython()      #Function Call                      

[2] def Greetings(Name): #Function Header Figure 7.5 explains 
[3]      print("Hello "+Name) the flow of execution 

for two programs. The 
number in square 

[1] Greetings("John") #Function Call brackets shows the 
[4] print("Thanks") order of execution of 

the statements.
[4] def RectangleArea(l,b): #Function Header Sometime, a 
[5] return l*b function needs to 

return multiple 
values which may be 

[1] l = input("Length: ") returned using tuple. 
[2] b = input("Breadth: ") Program 7-12 shows 
[3][6] Area = RectangleArea(l,b) #Function Call a function which 

returns two values 
[7] print(Area) area and perimeter of 
[8] print("thanks") rectangle using tuple.

Figure 7.5:	Order of execution of statements

Program 7-12	 Write a program using user defined 
function that accepts length and breadth 
of a rectangle  and returns the area and 
perimeter of the rectangle.

#Program 7-12
#Function to calculate area and perimeter of a rectangle
#The requirements are listed below:
	 #1. The function should accept 2 parameters.
	 #2. Calculate area and perimeter.
	 #3. Return area and perimeter.

def calcAreaPeri(Length,Breadth):
     area = length * breadth 
     perimeter = 2 * (length + breadth)
     #a tuple is returned consisting of 2 values area and perimeter
     return (area,perimeter)     

l = float(input("Enter length of the rectangle: "))
b = float(input("Enter breadth of the rectangle: "))
#value of tuples assigned in order they are returned
area,perimeter = calcAreaPeri(l,b)   
print("Area is:",area,"\nPerimeter is:",perimeter)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   156 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



Functions 157

Output: 
Enter Length of the rectangle: 45 Multiple values in 
Enter Breadth of the rectangle: 66 Python are returned 

Multiple values in 
Area is: 2970.0 through a tuple.(Ch 11)

Python are returned 
Perimeter is: 222.0 through a tuple. (Ch. 10) 

Program 7-13	 Write a program that simulates a traffic 
 light . The program should consist of the 
 following:

1.	 A user defined function trafficLight( ) that accepts 
input from the user, displays an error message 
if the user enters anything other than RED, 
YELLOW, and GREEN. Function light() is called 
and following is displayed depending upon return 
value from light().

a)	 “STOP, your life is precious” if the value 
returned by light() is 0.

b)	 “Please WAIT, till the light is Green “ if the 
value returned by light() is 1

c)	 “GO! Thank you for being patient” if the value 
returned by light() is 2.

2.	 A user defined function light() that accepts a string 
as input and returns 0  when the input is RED, 
1 when the input is YELLOW and 2 when the 
input is GREEN. The input should be passed as 
an argument.

3.	 Display “ SPEED THRILLS BUT KILLS” after the 
function trafficLight( ) is executed.

#Program 7-13
#Function to simulate a traffic light
#It is required to make 2 user defined functions trafficLight() and 
#light().

def trafficLight():
     signal = input("Enter the colour of the traffic light: ")
     if (signal not in ("RED","YELLOW","GREEN")):
          print("Please enter a valid Traffic Light colour in 
CAPITALS")
     else:
          value = light(signal)           #function call to light()
          if (value == 0):
               print("STOP, Your Life is Precious.")
          elif (value == 1):
               print ("PLEASE GO SLOW.")
          else:

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   157 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



158 Computer Science – Class xi

               print("GO!,Thank you for being patient.")
#function ends here
          
def light(colour):
     if (colour == "RED"):
          return(0);
     elif (colour == "YELLOW"):
          return (1)
     else:
          return(2)
#function ends here

trafficLight()
print("SPEED THRILLS BUT KILLS")

Output:
Enter the colour of the traffic light: YELLOW
PLEASE GO SLOW.
SPEED THRILLS BUT KILLS

7.4 Scope of a Variable

A variable defined inside a function cannot be 
accessed outside it. Every variable has a well-defined 

Variable accessibility. The part of the program where a 
Scope

variable is accessible can be defined as the scope 
of that variable. A variable can have one of the 

Global Local following two scopes:
Scope Scope A variable that has global scope is known as a 

global variable and a variable that has a local scope 
Figure 7.6:	Scope of a variable is known as a local variable.

(A) Global Variable        
In Python, a variable that is defined outside any function 
or any block is known as a global variable. It can be 
accessed in any functions defined onwards. Any change 
made to the global variable will impact all the functions 
in the program where that variable can be accessed.

(B) Local Variable        
A variable that is defined inside any function or a block 
is known as a local variable. It can be accessed only in 
the function or a block where it is defined. It exists only 
till the function executes.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   158 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



Functions 159

Program 7-14	  Program to access any variable outside 
 the function

#Program 7-14
#To access any variable outside the function
num = 5
def myFunc1( ):
    y = num + 5
    print("Accessing num -> (global) in myFunc1, value = ",num)
    print("Accessing y-> (local variable of myFunc1) accessible, value=",y)

myFunc1()
print("Accessing num outside myFunc1 ",num)
print("Accessing y outside myFunc1 ",y)
Output:
Accessing num -> (global) in myFunc1, value =  5
Accessing y-> (local variable of myFunc1) accessible, value =  10
Accessing num outside myFunc1  5
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "C:\NCERT\Prog 7-14.py", line 9, in <module>
    print("Accessing y outside myFunc1 ",y) y generates error when it is 
NameError: name ‘y’ is not defined accessed outside myfunc1()

 Global variable output,   Local variable output     
Note:

•	 Any modification to global variable is permanent and 
affects all the functions where it is used. 

•	 If a variable with the same name as the global variable 
is defined inside a function, then it is considered local 
to that function and hides the global variable.

•	 If the modified value of a global variable is to be used 
outside the function, then the keyword global should 
be prefixed to the variable name in the function.

Program 7-15	   Write a program to access any variable 	
	    outside the function.

#Program 7-15
#To access any variable outside the function
num = 5
def myfunc1():
	 #Prefixing global informs Python to use the updated global  
	 #variable num outside the function
     global num  
     print("Accessing num =",num)
     num = 10
     print("num reassigned =",num)
#function ends here
myfunc1()
print("Accessing num outside myfunc1",num)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   159 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



160 Computer Science – Class xi

Output:
Global variable num is accessed as the ambiguity is resolved by 

Accessing num = 5  prefixing global to it
num reassigned = 10
Accessing num outside myfunc1 10

7.5 Python Standard Library

Python has a very extensive 
Built-in standard library. It is a 

Standard Library collection of many built 
Function Module in functions that can be 

called in the program as 
User Defined and when required, thus 

saving programmer’s time 
Figure 7.7:	Types of functions of creating those commonly 

used functions everytime.
7.5.1 Built-in functions
Built-in functions are the ready-made functions in 
Python that are frequently used in  programs. Let us 
inspect the following Python program:

#Program to calculate square of a number
a = int(input("Enter a number: ")
b = a * a
print(" The square of ",a ,"is", b)

In the above program input(), int() and print() 
are the built-in functions. The set of instructions to be 
executed for these built-in functions are already defined 
in the python interpreter.

Let us consider the following Python statement 
consisting of a function call to a built in function and 
answer the given questions:

fname = input("Enter your name: ")
What is the name of the function being used?

•	 input()
Does the function accept a value or argument?

•	 Yes, because the parenthesis "()" consists of a 
string "Enter your name".

Does the function return a value?
•	 Yes, since there is an assignment (=) operator 

preceding the function name, it means that the 
function returns a value which is stored in the 
variable fname.

Hence, the function input() accepts a value and 
returns a value.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   160 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



Functions 161

Now consider the built-in functions int() and print(), 
and answer the questions below:

•	 Does the function accept a value or argument?
•	 Does the function return a value?
Following is a categorised list of some of the 

frequently used built-in functions in Python:

Built-in Functions

Input or Output Datatype Mathematical Other Functions
Conversion Functions

input() bool() abs() __import__()
print() chr() divmod() len()

dict() max() range()
float() min() type()
int() pow()
list() sum()
ord()
set()
str()
tuple()

We have already used some of the built-in functions. 
Let us get familiar with some of them as explained in 
Table 7.1.

Table 7.1	 Commonly used built-in functions
Function Arguments Returns Example
Syntax Output

abs(x) x may be an integer Absolute value of x >>> abs(4) 
or floating point 4 	
number >>> abs(-5.7) 

5.7
divmod(x,y) x and y are integers A tuple: >>> divmod(7,2) 

(quotient, remainder) (3, 1) 
>>> divmod(7.5,2)
(3.0, 1.5) 
>>> divmod(-7,2) 
(-4, 1)

max(sequence) x,y,z,.. may be Largest number >>> max([1,2,3,4]) 
or integer or floating in the sequence/ 4 
max(x,y,z,...) point number largest of two or >>> max("Sincerity") 

more arguments 'y' #Based on ASCII value

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   161 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



162 Computer Science – Class xi

>>> max(23,4,56) 
56

min(sequence) x, y, z,.. may be Smallest number >>> min([1,2,3,4])
or integer or floating in the sequence/ 1 
min(x,y,z,...) point number smallest of two or >>> min("Sincerity") 

more arguments 'S' 
#Uppercase letters have 
lower ASCII values than 
lowercase letters.
>>> min(23,4,56) 
4

pow(x,y[,z]) x, y, z may be xy (x raised to the >>> pow(5,2)
integer or floating power y) 25.0 
point number if z is provided, then: >>> pow(5.3,2.2) 

(xy ) % z 39.2 
>>> pow(5,2,4) 
1

sum(x[,num]) x is a numeric Sum of all the >>> sum([2,4,7,3]) 
sequence and num elements in the 16 
is an optional sequence from left to >>> sum([2,4,7,3],3)
argument right. 19 

if given parameter, >>> sum((52,8,4,2))
num is added to the 
sum 66 

len(x) x can be a sequence Count of elements >>> len(“Patience”) 
or a dictionary in x 8 

>>> len([12,34,98]) 
3 
>>> len((9,45))
2 >>>len({1:”Anuj”,2:”Razia”,
3:”Gurpreet”,4:”Sandra”}) 
4

7.5.2 Module
Other than the built-in functions, the Python standard 
library also consists of a number of modules. While 
a function is a grouping of instructions, a module 
is a grouping of functions. As we know that when a 
program grows, function is used to simplify the code 
and to avoid repetition. For a complex problem, it may 
not be feasible to manage the code in one single file. 
Then, the program is divided into different parts under 
different levels, called modules. Also, suppose we have 
created some functions in a program and we want to 
reuse them in another program. In that case, we can 
save those functions under a module and reuse them. 
A module is created as a python (.py) file containing a 
collection of function definitions. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   162 08-Apr-19   12:23:13 PM



Functions 163

To use a module, we need to import the module. Once 
we import a module, we can directly use all the functions 
of that module. The syntax of import statement is as 
follows:

import modulename1 [,modulename2, …]
This gives us access to all the functions in the 

module(s). To call a function of a module, the function 
name should be preceded with the name of the module 
with a dot(.) as a separator.
The syntax is as shown below:

modulename.functionname()

(A) Built-in Modules
Python library has many built-in modules that are really 
handy to programmers. Let us explore some commonly 
used modules and the frequently used functions that 
are found in those modules: 

•	 math
•	 random Remember, Python is case 

sensitive. All the module 
•	 statistics names are in lowercase.

1. Module name : math 
It contains different types of mathematical functions. 
Most of the functions in this module return a float value. 
Some of the commonly used functions in math module 
are given in Table 7.2. In order to use the math module 
we need to import it using the following statement: 

 import math

Table 7.2	 Commonly used functions in math module

Function Arguments Returns Example
Syntax Output

math.ceil(x) x may be an integer or ceiling value of x >>> math.ceil(-9.7)
floating point number -9

>>> math.ceil (9.7)
10 
>>> math.ceil(9) 
9 

math.floor(x) x may be an integer or floor value of x >>> math.floor(-4.5) 
floating point number -5 

>>> math.floor(4.5) 
4 
>>> math.floor(4) 
4 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   163 08-Apr-19   12:23:14 PM



164 Computer Science – Class xi

math.fabs(x) x may be an integer or absolute value of x >>> math.fabs(6.7) 
floating point number 6.7 

>>> math.fabs(-6.7)
6.7 
>>> math.fabs(-4) 
4.0 

math.factorial(x) x is a positive integer factorial of x >>> math.factorial(5) 
120 

math.fmod(x,y) x and y may be an x % y with sign of x >>> math.fmod(4,4.9) 
integer or floating point 4.0 
number >>> math.fmod(4.9,4.9) 

0.0 
>>> math.fmod(-4.9,2.5) 
-2.4 
>>> math.fmod(4.9,-4.9)
0.0  

math.gcd(x,y) x, y are positive integers gcd (greatest common >>> math.gcd(10,2) 
divisor) of x and y 2 

math.pow(x,y) x, y may be an integer or xy (x raised to the >>> math.pow(3,2)
floating point number power y) 9.0 

>>> math.pow(4,2.5)
32.0 
>>> math.pow(6.5,2)
42.25 
>>> math.pow(5.5,3.2) 
233.97 

math.sqrt(x) x may be a positive square root of x >>> math.sqrt(144)
integer or floating point 12.0
number >>> math.sqrt(.64) 

0.8 
math.sin(x) x may be an integer or sine of x in radians >>> math.sin(0)

floating point number in 0 
radians >>> math.sin(6) 

-0.279 

2. Module name : random
This module contains functions that are used for 
generating random numbers. Some of the commonly 
used functions in random module are given in Table 
7.3. For using this module, we can import it using the 
following statement:

import random
Table 7.3	 Commonly used functions in random module

Function Argument Return Example
Syntax Output

random.random() No argument Random >>> random.random()
(void) Real Number 0.65333522

(float) in the 
range 
0.0 to 1.0

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   164 08-Apr-19   12:23:14 PM



Functions 165

random. x, y are integers Random integer >>> random.randint(3,7)
randint(x,y) such that between x and y 4

x <= y >>> random.randint(-3,5) 
1 
>>> random.randint(-5,-3) 
-5.0 

random. y is a positive integer Random integer >>> random.randrange(5) 
randrange(y) signifying the stop between 0 and y 4 

value
random. x and y are positive Random integer >>> random.randrange(2,7) 
randrange(x,y) integers signifying between x and y 2 

the start and stop 
value

3. Module name : statistics
This module provides functions for calculating statistics 
of numeric (Real-valued) data. Some of the commonly 
used functions in statistics module are given in 
Table 7.4. It can be included in the program by using 
the following statements:

import statistics

Table 7.4	 Some of the function available through statistics module
Function Syntax Argument Return Example

Output
statistics.mean(x) x is a numeric arithmetic >>> statistics.

sequence mean mean([11,24,32,45,51]) 
32.6 

statistics.median(x) x is a numeric median >>>statistics.
sequence (middle median([11,24,32,45,51]) 

value) of x 32 

statistics.mode(x) x is a sequence mode >>> statistics.
(the most mode([11,24,11,45,11]) 
repeated 11 
value) >>> statistics.

mode(("red","blue","red")) 
'red' 

Note:

•	 import statement can be written anywhere in the 
program

•	 Module must be imported only once
•	 In order to get a list of modules available in Python, we 

can use the following statement:
    >>> help("module")
•	 To view the content of a module say math, type the 

following:
    >>> help("math")

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   165 08-Apr-19   12:23:14 PM



166 Computer Science – Class xi

Figure 7.8:	Content of module "math"
•	 The modules in the standard library can be found in 

the Lib folder of Python.
(B) From Statement  
Instead of loading all the functions into memory by 
importing a module, from statement can be used to 
access only the required functions from a module. It 
loads only the specified function(s) instead of all the 
functions in a module.
Its syntax is 

>>> from modulename import functionname [, 
functionname,...] 

To use the function when imported using "from 
statement" we do not need to precede it with the module 
name. Rather we can directly call the function as shown 
in the following examples:

Example 7.5	  
>>> from random import random
>>> random()      #Function called without 
the module name

 Output:  
Good Programming 
Practice: Only using 0.9796352504608387    

the required function(s) Example 7.6	
rather than importing a 
module saves memory. >>> from math import ceil,sqrt

>>> value = ceil(624.7)
>>> sqrt(value)

Output:       
25.0

In example 7.2, the ceil value of 624.7 is stored in the 
variable "value" and then sqrt function is applied on the 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   166 08-Apr-19   12:23:14 PM



Functions 167

variable "value". The above example can be rewritten as:
>>> sqrt(ceil(624.7))

The execution of the function sqrt() is dependent 
on the output of ceil() function. 

If we want to extract the integer part of 624.7 (we will 
use trunc() function from math module), we can use 
the following statements.

#ceil and sqrt already been imported above
>>> from math import trunc
>>> sqrt(trunc(625.7))  

Output:
25.0

A programming statement wherein the functions or 
expressions are dependent on each other’s execution 
for achieving an output is termed as composition, here 
are some other examples of composition:

•	 a = int(input("First number: "))
•	 print("Square root of ",a ," = ",math.sqrt(a))
•	 print(floor(a+(b/c)))
•	 math.sin(float(h)/float(c))
Besides the available modules in Python standard 

library, we can also create our own module consisting 
of our own functions.
Program 7-16	  Create a user defined module basic_ 

 math that contains the following user 
  defined functions:

1.	 To add two numbers and return their sum.
2.	 To subtract two numbers and return their difference. """Docstrings""" is 
3.	 To multiply two numbers and return their product. also called Python 
4.	 To divide two numbers and return their quotient documentation strings. 

and print “Division by Zero” error if the denominator It is a multiline comment 
that is added to describe 

is zero. the modules, functions, 
5.	 Also add a docstring to describe the module. After etc. They are typically 

creating module, import and execute functions. added as the first line, 
using 3 double quotes.

#Program 7-16
#The requirement is:
	 #1. Write a docstring describing the module.
	 #2. Write user defined functions as per the specification.
	 #3. Save the file.
  #4. Import at shell prompt and execute the functions.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   167 08-Apr-19   12:23:14 PM



168 Computer Science – Class xi

"""
        basic_math Module
       *******************            
This module contains basic arithmetic operations
that can be carried out on numbers

"""
#Beginning of module
def addnum(x,y):
    return(x + y)
def subnum(x,y):
    return(x - y)
def multnum(x,y):
    return(x * y)
def divnum(x,y):
    if y == 0:
        print ("Division by Zero Error")
    else:
        return (x/y) 		  #End of module

Output:
#Statements for using module basic_math
>>> import basic_math
#Display descriptions of the said module
>>> print(basic_math.__doc__)  

        basic_math Module
       *******************            
This module contains basic arithmetic operations
that can be carried out on numbers

>>> a = basic_math.addnum(2,5)  #Call addnum() function of the   
>>> a                           #basic_math module
7
>>> a = basic_math.subnum(2,5)  #Call subnum() function of the    
>>> a                           #basic_ math module
-3
>>> a = basic_math.multnum(2,5) #Call multnum() function of the   
>>> a                           #basic_math module
10
>>> a = basic_math.divnum(2,5)  #Call divnum() function of the   
>>> a                           #basic_math module
0.4
>>> a = basic_math.divnum(2,0)  #Call divnum() function of the   
Zero Divide Error               #basic_math module
__doc__ variable stores the docstring. To display docstring of a module we 

need to import the module and type the following:
print(<modulename>.__doc__)         #__ are 2 underscore without space

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   168 08-Apr-19   12:23:14 PM



Functions 169

Summary Notes

•	 In programming, functions are used to achieve 
modularity and reusability. 

•	 Function can be defined as a named group of 
instructions that are executed when the function 
is invoked or called by its name. Programmers 
can write their own functions known as user 
defined functions.

•	 The Python interpreter has a number of functions 
built into it. These are the functions that are 
frequently used in a Python program. Such functions 
are known as built-in functions.

•	 An argument is a value passed to the function 
during function call which is received in a parameter 
defined in function header.

•	 Python allows assigning a default value to 
the parameter.

•	 A function returns value(s) to the calling function 
using return statement.

•	 Multiple values in Python are returned through 
a Tuple.

•	 Flow of execution can be defined as the order in 
which the statements in a program are executed.

•	 The part of the program where a variable is accessible 
is defined as the scope of the variable.

•	 A variable that is defined outside any particular 
function or block is known as a global variable. It 
can be accessed anywhere in the program.

•	 A variable that is defined inside any function or block 
is known as a local variable. It can be accessed only 
in the function or block where it is defined. It exists 
only till the function executes or remains active.

•	 The Python standard library is an extensive 
collection of functions and modules that help the 
programmer in the faster development of programs.

•	 A module is a Python file that contains definitions of 
multiple functions.

•	 A module can be imported in a program using 
import statement.

•	 Irrespective of the number of times a module is 
imported, it is loaded only once.

•	 To import specific functions in a program from a 
module, from statement can be used.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   169 08-Apr-19   12:23:14 PM



170 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes Exercise
1.	 Observe the following programs carefully, and 

identify the error:
a) def create (text, freq):

     for i in range (1, freq):
          print text
create(5)          #function call

b) from math import sqrt,ceil
def calc():
     print cos(0)
calc()             #function call

c) mynum = 9
def add9():
     mynum = mynum + 9
     print mynum
add9()              #function call

d) def findValue( vall = 1.1, val2, val3):
     final = (val2 + val3)/ vall
     print(final)
findvalue()          #function call

e) def greet():
     return("Good morning")
greet() = message  #function call

2.	 How is math.ceil(89.7) different from math.floor 
(89.7)?

3.	 Out of random() and randint(), which function 
should we use to generate random numbers between 
1 and 5. Justify.

4.	 How is built-in function pow() function different from 
function math.pow() ? Explain with an example.

5.	 Using an example show how a function in Python 
can return multiple values.

6.	 Differentiate between following with the help of an 
example:

a)	 Argument and Parameter
b)	 Global and Local variable

7.	 Does a function always return a value? Explain with 
an example.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   170 08-Apr-19   12:23:14 PM



Functions 171

Activity-based Questions Notes
Note: Writing a program implies:

•	 Adding comments as part of documentation
•	 Writing function definition 
•	 Executing the function through a function call 

1.	 To secure your account, whether it be an email, 
online bank account or any other account, it is 
important that we use authentication. Use your 
programming expertise to create a program using 
user defined function named login that accepts 
userid and password as parameters (login(uid,pwd)) 
that displays a message “account blocked” in case of 
three wrong attempts. The login is successful if the 
user enters user ID as "ADMIN" and password as 
"St0rE@1". On successful login, display a message 
“login successful”.

2.	 XYZ store plans to give festival discount to its 
customers. The store management has decided to 
give discount on the following criteria:

Shopping Amount Discount Offered

>=500 and <1000 5%

>=1000 and <2000 8%

>=2000 10%
 

An additional discount of 5% is given to customers 
who are the members of the store. Create a program 
using user defined function that accepts the shopping 
amount as a parameter and calculates discount and net 
amount payable on the basis of the following conditions:

Net Payable Amount = Total Shopping Amount – 
Discount. 
3.	 ‘Play and learn’ strategy helps toddlers understand 

concepts in a fun way. Being a senior student you 
have taken responsibility to develop a program using 
user defined functions to help children master two 
and three-letter words using English alphabets and 
addition of single digit numbers. Make sure that you 
perform a careful analysis of the type of questions 
that can be included as per the age and curriculum.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   171 08-Apr-19   12:23:14 PM



172 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes 4.	 Take a look at the series below:
1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55… 
To form the pattern, start by writing 1 and 1. 
Add them together to get 2. Add the last two 
numbers: 1+2 = 3.Continue adding the previous 
two numbers to find the next number in the series. 
These numbers make up the famed Fibonacci 
sequence: previous two numbers are added to get 
the immediate new number.

5.	 Create a menu driven program using user defined 
functions to implement a calculator that performs 
the following:

a)	  Basic arithmetic operations(+,-,*,/)
b)	  log10(x),sin(x),cos(x)

Suggested Lab. Exercises
1.	 Write a program to check the divisibility of a 

number by 7 that is passed as a parameter to the 
user defined function.

2.	 Write a program that uses a user defined function 
that accepts name and gender (as M for Male, 
F for Female) and prefixes Mr/Ms on the basis of 
the gender.

3.	 Write a program that has a user defined function 
to accept the coefficients of a quadratic equation 
in variables and calculates its determinant. For 
example : if the coefficients are stored in the 
variables a,b,c then calculate determinant as 
b2-4ac. Write the appropriate condition to check 
determinants on positive, zero and negative and 
output appropriate result.

4.	 ABC School has allotted unique token IDs from (1 to 
600) to all the parents for facilitating a lucky draw 
on the day of their Annual day function. The winner 
would receive a special prize. Write a program using 
Python that helps to automate the task.(Hint: use 
random module)

5.	 Write a program that implements a user defined 
function that accepts Principal Amount, Rate, 
Time, Number of Times the interest is compounded 
to calculate and displays compound interest. 
(Hint: CI=P*(1+r/n)nt)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   172 15-Jun-21   11:16:46 AM



Functions 173

6.	 Write a program that has a user defined function Notes
to accept 2 numbers as parameters, if number 1 
is less than number 2 then numbers are swapped 
and returned, i.e., number 2 is returned in place 
of number1 and number 1 is reformed in place of 
number 2, otherwise the same order is returned.

7.	 Write a program that contains user defined 
functions to calculate area, perimeter or surface 
area whichever is applicable for various shapes 
like square, rectangle, triangle, circle and cylinder. 
The user defined functions should accept the values 
for calculation as parameters and the calculated 
value should be returned. Import the module and 
use the appropriate functions. 

8.	 Write a program that creates a GK quiz  consisting 
of any five questions of your choice. The questions 
should be displayed randomly. Create a user defined 
function  score() to calculate the score of the quiz and 
another user defined function remark (scorevalue) 
that accepts the final score to display remarks as 
follows:

Marks Remarks
5 Outstanding
4 Excellent

3 Good
2 Read more to score more
1 Needs to take interest
0 General knowledge will always help you. Take it seriously.

Case Study-based Question
For the SMIS system extended in Chapter 6 let us do 
the following:
1.	 7.1 Convert all the functionality in Chapter 5 and 6 

using user defined functions.
2.	 7.2 Add another user defined function to the above 

menu to check if the student has short attendance 
or not. The function should accept total number of 
working days in a month and check if the student 
is a defaulter by calculating his or her attendance 
using the formula: Count of days the student was 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   173 08-Apr-19   12:23:14 PM



174 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes present or the total number of working days. In case 
the attendance calculated is less than 78%, the 
function should return 1 indicating short attendance 
otherwise the function should return 0 indicating 
attendance is not short.
Let’s peer review the case studies of others based on 

the parameters given under “DOCUMENTATION TIPS” 
at the end of Chapter 5 and provide a feedback to them.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 7.indd   174 08-Apr-19   12:23:14 PM



##8##
Chapter 8

Strings

8.1 Introduction “The great thing about a 

We have studied in Chapter 5, that a sequence is an computer notebook is that no 
orderly collection of items and each item is indexed by matter how much you stuff 
an integer. Following sequence data types in Python into it, it doesn't get bigger or 
were also briefly introduced in Chapter 5. heavier. ”

•	 Strings
•	 Lists – Bill Gates
•	 Tuples
Another data type ‘Dictionary’ was also introduced 

in chapter 5 which falls under the category of mapping. 
In this chapter, we will go through strings in detail. 
List will be covered in Chapter 9 whereas tuple and 
dictionary will be discussed in Chapter 10.

8.2 Strings 
String is a sequence which is made up of one or more 
UNICODE characters. Here the character can be a letter, 
digit, whitespace or any other symbol. A string can be 
created by enclosing one or more characters in single, 
double or triple quote.

Example 8.1	
>>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
>>> str2 = "Hello World!" In this chapter
>>> str3 = """Hello World!"""
>>> str4 = '''Hello World!'' »» Introduction to 
str1, str2, str3, str4 are all string variables Strings

having the same value 'Hello World!'. Values stored in »» String Operations
str3 and str4 can be extended to multiple lines using »» Traversing a String
triple codes as can be seen in the following example: »» Strings Methods 

>>> str3 = """Hello World! and Built-in 
          welcome to the world of Python""" Functions
>>> str4 = '''Hello World! »» Handling Strings
          welcome to the world of Python'''

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   175 08-Apr-19   12:39:21 PM



176 Computer Science – Class xi

8.2.1 Accessing Characters in a String 
Each individual character in a string can be accessed 

Python does not have using a technique called indexing. The index specifies 
a character data type. 
String of length one is the character to be accessed in the string and is written 

considered as character. in square brackets ([ ]). The index of the first character 
(from left) in the string is 0 and the last character is n-1 
where n is the length of the string. If we give index value 
out of this range then we get an IndexError. The index 
must be an integer (positive, zero or negative).

#initializes a string str1
>>> str1 = 'Hello World!'   
#gives the first character of str1
>>> str1[0]                  
 'H'
#gives seventh character of str1
>>> str1[6]                  
'W'
#gives last character of str1
>>> str1[11]                 
'!'
#gives error as index is out of range
>>> str1[15]                 
IndexError: string index out of range
The index can also be an expression including 

variables and operators but the expression must 
evaluate to an integer.

#an expression resulting in an integer index 
#so gives 6th character of str1
>>> str1[2+4]        
 'W'                
#gives error as index must be an integer
>>> str1[1.5]       
TypeError: string indices must be integers

Python allows an index value to be negative also. 
Negative indices are used when we want to access the 
characters of the string from right to left. Starting from 
right hand side, the first character has the index as -1 
and the last character has the index –n where n is the 
length of the string. Table 8.1 shows the indexing of 
characters in the string ‘Hello World!’ in both the cases, 
i.e., positive and negative indices.

>>> str1[-1] #gives first character from right
'!'
>>> str1[-12]#gives last character from right
'H'

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   176 08-Apr-19   12:39:21 PM



Strings 177

Table 8.1	 Indexing of characters in string 'Hello World!' 
Positive Indices 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

String H e l l o W o r l d !

Negative Indices -12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1

An inbuilt function len() in Python returns the length 
of the string that is passed as parameter. For example, 
the length of string str1 = 'Hello World!' is 12.

#gives the length of the string str1
>>> len(str1)            
12
#length of the string is assigned to n
>>> n = len(str1)       
>>> print(n)
12
#gives the last character of the string
>>> str1[n-1]            
'!'
#gives the first character of the string
>>> str1[-n]             
'H'

8.2.2 String is Immutable
A string is an immutable data type. It means that 
the contents of the string cannot be changed after it 
has been created. An attempt to do this would lead to 
an error.

>>> str1 = "Hello World!"    
#if we try to replace character 'e' with 'a'
>>> str1[1] = 'a'  
TypeError: 'str' object does not support item 
assignment

8.3 String Operations

As we know that string is a sequence of characters. 
Python allows certain operations on string data type, 
such as concatenation, repetition, membership and 
slicing. These operations are explained in the following 
subsections with suitable examples.
8.3.1 Concatenation
To concatenate means to join. Python allows us to join 
two strings using concatenation operator plus which is 
denoted by symbol +.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   177 08-Apr-19   12:39:21 PM



178 Computer Science – Class xi

>>> str1 = 'Hello'      #First string
>>> str2 = 'World!'     #Second string
>>> str1 + str2         #Concatenated strings
'HelloWorld!'
				    #str1 and str2 remain same 	
>>> str1		  #after this operation.
'Hello'
>>> str2
'World!'

8.3.2 Repetition
Python allows us to repeat the given string using 
repetition operator which is denoted by symbol *.

#assign string 'Hello' to str1
>>> str1 = 'Hello'        
#repeat the value of str1 2 times
>>> str1 * 2              
'HelloHello'
#repeat the value of str1 5 times
>>> str1 * 5              
'HelloHelloHelloHelloHello'

Note: str1 still remains the same after the use of 
repetition operator.
8.3.3 Membership
Python has two membership operators 'in' and 'not 
in'. The 'in' operator takes two strings and returns 
True if the first string appears as a substring in the 
second string, otherwise it returns False.

>>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
>>> 'W' in str1
True
>>> 'Wor' in str1
True
>>> 'My' in str1
False

The 'not in' operator also takes two strings and 
returns True if the first string does not appear as a 
substring in the second string, otherwise returns False.

>>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
>>> 'My' not in str1    
True
>>> 'Hello' not in str1
False

8.3.4 Slicing
In Python, to access some part of a string or substring, 
we use a method called slicing. This can be done by 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   178 08-Apr-19   12:39:21 PM



Strings 179

specifying an index range. Given a string str1, the 
slice operation str1[n:m] returns the part of the string 
str1 starting from index n (inclusive) and ending at m 
(exclusive). In other words, we can say that str1[n:m] 
returns all the characters starting from str1[n] till 
str1[m-1]. The numbers of characters in the substring 
will always be equal to difference of two indices m and 
n, i.e., (m-n).

>>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
#gives substring starting from index 1 to 4
>>> str1[1:5]		
'ello'
#gives substring starting from 7 to 9
>>> str1[7:10]		
'orl'
#index that is too big is truncated down to
#the end of the string
>>> str1[3:20]		    
'lo World!'			 
#first index > second index results in an 
#empty '' string
 >>> str1[7:2]

If the first index is not mentioned, the slice starts 
from index. 

#gives substring from index 0 to 4
>>> str1[:5]
'Hello'

If the second index is not mentioned, the slicing is 
done till the length of the string.

#gives substring from index 6 to end
>>> str1[6:]			
'World!'

The slice operation can also take a third index that 
specifies the ‘step size’. For example, str1[n:m:k], 
means every kth character has to be extracted from 
the string str1 starting from n and ending at m-1. By 
default, the step size is one.

>>> str1[0:10:2]
'HloWr'
>>> str1[0:10:3]
'HlWl'

Negative indexes can also be used for slicing.
	   #characters at index -6,-5,-4,-3 and -2 are 		
	  #sliced

>>> str1[-6:-1]   

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   179 21-May-19   12:26:40 PM



180 Computer Science – Class xi

'World'
If we ignore both the indexes and give step size as -1

#str1 string is obtained in the reverse order
>>> str1[::-1]    
'!dlroW olleH'

8.4 Traversing a String

We can access each character of a string or traverse a 
string using for loop and while loop.
(A)	 String Traversal Using for Loop: 

>>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
>>> for ch in str1:
         print(ch,end = '')
Hello World!       #output of for loop

In the above code, the loop starts from the first 
character of the string str1 and automatically ends 
when the last character is accessed.
(B)	 String Traversal Using while Loop:

>>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
>>> index = 0
#len(): a function to get length of string
>>> while  index < len(str1):                        
         print(str1[index],end = '')  
         index += 1

Hello World!            #output of while loop
Here while loop runs till the condition index 

< len(str) is True, where index varies from 0 to 
len(str1) -1.

8.5 String Methods and Built-in Functions
Python has several built-in functions that allow us to work 
with strings. Table 8.2 describes some of the commonly 
used built-in functions for string manipulation.

Table 8.2	 Built-in functions for string manipulations
Method Description Example

len() Returns the length of the >>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
given string >>> len(str1)

12

title() Returns the string with first letter >>> str1 = 'hello WORLD!'
of every word in the string in >>> str1.title()
uppercase and rest in lowercase 'Hello World!'

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   180 08-Apr-19   12:39:21 PM



Strings 181

lower() Returns the string with all >>> str1 = 'hello WORLD!'
uppercase letters converted >>> str1.lower()
to lowercase 'hello world!'

upper() Returns the string with all >>> str1 = 'hello WORLD!'
lowercase letters converted >>> str1.upper()
to uppercase 'HELLO WORLD!'

count(str, Returns number of times >>> str1 = 'Hello World! Hello 
start, end) substring str occurs in the Hello'

given string. If we do not give >>> str1.count('Hello',12,25)
start index and end index  then 2
searching starts from index 0 

>>> str1.count('Hello')
and ends at length of the string

3

find(str,start, Returns the first occurrence of >>> str1  = 'Hello World! Hello Hello'
end) index of substring str occurring >>> str1.find('Hello',10,20)

in the given string. If we do not 13
give start and end then searching 

>>> str1.find('Hello',15,25)
starts from index 0 and ends 
at length of the string. If the 19

substring is not present in the >>> str1.find('Hello')
given string, then the function 0
returns -1 >>> str1.find('Hee')

-1

index(str, Same as find() but raises an >>> str1 = 'Hello World! Hello 
start, end) exception if the substring is not Hello'

present in the given string >>> str1.index('Hello')
0
>>> str1.index('Hee')
ValueError: substring not found

endswith() Returns True if the given string >>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
ends with the supplied substring >>> str1.endswith('World!')
otherwise returns False True

>>> str1.endswith('!')
True
>>> str1.endswith('lde')
False

startswith() Returns True if the given string >>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
starts with the supplied substring >>> str1.startswith('He')
otherwise returns False True

>>> str1.startswith('Hee')
False

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   181 08-Apr-19   12:39:22 PM



182 Computer Science – Class xi

isalnum() Returns True if characters of the >>> str1 = 'HelloWorld'
given string are either alphabets >>> str1.isalnum()
or numeric. If whitespace or True
special symbols are part of the 

>>> str1 = 'HelloWorld2'
given string or the string is empty 
it returns False >>> str1.isalnum()

True
>>> str1 = 'HelloWorld!!'
>>> str1.isalnum()
False

islower() Returns True if the string is >>> str1 = 'hello world!'
non-empty and has all lowercase >>> str1.islower()
alphabets, or has at least one True
character as lowercase alphabet 

>>> str1 = 'hello 1234'
and rest are non-alphabet 
characters >>> str1.islower()

True
>>> str1 = 'hello ??'
>>> str1.islower()
True
>>> str1 = '1234'
>>> str1.islower()
False
>>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
>>> str1.islower()
False

isupper() Returns True if the string is >>> str1 = 'HELLO WORLD!'
non-empty and has all uppercase >>> str1.isupper()
alphabets, or has at least one True
character as uppercase character 

>>> str1 = 'HELLO 1234'
and rest are non-alphabet 
characters >>> str1.isupper()

True
>>> str1 = 'HELLO ??'
>>> str1.isupper()
True
>>> str1 = '1234'
>>> str1.isupper()
False 
>>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
>>> str1.isupper()
False

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   182 08-Apr-19   12:39:22 PM



Strings 183

isspace() Returns True if the string is >>> str1 = '     \n   \t \r'
non-empty and all characters >>> str1.isspace()
are white spaces (blank, tab, True
newline, carriage return)

>>> str1 = 'Hello        \n'
>>> str1.isspace()
False

istitle() Returns True if the string is >>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
non-empty and title case, i.e., >>> str1.istitle()
the first letter of every word in True
the string in uppercase and rest 

>>> str1 = 'hello World!'
in lowercase

>>> str1.istitle()
False

lstrip() Returns the string after removing >>> str1 = '        Hello World!    
the spaces only on the left of the '
string >>> str1.lstrip()

'Hello World!    '

rstrip() Returns the string after removing >>> str1 = '       Hello World!'    
the spaces only on the right of >>> str1.rstrip()
the string '       Hello World!'

strip() Returns the string after removing >>> str1 = '         Hello World!'   
the spaces both on the left and >>> str1.strip()
the right of the string 'Hello World!'

replace(oldstr, Replaces all occurrences of old >>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
newstr) string with the new string >>> str1.replace('o','*')

'Hell* W*rld!'
>>> str1 = 'Hello World!'
>>> str1.replace('World','Country')
'Hello Country!'
>>> str1 = 'Hello World! Hello'
>>> str1.replace('Hello','Bye')
'Bye World! Bye'

join() Returns a string in which the >>> str1 = ('HelloWorld!')
characters in the string have >>> str2 = '-'        #separator
been joined by a separator >>> str2.join(str1)

'H-e-l-l-o-W-o-r-l-d-!'

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   183 08-Apr-19   12:39:22 PM



184 Computer Science – Class xi

partition()) Partitions the given string at the >>> str1 = 'India is a Great   Country' 
first occurrence of the substring >>> str1.partition('is')
(separator) and returns the string ('India ', 'is', ' a Great 
partitioned into three parts. Country')
1. Substring before the      

>>> str1.partition('are')
    separator
2. Separator ('India is a Great Country',' ',' 

3. Substring after the separator ')

If the separator is not found in the 
string, it returns the whole string 
itself and two empty strings

split() Returns a list of words delimited >>> str1 = 'India is a Great    Country' 
by the specified substring. If no >>> str1.split()
delimiter is given then words are ['India','is','a','Great', 
separated by space. 'Country']

>>> str1 = 'India is a Great 
Country'
>>> str1.split('a')
['Indi', ' is ', ' Gre', 't 
Country']

8.6 Handling Strings

In this section, we will learn about user defined functions 
in Python to perform different operations on strings.
Program 8-1	 Write a program with a user defined 

function to count the number of times a 
character (passed as argument) occurs in 
the given string.

#Program 8-1
#Function to count the number of times a character occurs in a 
#string
def charCount(ch,st):
     count = 0
     for character in st:
          if character == ch:
               count += 1
     return count
#end of function

st = input("Enter a string: ")
ch = input("Enter the character to be searched: ")
count = charCount(ch,st)
print("Number of times character",ch,"occurs in the string 
is:",count)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   184 08-Apr-19   12:39:22 PM



Strings 185

Output:
Enter a string: Today is a Holiday
Enter the character to be searched: a
Number of times character a occurs in the string is: 3

Program 8-2	 Write a program with a user defined 
function with string as a parameter which 
replaces all vowels in the string with '*'.

#Program 8-2
#Function to replace all vowels in the string with  '*'
def replaceVowel(st):
	    #create an empty string
     newstr = ''                         
     for character in st:
		     #check if next character is a vowel
          if character in 'aeiouAEIOU':
			     #Replace vowel with *  
               newstr += '*'             
          else:	
               newstr += character
     return newstr
#end of function
st = input("Enter a String: ")
st1 = replaceVowel(st)
print("The original String is:",st)
print("The modified String is:",st1)

Output:
Enter a String: Hello World
The original String is: Hello World
The modified String is: H*ll* W*rld

Program 8-3	 Write a program to input a string from 
the user and print it in the reverse order 
without creating a new string.

#Program 8-3
#Program to display string in reverse order
st = input("Enter a string: ")
for i in range(-1,-len(st)-1,-1):
    print(st[i],end='')

  Output:
Enter a string: Hello World
dlroW olleH

Program 8-4	 Write a program which reverses a string 
passed as parameter and stores the 
reversed string in a new string. Use a user 
defined function for reversing the string.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   185 08-Apr-19   12:39:22 PM



186 Computer Science – Class xi

#Program 8-4
#Function to reverse a string
def reverseString(st):
     newstr = ''        #create a new string
     length = len(st)
     for i in range(-1,-length-1,-1):
         newstr += st[i]
     return newstr
#end of function
st = input("Enter a String: ")
st1 = reverseString(st)
print("The original String is:",st)
print("The reversed String is:",st1)

Output:
Enter a String: Hello World
The original String is: Hello World
The reversed String is: dlroW olleH

Program 8-5	 Write a program using a user defined 
function to check if a string is a palindrome 
or not. (A string is called palindrome if it 
reads same backwards as forward. For 
example, Kanak is a palindrome.) 

#Program 8-5
#Function to check if a string is palindrome or not
def checkPalin(st):
     i = 0
     j = len(st) - 1
     while(i <= j):
          if(st[i] != st[j]):
               return False
          i += 1
          j -= 1
     return True
#end of function
st = input("Enter a String: ")
result = checkPalin(st)
if result == True:
     print("The given string",st,"is a palindrome")
else:
     print("The given string",st,"is not a palindrome")

Output 1:
Enter a String: kanak
The given string kanak is a palindrome

Output 2:
Enter a String: computer
The given string computer is not a palindrome

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   186 08-Apr-19   12:39:22 PM



Strings 187

Summary Notes
•	 A string is a sequence of characters enclosed in 

single, double or triple quotes.
•	 Indexing is used for accessing individual 

characters within a string.
•	 The first character has the index 0 and the last 

character has the index n-1 where n is the length 
of the string. The negative indexing ranges from 
-n to -1.

•	 Strings in Python are immutable, i.e., a string 
cannot be changed after it is created.

•	 Membership operator in takes two strings and 
returns True if the first string appears as a 
substring in the second else returns False. 
Membership operator ‘not in’ does the reverse.

•	 Retrieving a portion of a string is called slicing. 
This can be done by specifying an index range. 
The slice operation str1[n:m] returns the part of 
the string str1 starting from index n (inclusive) 
and ending at m (exclusive).

•	 Each character of a string can be accessed either 
using a for loop or while loop.

•	 There are many built-in functions for working 
with strings in Python.

Exercise
1.	 Consider the following string mySubject:
        mySubject = "Computer Science"
     What will be the output of the following string operations :

i.	 print(mySubject[0:len(mySubject)])
ii.	 print(mySubject[-7:-1])

iii.	 print(mySubject[::2])
iv.	 print(mySubject[len(mySubject)-1])
v.	 print(2*mySubject)

vi.	 print(mySubject[::-2])
vii.	 print(mySubject[:3] + mySubject[3:])

viii.	 print(mySubject.swapcase())
ix.	 print(mySubject.startswith('Comp'))
x.	 print(mySubject.isalpha())  

2.	 Consider the following string myAddress:
             myAddress = "WZ-1,New Ganga Nagar,New Delhi"
     What will be the output of following string operations :

i.	 print(myAddress.lower())

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   187 08-Apr-19   12:39:22 PM



188 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes ii.	 print(myAddress.upper())
iii.	 print(myAddress.count('New'))
iv.	 print(myAddress.find('New'))
v.	 print(myAddress.rfind('New'))

vi.	 print(myAddress.split(','))
vii.	 print(myAddress.split(' '))

viii.	 print(myAddress.replace('New','Old'))
ix.	 print(myAddress.partition(','))
x.	 print(myAddress.index('Agra'))

Programming Problems
1.	 Write a program to input line(s) of text from the user 

until enter is pressed. Count the total number of 
characters in the text (including white spaces),total 
number of alphabets, total number of digits, total 
number of special symbols and total number of 
words in the given text. (Assume that each word is 
separated by one space). 

2.	 Write a user defined function to convert a string 
with more than one word into title case string where 
string is passed as parameter. (Title case means 
that the first letter of each word is capitalised)

3.	 Write a function deleteChar() which takes two 
parameters one is a string and other is a character. 
The function should create a new string after 
deleting all occurrences of the character from the 
string and return the new string.

4.	 Input a string having some digits. Write a function 
to return the sum of digits present in this string. 

5.	 Write a function that takes a sentence as an input 
parameter where each word in the sentence is 
separated by a space. The function should replace 
each blank with a hyphen and then return the 
modified sentence.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 8.indd   188 08-Apr-19   12:39:22 PM



##9##
Chapter 9

Lists

9.1 Introduction to List “Measuring programming 
The data type list is an ordered sequence which is progress by lines of code 
mutable and made up of one or more elements. Unlike is like measuring aircraft 
a string which consists of only characters, a list can building progress by weight.”
have elements of different data types, such as integer,       
float, string, tuple or even another list. A list is very –Bill Gates
useful to group together elements of mixed data types. 
Elements of a list are enclosed in square brackets and 
are separated by comma. Like string indices, list indices 
also start from 0.
Example 9.1	  

#list1 is the list of six even numbers
>>> list1 = [2,4,6,8,10,12]
>>> print(list1)
[2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12]

#list2 is the list of vowels
>>> list2 = ['a','e','i','o','u']
>>> print(list2)
['a', 'e', 'i', 'o', 'u']

#list3 is the list of mixed data types
>>> list3 = [100,23.5,'Hello'] In this chapter
>>> print(list3)
[100, 23.5, 'Hello']

»» Introduction to List
#list4 is the list of lists called nested »» List Operations
#list »» Traversing a List
>>> list4 =[['Physics',101],['Chemistry',202], »» List Methods and 
            ['Maths',303]] Built-in Functions
>>> print(list4)
[['Physics', 101], ['Chemistry', 202], »» Nested Lists
 ['Maths', 303]] »» Copying Lists

9.1.1 Accessing Elements in a List »» List as Arguments 
to Function

The elements of a list are accessed in the same way as »» List Manipulation
characters are accessed in a string. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   189 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



190 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes #initializes a list list1 
>>> list1 = [2,4,6,8,10,12]   	
>>> list1[0]	#return first element of list1
2
>>> list1[3]	#return fourth element of list1
8
#return error as index is out of range 
>>> list1[15]	
IndexError: list index out of range
#an expression resulting in an integer index 
>>> list1[1+4]	
12
>>> list1[-1] #return first element from right
12
#length of the list list1 is assigned to n
>>> n = len(list1)	
>>> print(n)
6
#return the last element of the list1 
>>> list1[n-1]	  
12
#return the first element of list1 
>>> list1[-n]	
2

9.1.2 Lists are Mutable
In Python, lists are mutable. It means that the contents 
of the list can be changed after it has been created. 

#List list1 of colors 
>>> list1 = ['Red','Green','Blue','Orange']   
#change/override the fourth element of list1 
>>> list1[3] = 'Black'               
>>> list1  	   #print the modified list list1
['Red', 'Green', 'Blue', 'Black']

9.2 List Operations

The data type list allows manipulation of its contents 
through various operations as shown below.
9.2.1 Concatenation
Python allows us to join two or more lists using 
concatenation operator depicted by the symbol +.

#list1 is list of first five odd integers 
>>> list1 = [1,3,5,7,9]		
#list2 is list of first five even integers 
>>> list2 = [2,4,6,8,10]		
#elements of list1 followed by list2 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   190 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



Lists 191

>>> list1 + list2           	 Notes
[1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10]
>>> list3 = ['Red','Green','Blue']
>>> list4 = ['Cyan', 'Magenta', 'Yellow' 
,'Black']
>>> list3 + list4
['Red','Green','Blue','Cyan','Magenta',   	
	  'Yellow','Black']

Note that, there is no change in ongoing lists, i.e., 
list1, list2, list3, list4 remain the same 
after concatenation operation. If we want to merge two 
lists, then we should use an assignment statement to 
assign the merged list to another list. The concatenation 
operator '+’ requires that the operands should be of list 
type only. If we try to concatenate a list with elements of 
some other data type, TypeError occurs.

>>> list1 = [1,2,3]
>>> str1 = "abc"
>>> list1 + str1
TypeError: can only concatenate list (not 
"str") to list

9.2.2 Repetition
Python allows us to replicate a list using repetition 
operator depicted by symbol *.

>>> list1 = ['Hello']
#elements of list1 repeated 4 times
>>> list1 * 4			 
['Hello', 'Hello', 'Hello', 'Hello']

9.2.3 Membership
Like strings, the membership operators in checks if 
the element is present in the list and returns True, else 
returns False. 

>>> list1 = ['Red','Green','Blue']
>>> 'Green' in list1
True
>>> 'Cyan' in list1
False

The not in operator returns True if the element is not 
present in the list, else it returns False.

>>> list1 = ['Red','Green','Blue']
>>> 'Cyan' not in list1
True
>>> 'Green' not in list1
False

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   191 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



192 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes 9.2.4 Slicing
Like strings, the slicing operation can also be applied 
to lists. 

>>> list1 =['Red','Green','Blue','Cyan', 
'Magenta','Yellow','Black']
>>> list1[2:6]
['Blue', 'Cyan', 'Magenta', 'Yellow'] 

 #list1 is truncated to the end of the list
>>> list1[2:20] #second index is out of range  
['Blue', 'Cyan', 'Magenta', 'Yellow', 
'Black']
	
>>> list1[7:2] 	 #first index > second index
[] 			   #results in an empty list

#return sublist from index 0 to 4 
>>> list1[:5]	 #first index missing	
['Red','Green','Blue','Cyan','Magenta'] 

#slicing with a given step size 
>>> list1[0:6:2]          
['Red','Blue','Magenta']

#negative indexes
#elements at index -6,-5,-4,-3 are sliced 
>>> list1[-6:-2]    
['Green','Blue','Cyan','Magenta'] 

#both first and last index missing
>>> list1[::2]	 #step size 2 on entire list
['Red','Blue','Magenta','Black']

#negative step size
#whole list in the reverse order 
>>> list1[::-1]	
['Black','Yellow','Magenta','Cyan','Blue', 
'Green','Red']

9.3 Traversing a List

We can access each element of the list or traverse a list 
using a for loop or a while loop.
(A)	 List Traversal Using for Loop: 

>>> list1 = ['Red','Green','Blue','Yellow',  
		     	 'Black']

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   192 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



Lists 193

>>> for item in list1:
         print(item)

 Output:
Red
Green
Blue
Yellow
Black

Another way of accessing the elements of the list is 
using range() and len() functions:

>>> for i in range(len(list1)):
         print(list1[i]) len(lis t1) returns the 

length or total number of 
Output: elements of list1.

Red
Green
Blue
Yellow
Black

(B)	 List Traversal Using while Loop:   
>>> list1 = ['Red','Green','Blue','Yellow',  
			   'Black']
>>> i = 0
>>> while i < len(list1):
         print(list1[i])
         i += 1

Output:
Red
Green
Blue
Yellow 
Black

9.4 List Methods and Built-in Functions

The data type list has several built-in methods that 
are useful in programming. Some of them are listed in 
Table 9.1.

Table 9.1 Built-in functions for list manipulations

Method Description Example

len() Returns the length of the list passed as >>> list1 = [10,20,30,40,50]
the argument >>> len(list1)

5

list() Creates an empty list if no argument is >>> list1 = list()
passed >>> list1

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   193 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



194 Computer Science – Class xi

[ ]
Creates a list if a sequence is passed as >>> str1 = 'aeiou'
an argument >>> list1 = list(str1)

>>> list1
['a', 'e', 'i', 'o', 'u']

append() Appends a single element passed as an >>> list1 = [10,20,30,40]
argument at the end of the list >>> list1.append(50)

>>> list1
The single element can also be a list [10, 20, 30, 40, 50]

>>> list1 = [10,20,30,40]
>>> list1.append([50,60])
>>> list1
[10, 20, 30, 40, [50, 60]]

extend() Appends each element of the list passed >>> list1 = [10,20,30]
as argument to the end of the given list >>> list2 = [40,50]

>>> list1.extend(list2)
>>> list1
[10, 20, 30, 40, 50]

insert() Inserts an element at a particular index >>> list1 = [10,20,30,40,50]
in the list >>> list1.insert(2,25)

>>> list1
[10, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50]
>>> list1.insert(0,5)
>>> list1
[5, 10, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50]

count() Returns the number of times a given >>> list1 = [10,20,30,10,40,10]
element appears in the list >>> list1.count(10)

3
>>> list1.count(90)
0

index() Returns index of the first occurrence of >>> list1 = [10,20,30,20,40,10]
the element in the list. If the element is >>> list1.index(20)
not present, ValueError is generated 1

>>> list1.index(90)
ValueError: 90 is not in list

remove() Removes the given element from the >>> list1 = [10,20,30,40,50,30]
list. If the element is present multiple >>> list1.remove(30)
times, only the first occurrence is >>> list1
removed. If the element is not present, [10, 20, 40, 50, 30]
then ValueError is generated

>>> list1.remove(90)
ValueError:list.remove(x):x not 
in list

pop() Returns the element whose index is >>> list1 = [10,20,30,40,50,60]
passed as parameter to this function >>> list1.pop(3)
and also removes it from the list. If no 40
parameter is given, then it returns and >>> list1
removes the last element of the list [10, 20, 30, 50, 60]

>>> list1 = [10,20,30,40,50,60]
>>> list1.pop()
60

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   194 21-May-19   12:28:25 PM



Lists 195

>>> list1
[10, 20, 30, 40, 50]

reverse() Reverses the order of elements in the >>> list1 = [34,66,12,89,28,99]
given list >>> list1.reverse()

>>> list1
[ 99, 28, 89, 12, 66, 34]

>>> list1 = [ 'Tiger' ,'Zebra' , 
'Lion' , 'Cat' ,'Elephant' ,'Dog']
>>> list1.reverse()
>>> list1
['Dog', 'Elephant', 'Cat', 
'Lion', 'Zebra', 'Tiger']

sort() Sorts the elements of the given list >>>list1 = ['Tiger','Zebra','Lion', 
in-place 'Cat', 'Elephant' ,'Dog']

>>> list1.sort()
>>> list1
['Cat', 'Dog', 'Elephant', 'Lion', 
'Tiger', 'Zebra']

>>> list1 = [34,66,12,89,28,99]
>>> list1.sort(reverse = True)
>>> list1
[99,89,66,34,28,12]

sorted() It takes a list as parameter and creates a >>> list1 = [23,45,11,67,85,56]
new list consisting of the same elements >>> list2 = sorted(list1)
arranged in sorted order >>> list1

[23, 45, 11, 67, 85, 56]
>>> list2
[11, 23, 45, 56, 67, 85]

min() Returns minimum or smallest element >>> list1 = [34,12,63,39,92,44]
of the list >>> min(list1)

12
max() Returns maximum or largest element of >>> max(list1)

the list 92
sum() Returns sum of the elements of the list >>> sum(list1)

284

9.5 Nested Lists

When a list appears as an element of another list, it is 
called a nested list.
Example 9.2	

>>> list1 = [1,2,'a','c',[6,7,8],4,9]
#fifth element of list is also a list 
>>> list1[4]        
[6, 7, 8]

To access the element of the nested list of list1, we have 
to specify two indices list1[i][j]. The first index i 
will take us to the desired nested list and second index 
j will take us to the desired element in that nested list.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   195 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



196 Computer Science – Class xi

>>> list1[4][1] 
7
#index i gives the fifth element of list1 
#which is a list 
#index j gives the second element in the 
#nested list 

9.6 Copying Lists

Given a list, the simplest way to make a copy of the list 
is to assign it to another list.

>>> list1 = [1,2,3]           
>>> list2 = list1
>>> list1
[1, 2, 3]
>>> list2
[1, 2, 3]    

The statement list2 = list1 does not create a 
new list. Rather, it just makes list1  and list2 refer 
to the same list object. Here list2 actually becomes an 
alias of list1. Therefore, any changes made to either of 
them will be reflected in the other list.

>>> list1.append(10)
>>> list1
[1, 2, 3, 10]
>>> list2
[1, 2, 3, 10]

We can also create a copy or clone of the list as a 
distinct object by three methods. The first method uses 
slicing, the second method uses built-in function list() 
and the third method uses copy() function of python 
library copy.
Method 1
We can slice our original list and store it into a new 
variable as follows:

newList = oldList[:]

Example 9.3	
>>> list1 = [1,2,3,4,5]
>>> list2 = list1[:]
>>> list2
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

Method 2
We can use the built-in function list() as follows:

newList = list(oldList)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   196 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



Lists 197

Example 9.4	
>>> list1 = [10,20,30,40]
>>> list2 = list(list1)
>>> list2
[10, 20, 30, 40]

Method 3
We can use the copy () function as follows: 

import copy 		 #import the library copy
#use copy()function of library copy 
newList = copy.copy(oldList) 		

Example 9.5	
>>> import copy
>>> list1 = [1,2,3,4,5]
>>> list2 = copy.copy(list1)
>>> list2
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

9.7 List as Argument to a Function

Whenever a list is passed as an argument to a function, 
we have to consider two scenarios: 

(A)	Elements of the original list may be changed, 
i.e. changes made to the list in the function are 
reflected back in the calling function.

For example in the following program list list1 
of numbers is passed as an argument to function 
increment(). This function increases every element of 
the list by 5. 
Program 9-1	 Program to increment the elements of a 

list. The list is passed as an argument to 
a function.

#Program 9-1
#Function to increment the elements of the list passed as argument
def increment(list2):
     for i in range(0,len(list2)): 
		    #5 is added to individual elements in the list
          list2[i] += 5	
     print('Reference of list Inside Function',id(list2))
#end of function
list1 = [10,20,30,40,50]   #Create a list
print("Reference of list in Main",id(list1))
print("The list before the function call")
print(list1)
increment(list1)           #list1 is passed as parameter to function
print("The list after the function call")
print(list1)  

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   197 21-May-19   12:29:45 PM



198 Computer Science – Class xi

Output:
Reference of list in Main 70615968
The list before the function call
[10, 20, 30, 40, 50]
Reference of list Inside Function 70615968 #The id remains same
The list after the function call
[15, 25, 35, 45, 55]

Observe that, when we pass a list as an argument, we 
actually pass a reference to the list. Hence any change 
made to list2 inside the function is reflected in the 
actual list list1.

(B)	If the list is assigned a new value inside the 
function then a new list object is created and 
it becomes the local copy of the function. Any 
changes made inside the local copy of the function 
are not reflected back to the calling function.

Program 9-2	 Program to increment the elements of the 
list passed as parameter.

#Program 9-2
#Function to increment the elements of the list passed as argument
def increment(list2):
     print("\nID of list inside function before assignment:", 
id(list2))
     list2 = [15,25,35,45,55] #List2 assigned a new list
     print("ID of list changes inside function after assignment:", 
id(list2))
     print("The list inside the function after assignment is:")
     print(list2)
#end of function

list1 = [10,20,30,40,50]        #Create a list
print("ID of list before function call:",id(list1))
print("The list before function call:")
print(list1)
increment(list1)  #list1 passed as parameter to function
print('\nID of list after function call:',id(list1))
print("The list after the function call:")
print(list1)

Output:
ID of list before function call: 65565640
The list before function call:
[10, 20, 30, 40, 50]

ID of list inside function before assignment:65565640 
ID of list changes inside function  after assignment:65565600
The list inside the function after assignment is:

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   198 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



Lists 199

[15, 25, 35, 45, 55]

ID of list after function call: 65565640
The list after the function call:
[10, 20, 30, 40, 50]

9.8 List Manipulation    
In this chapter, we have learnt to create a list and the 
different ways to manipulate lists. In the following 
programs, we will apply the various list manipulation 
methods.
Program 9-3	 Write a menu driven program to perform 

various list operations, such as:
•	 Append an element
•	 Insert an element
•	 Append a list to the given list
•	 Modify an existing element
•	 Delete an existing element from its position
•	 Delete an existing element with a given value
•	 Sort the list in ascending order
•	 Sort the list in descending order 
•	 Display the list.
#Program 9-3
#Menu driven program to do various list operations
myList = [22,4,16,38,13] #myList already has 5 elements
choice = 0
while True:
    print("The list 'myList' has the following elements", myList)
    print("\nL I S T   O P E R A T I O N S")
    print(" 1. Append an element")
    print(" 2. Insert an element at the desired position")
    print(" 3. Append a list to the given list")
    print(" 4. Modify an existing element")
    print(" 5. Delete an existing element by its position")
    print(" 6. Delete an existing element by its value")
    print(" 7. Sort the list in ascending order")
    print(" 8. Sort the list in descending order")
    print(" 9. Display the list")
    print(" 10. Exit")
    choice = int(input("ENTER YOUR CHOICE (1-10): "))

    #append element
    if choice == 1: 
        element = int(input("Enter the element to be appended: "))
        myList.append(element)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   199 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



200 Computer Science – Class xi

        print("The element has been appended\n")

    #insert an element at desired position
    elif choice == 2: 
        element = int(input("Enter the element to be inserted: "))
        pos = int(input("Enter the position:"))
        myList.insert(pos,element)
        print("The element has been inserted\n")

    #append a list to the given list
	   elif choice == 3:
   	 newList = eval(input( "Enter the elements separated by commas"))
		  myList.extend(list(newList))
		  print("The list has been appended\n")

    #modify an existing element
    elif choice == 4: 
        i = int(input("Enter the position of the element to be 
modified: "))
        if i < len(myList):
            newElement = int(input("Enter the new element: "))
            oldElement = myList[i]
            myList[i] = newElement
            print("The element",oldElement,"has been modified\n")
        else:
            print("Position of the element is more than the length 
of list")

    #delete an existing element by position
    elif choice == 5: 
        i = int(input("Enter the position of the element to be 
deleted: "))
        if i < len(myList):
            element = myList.pop(i)
            print("The element",element,"has been deleted\n")
        else:
            print("\nPosition of the element is more than the length 
of list")

    #delete an existing element by value
    elif choice == 6: 
        element = int(input("\nEnter the element to be deleted: "))
        if element in myList:
            myList.remove(element)
            print("\nThe element",element,"has been deleted\n")
        else:
            print("\nElement",element,"is not present in the list")

    #list in sorted order

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   200 15-Jun-21   3:13:11 PM



Lists 201

    elif choice == 7: 
        myList.sort()
        print("\nThe list has been sorted")

    #list in reverse sorted order
    elif choice == 8: 
        myList.sort(reverse = True)
        print("\nThe list has been sorted in reverse order")

    #display the list
    elif choice == 9: 
        print("\nThe list is:", myList)

    #exit from the menu
    elif choice == 10: 
        break
    else:
        print("Choice is not valid")
        print("\n\nPress any key to continue..............")
        ch = input()

Output:
The list 'myList' has the following elements [22, 4, 16, 38, 13]

L I S T   O P E R A T I O N S
	 1.	Append an element
	 2.	Insert an element at the desired position
	 3.	Append a list to the given list
	 4.	Modify an existing element
	 5.	Delete an existing element by its position
	 6.	Delete an existing element by its value
	 7.	Sort the list in ascending order
	 8.	Sort the list in descending order
	 9.	Display the list
	 10.	Exit

ENTER YOUR CHOICE (1-10): 8

The list has been sorted in reverse order
The list 'myList' has the following elements [38, 22, 16, 13, 4]

L I S T   O P E R A T I O N S
	 1.	Append an element
	 2.	Insert an element at the desired position
	 3.	Append a list to the given list
	 4.	Modify an existing element
	 5.	Delete an existing element by its position
	 6.	Delete an existing element by its value
	 7.	Sort the list in ascending order
	 8.	Sort the list in descending order
	 9.	Display the list
	 10.	Exit

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   201 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



202 Computer Science – Class xi

ENTER YOUR CHOICE (1-10): 5
Enter the position of the element to be deleted: 2
The element 16 has been deleted

The list 'myList' has the following elements [38, 22, 13, 4]

L I S T   O P E R A T I O N S
	 1.	Append an element
	  2.	Insert an element at the desired position
	  3.	Append a list to the given list
	  4.	Modify an existing element
	  5.	Delete an existing element by its position
	  6.	Delete an existing element by its value
	  7.	Sort the list in ascending order
	  8.	Sort the list in descending order
	 9.	Display the list
	 10.	Exit

Program 9-4	 A program to calculate average marks of 
n students using a function where n is 
entered by the user.

#Program 9-4
#Function to calculate average marks of n students
def computeAverage(list1,n):    
     #initialize total 
	    total = 0                     
     for marks in list1:
          #add marks to total 
		     total = total + marks    
     average = total / n
     return average

#create an empty list 
list1 = []                         
print("How many students marks you want to enter: ")
n = int(input())
for i in range(0,n):
     print("Enter marks of student",(i+1),":")
     marks = int(input())
     #append marks in the list
 	   list1.append(marks)           
average = computeAverage(list1,n)
print("Average marks of",n,"students is:",average)

Output:
How many students marks you want to enter:
5
Enter marks of student 1:
45

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   202 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



Lists 203

Enter marks of student 2:
89
Enter marks of student 3:
79
Enter marks of student 4:
76
Enter marks of student 5:
55
Average marks of 5 students is: 68.8

Program 9-5	 Write a user-defined function to check if a 
number is present in the list or not. If the 
number is present, return the position of 
the number. Print an appropriate message 
if the number is not present in the list.

#Program 9-5
#Function to check if a number is present in the list or not
def linearSearch(num,list1):
     for i in range(0,len(list1)):
          if list1[i] == num:       #num is present
               return i             #return the position
     return None                    #num is not present in the list
#end of function

list1 = []                          #Create an empty list
print("How many numbers do you want to enter in the list: ")
maximum = int(input())
print("Enter a list of numbers: ")
for i in range(0,maximum):
     n = int(input())
     list1.append(n)                #append numbers to the list
num = int(input("Enter the number to be searched: "))
result = linearSearch(num,list1)
if result is None:
     print("Number",num,"is not present in the list")
else:
     print("Number",num,"is present at",result + 1, "position")  

Output:
How many numbers do you want to enter in the list:
5
Enter a list of numbers:
23
567
12
89
324
Enter the number to be searched:12
Number 12 is present at 3 position

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   203 08-Apr-19   12:40:13 PM



204 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes Summary
•	 Lists are mutable sequences in Python, i.e., we 

can change the elements of the list.
•	 Elements of a list are put in square brackets 

separated by comma.
•	 A list within a list is called a nested list. List 

indexing is same as that of strings and starts at 
0. Two way indexing allows traversing the list in 
the forward as well as in the backward direction.

•	 Operator + concatenates one list to the end of 
other list.

•	 Operator * repeats a list by specified number 
of times.

•	 Membership operator in tells if an element 
is present in the list or not and not in does 
the opposite.

•	 Slicing is used to extract a part of the list.
•	 There are many list manipulation functions 

including: len(), list(), append(), extend(), insert(), 
count(), find(), remove(), pop(), reverse(), sort(), 
sorted(), min(), max(), sum().

Exercise

1.	 What will be the output of the following statements?

i. list1 = [12,32,65,26,80,10]
list1.sort()
print(list1)

ii. list1 = [12,32,65,26,80,10]
sorted(list1)
print(list1)

iii. list1 = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
list1[::-2]
list1[:3] + list1[3:]

iv. list1 = [1,2,3,4,5]
list1[len(list1)-1]

2.	 Consider the following list myList. What will be 
the elements of myList after the following two 
operations:
  myList = [10,20,30,40]

i.	myList.append([50,60])
ii.	myList.extend([80,90])

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   204 08-Apr-19   12:40:14 PM



Lists 205

3.	 What will be the output of the following code Notes
segment: 
   myList = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
   for i in range(0,len(myList)):
        if i%2 == 0:
             print(myList[i])

4.	 What will be the output of the following code 
segment:
a.  myList = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
  	 del myList[3:]
  	 print(myList)
b.  myList = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
  	 del myList[:5]
  	 print(myList)
c.  myList = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
  	 del myList[::2]
  	 print(myList)

5.	 Differentiate between append() and extend() 
functions of list.

6.	 Consider a list:
   list1 = [6,7,8,9]
What is the difference between the following 
operations on list1:

a. list1 * 2
b. list1 *= 2
c. list1 =  list1 * 2

7.	 The record of a student (Name, Roll No., 
Marks in five subjects and percentage of 
marks) is stored in the following list:
stRecord = ['Raman','A-36',[56,98,99,72,69], 		
			   78.8]
Write Python statements to retrieve the following 
information from the list stRecord.

a)	 Percentage of the student
b)	 Marks in the fifth subject
c)	 Maximum marks of the student
d)	 Roll no. of the student
e)	 Change the name of the student from 		
	 ‘Raman’ to ‘Raghav’

Programming Problems

1.	 Write a program to find the number of times an 
element occurs in the list.

2.	 Write a program to read a list of n integers (positive 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   205 08-Apr-19   12:40:14 PM



206 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes as well as negative). Create two new lists, one 
having all positive numbers and the other having 
all negative numbers from the given list. Print all 
three lists.

3.	 Write a function that returns the largest element of 
the list passed as parameter.

4.	 Write a function to return the second largest number 
from a list of numbers.

5.	 Write a program to read a list of n integers and find 
their median. 
Note: The median value of a list of values is the 
middle one when they are arranged in order. If there 
are two middle values then take their average. 
Hint: You can use an built-in function to sort the list

6.	 Write a program to read a list of elements. Modify 
this list so that it does not contain any duplicate 
elements, i.e., all elements occurring multiple times 
in the list should appear only once.

7.	 Write a program to read a list of elements. Input 
an element from the user that has to be inserted in 
the list. Also input the position at which it is to be 
inserted. Write a user defined function to insert the 
element at the desired position in the list.

8.	 Write a program to read elements of a list. 
a)	 The program should ask for the position of 

the element to be deleted from the list. Write 
a function to delete the element at the desired 
position in the list.

b)	 The program should ask for the value of the 
element to be deleted from the list. Write a 
function to delete the element of this value 
from the list.

9.	 Read a list of n elements. Pass this list to a function 
which reverses this list in-place without creating a 
new list.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 9.indd   206 08-Apr-19   12:40:14 PM



##10##
Chapter 10

Tuples and Dictionaries

10.1 Introduction to Tuples “Computers are to computing 
as instruments are to music. 

A tuple is an ordered sequence of elements of different Software is the score whose 
data types, such as integer, float, string, list or even a interpretations amplifies our 
tuple. Elements of a tuple are enclosed in parenthesis reach and lifts our spirits. 
(round brackets) and are separated by commas. Like list Leonardo da Vinci called music 
and string, elements of a tuple can be accessed using the shaping of the invisible, and 
index values, starting from 0. his phrase is even more apt as a 
Example 10.1	 description of software.”

#tuple1 is the tuple of integers
>>> tuple1 = (1,2,3,4,5) – A Kay
>>> tuple1
(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)

In this chapter
#tuple2 is the tuple of mixed data types
>>> tuple2 =('Economics',87,'Accountancy',89.6) »» Introduction to 
>>> tuple2 Tuples	
('Economics', 87, 'Accountancy', 89.6)

»» Tuple Operations
#tuple3 is the tuple with list as an element »» Tuple Methods and 
>>> tuple3 = (10,20,30,[40,50]) Built-in Functions
>>> tuple3 »» Tuple Assignment
(10, 20, 30, [40, 50]) »» Nested Tuples

»» Tuple Handling
#tuple4 is the tuple with tuple as an element
>>> tuple4 = (1,2,3,4,5,(10,20)) »» Introduction to 
>>> tuple4 Dictionaries
(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, (10, 20)) »» Dictionaries are 

Mutable
If there is only a single element in a tuple then the »» Dictionary 

element should be followed by a comma. If we assign the Operations
value without comma it is treated as integer. It should »» Traversing a 
be noted that a sequence without parenthesis is treated Dictionary
as tuple by default. »» Dictionary Methods 

and Built-in 
#incorrect way of assigning single element to Functions
#tuple

	 #tuple5 is assigned a single element »» Manipulating 
Dictionaries

>>> tuple5 = (20)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   207 08-Apr-19   12:28:09 PM



208 Computer Science – Class xi

>>> tuple5
20
>>>type(tuple5)  #tuple5 is not of type tuple

We generally use list 
to store elements of <class 'int'>    #it is treated as integer 
the same data types 

whereas we use tuples #Correct Way of assigning single element to 
to store elements of #tuple
different data types. #tuple5 is assigned a single element

>>> tuple5 = (20,) #element followed by comma
>>> tuple5
(20,)
>>>type(tuple5)    #tuple5 is of type tuple
<class 'tuple'>

#a sequence without parentheses is treated as 
#tuple by default
>>> seq = 1,2,3     #comma separated elements
>>> type(seq)       #treated as tuple
<class 'tuple'>
>>> print(seq)      #seq is a tuple
(1, 2, 3)

10.1.1 Accessing Elements in a Tuple
Elements of a tuple can be accessed in the same way as 
a list or string using indexing and slicing.

>>> tuple1 = (2,4,6,8,10,12)       
#initializes a tuple tuple1
#returns the first element of tuple1
>>> tuple1[0]                      
2
#returns fourth element of tuple1
>>> tuple1[3]                      
8
#returns error as index is out of range
>>> tuple1[15]                     
IndexError: tuple index out of range
#an expression resulting in an integer index
>>> tuple1[1+4]              
12
#returns first element from right
>>> tuple1[-1]                     
12

10.1.2 Tuple is Immutable
Tuple is an immutable data type. It means that the 
elements of a tuple cannot be changed after it has been 
created. An attempt to do this would lead to an error. 

>>> tuple1 = (1,2,3,4,5)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   208 08-Apr-19   12:28:09 PM



Tuples and Dictionaries 209

>>> tuple1[4] = 10
TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support 
item assignment

However an element of a tuple may be of mutable type, √	 List is mutable but 
tuple is immutable. 

e.g., a list. So iterating through 
#4th element of the tuple2 is a list a tuple is faster as 
>>> tuple2 = (1,2,3,[8,9])    compared to a list. 
#modify the list element of the tuple tuple2 √	 If we have data that 
>>> tuple2[3][1] = 10           does not change 
#modification is reflected in tuple2 then storing this 
>>> tuple2                       data in a tuple will 
(1, 2, 3, [8, 10])           make sure that 

it is not changed 
accidentally.

10.2 Tuple Operations

10.2.1 Concatenation
Python allows us to join tuples using concatenation 
operator depicted by symbol +. We can also create a new 
tuple which contains the result of this concatenation 
operation.

>>> tuple1 = (1,3,5,7,9)
>>> tuple2 = (2,4,6,8,10)
>>> tuple1 + tuple2                
#concatenates two tuples
(1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10)
>>> tuple3 = ('Red','Green','Blue')
>>> tuple4 = ('Cyan', 'Magenta', 'Yellow' 
,'Black')
#tuple5 stores elements of tuple3 and tuple4
>>> tuple5 = tuple3 + tuple4
>>> tuple5
('Red','Green','Blue','Cyan','Magenta', 
'Yellow','Black')

Concatenation operator can also be used for 
extending an existing tuple. When we extend a tuple 
using concatenation a new tuple is created.

>>> tuple6 = (1,2,3,4,5)

#single element is appended to tuple6
>>> tuple6 = tuple6 + (6,)     	
>>> tuple6
(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)

#more than one elements are appended
>>> tuple6 = tuple6 + (7,8,9)  	  
>>> tuple6
(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   209 08-Apr-19   12:28:09 PM



210 Computer Science – Class xi

10.2.2 Repetition
Repetition operation is depicted by the symbol *. It is 
used to repeat elements of a tuple. We can repeat the 
tuple elements. The repetition operator requires the first 
operand to be a tuple and the second operand to be an 
integer only.

>>> tuple1 = ('Hello','World')
>>> tuple1 * 3
('Hello', 'World', 'Hello', 'World', 'Hello', 
'World')
#tuple with single element
>>> tuple2 = ("Hello",)    
>>> tuple2 * 4
('Hello', 'Hello', 'Hello', 'Hello')

10.2.3 Membership
The in operator checks if the element is present in the 
tuple and returns True, else it returns False. 

>>> tuple1 = ('Red','Green','Blue')
>>> 'Green' in tuple1
True

The not in operator returns True if the element is 
not present in the tuple, else it returns False.

>>> tuple1 = ('Red','Green','Blue')
>>> 'Green' not in tuple1
False

10.2.4 Slicing
Like string and list, slicing can be applied to tuples also.

#tuple1 is a tuple
>>> tuple1 = (10,20,30,40,50,60,70,80)

#elements from index 2 to index 6  
>>> tuple1[2:7]                         
(30, 40, 50, 60, 70)

#all elements of tuple are printed
>>> tuple1[0:len(tuple1)]               
(10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80)

#slice starts from zero index
>>> tuple1[:5]            
(10, 20, 30, 40, 50)

#slice is till end of the tuple
>>> tuple1[2:]    
(30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   210 08-Apr-19   12:28:09 PM



Tuples and Dictionaries 211

#step size 2
>>> tuple1[0:len(tuple1):2]      
(10, 30, 50, 70)
#negative indexing
>>> tuple1[-6:-4]                     
(30, 40)

#tuple is traversed in reverse order
>>> tuple1[::-1]                      
(80, 70, 60, 50, 40, 30, 20, 10)

10.3 Tuple Methods and Built-in Functions

Python provides many functions to work on tuples. Table 
10.1 list some of the commonly used tuple methods and 
built-in functions.

Table 10.1	 Built-in functions and methods for tuples
Method Description Example

len() Returns the length or the number of >>> tuple1 = (10,20,30,40,50)
elements of the tuple passed as the >>> len(tuple1)
argument 5

tuple() Creates an empty tuple if no argument >>> tuple1 = tuple()
is passed >>> tuple1

( )
Creates a tuple if a sequence is >>> tuple1 = tuple('aeiou')#string
passed as argument >>> tuple1

('a', 'e', 'i', 'o', 'u')

>>> tuple2 = tuple([1,2,3]) #list
>>> tuple2
(1, 2, 3)

>>> tuple3 = tuple(range(5))
>>> tuple3
(0, 1, 2, 3, 4)

count() Returns the number of times the >>> tuple1 = (10,20,30,10,40,10,50)
given element appears in the tuple >>> tuple1.count(10)

3
>>> tuple1.count(90)
0

index() Returns the index of the first >>> tuple1 = (10,20,30,40,50)
occurrence of the element in the >>> tuple1.index(30)
given tuple 2

>>> tuple1.index(90)
ValueError: tuple.index(x): x not 
in tuple

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   211 08-Apr-19   12:28:09 PM



212 Computer Science – Class xi

sorted() Takes elements in the tuple and >>> tuple1 = ("Rama","Heena","Raj", 
returns a new sorted list. It should "Mohsin","Aditya")
be noted that, sorted() does not make >>> sorted(tuple1)
any change to the original tuple ['Aditya', 'Heena', 'Mohsin', 'Raj', 

'Rama']

min() Returns minimum or smallest >>> tuple1 = (19,12,56,18,9,87,34)
element of the tuple >>> min(tuple1)

9
max() Returns maximum or largest element >>> max(tuple1)

of the tuple 87
sum() Returns sum of the elements of the >>> sum(tuple1)

tuple 235

10.4 Tuple Assignment

Assignment of tuple is a useful feature in Python. 
It allows a tuple of variables on the left side of the 
assignment operator to be assigned respective values 
from a tuple on the right side. The number of variables 
on the left should be same as the number of elements 
in the tuple. 

Example 10.2	
#The first element 10 is assigned to num1 and	
#the second element 20 is assigned to num2.
>>> (num1,num2) = (10,20)	    
>>> print(num1)
10
>>> print(num2)
20
>>> record = ( "Pooja",40,"CS")
>>> (name,rollNo,subject) = record
>>> name
'Pooja'
>>> rollNo
40 
>>> subject
'CS'
>>> (a,b,c,d) = (5,6,8)
ValueError: not enough values to unpack 
(expected 4, got 3)

If there is an expression on the right side then first 
that expression is evaluated and finally the result is 
assigned to the tuple. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   212 08-Apr-19   12:28:09 PM



Tuples and Dictionaries 213

Example 10.3	
#15 is assigned to num3 and 
#25 is assigned to num4
>>> (num3,num4) = (10+5,20+5)	
>>> print(num3)
15
>>> print(num4)
25

10.5 Nested Tuples \t is an escape 
character used for 

A tuple inside another tuple is called a nested tuple. adding horizontal 
In the program 10-1, roll number, name and marks tab space. Another 
(in percentage) of students are saved in a tuple. To commonly used 

escape character is 
store details of many such students we can create a \n, used for inserting 
nested tuple. a new line.
Program 10-1	 This is a program to create a nested 

tuple to store roll number, name and 
marks of students

#Program 10-1
#To store records of students in tuple and print them
st=((101,"Aman",98),(102,"Geet",95),(103,"Sahil",87),(104,"Pawan",79))
print("S_No"," Roll_No","   Name"," Marks")
for i in range(0,len(st)):
	 print((i+1),'\t',st[i][0],'\t',st[i][1],'\t',st[i][2])

Output: 
S_No  Roll_No  Name      Marks
1 	   101 	 Aman 		 98
2 	   102 	 Geet 		 95
3 	   103 	 Sahil 	 87
4 	   104 	 Pawan 	 79

10.6 Tuple Handling

Program 10-2	 Write a program to swap two numbers 
without using a temporary variable.

#Program 10-2
#Program to swap two numbers 
num1 = int(input('Enter the first number: '))
num2 = int(input('Enter the second number: '))
print("\nNumbers before swapping:")
print("First Number:",num1)
print("Second Number:",num2)
(num1,num2) = (num2,num1)
print("\nNumbers after swapping:")

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   213 08-Apr-19   12:28:09 PM



214 Computer Science – Class xi

print("First Number:",num1)
print("Second Number:",num2)

Output:
Enter the first number: 5
Enter the second number: 10

Numbers before swapping:
First Number: 5
Second Number: 10

Numbers after swapping:
First Number: 10
Second Number: 5

Program 10-3	 Write a program to compute the area 
and circumference of a circle using a 
function. 

#Program 10-3
#Function to compute area and circumference of the circle.
def circle(r):
     area = 3.14*r*r
     circumference = 2*3.14*r
	    #returns a tuple having two elements area and circumference
     return (area,circumference) 	
#end of function

radius = int(input('Enter radius of circle: '))
area,circumference = circle(radius)
print('Area of circle is:',area)
print('Circumference of circle is:',circumference)

Output:
Enter radius of circle: 5
Area of circle is: 78.5
Circumference of circle is: 31.400000000000002

Program 10-4	 Write a program to input n  numbers 
from the user. Store these numbers in a 
tuple. Print the maximum and minimum 
number from this tuple. 

#Program 10-4
#Program to input n numbers from the user. Store these numbers 
#in a tuple. Print the maximum and minimum number from this tuple.

numbers = tuple()               #create an empty tuple 'numbers'
n = int(input("How many numbers you want to enter?: "))
for i in range(0,n):    
     num = int(input())
     #it will assign numbers entered by user to tuple 'numbers'

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   214 08-Apr-19   12:28:09 PM



Tuples and Dictionaries 215

numbers = numbers +(num,) 	
print('\nThe numbers in the tuple are:')
print(numbers)
print("\nThe maximum number is:")
print(max(numbers))
print("The minimum number is:")
print(min(numbers))

Output:
How many numbers do you want to enter?: 5
9
8
10
12
15

The numbers in the tuple are:
(9, 8, 10, 12, 15)

The maximum number is:
15
The minimum number is:
8

10.7 Introduction to Dictionaries    
The data type dictionary fall under mapping. It is a 
mapping between a set of keys and a set of values. 
The key-value pair is called an item. A key is separated 
from its value by a colon(:) and consecutive items are 
separated by commas. Items in dictionaries are ordered, 
so we will get back the data in the same order in which 
we had entered  the data initially in the dictionary.
10.7.1 Creating a Dictionary
To create a dictionary, the items entered are separated by 
commas and enclosed in curly braces. Each item is a key 
value pair, separated through colon (:). The keys in the 
dictionary must be unique and should be of any immutable 
data type, i.e., number, string or tuple. The values can be 
repeated and can be of any data type.  
Example 10.4	

#dict1 is an empty Dictionary created
#curly braces are used for dictionary
>>> dict1 = {}           
>>> dict1
{}
#dict2 is an empty dictionary created using 
#built-in function

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   215 29-01-2025   2.26.30 PM



216 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes >>> dict2 = dict()
>>> dict2
{}
#dict3 is the dictionary that maps names 
#of the students to respective marks in 
#percentage
>>> dict3 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}
>>> dict3
{'Mohan': 95, 'Ram': 89, 'Suhel': 92, 
'Sangeeta': 85}

10.7.2 Accessing Items in a Dictionary
We have already seen that the items of a sequence 
(string, list and tuple) are accessed using a technique 
called indexing. The items of a dictionary are accessed 
via the keys rather than via their relative positions 
or indices. Each key serves as the index and maps to 
a value.

The following example shows how a dictionary 
returns the value corresponding to the given key:

>>> dict3 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}
>>> dict3['Ram']          
89
>>> dict3['Sangeeta']
85
#the key does not exist
>>> dict3['Shyam']        
KeyError: 'Shyam'

In the above examples the key 'Ram' always maps to 
the value 89 and key 'Sangeeta' always maps to the 
value 85. So the order of items does not matter. If the 
key is not present in the dictionary we get KeyError.

10.8 Dictionaries are Mutable

Dictionaries are mutable which implies that the 
contents of the dictionary can be changed after it has 
been created. 
10.8.1 Adding a new item
We can add a new item to the dictionary as shown in 
the following example:

>>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   216 08-Apr-19   12:28:10 PM



Tuples and Dictionaries 217

>>> dict1['Meena'] = 78 Notes
>>> dict1
{'Mohan': 95, 'Ram': 89, 'Suhel': 92, 
'Sangeeta': 85, 'Meena': 78}

10.8.2 Modifying an Existing Item
The existing dictionary can be modified by just 
overwriting the key-value pair. Example to modify a 
given item in the dictionary:

>>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}
#Marks of Suhel changed to 93.5
>>> dict1['Suhel'] = 93.5    
>>> dict1
{'Mohan': 95, 'Ram': 89, 'Suhel': 93.5, 
'Sangeeta': 85}

10.9 Dictionary Operations

10.9.1 Membership
The membership operator in checks if the key is present 
in the dictionary and returns True, else it returns False. 

>>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}
>>> 'Suhel' in dict1
True

The not in operator returns True if the key is not present in 
the dictionary, else it returns False.

>>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}
>>> 'Suhel' not in dict1
False

10.10 Traversing a Dictionary

We can access each item of the dictionary or traverse a 
dictionary using for loop. 

>>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}

Method 1
>>> for key in dict1:
         print(key,':',dict1[key])
Mohan: 95
Ram: 89
Suhel: 92
Sangeeta: 85

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   217 08-Apr-19   12:28:10 PM



218 Computer Science – Class xi

Method 2
>>> for key,value in dict1.items():
         print(key,':',value)
Mohan: 95
Ram: 89
Suhel: 92
Sangeeta: 85

10.11 Dictionary methods and Built-in functions

Python provides many functions to work on dictionaries. Table 10.2 lists some of 
the commonly used dictionary methods.

Table 10.2	Built-in functions and methods for dictionary
Method Description Example

len() Returns the length or number of >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,  
key: value pairs of the dictionary 'Suhel':92,  'Sangeeta':85}
passed as the argument >>> len(dict1)

4

dict() Creates a dictionary from a pair1 = [('Mohan',95),('Ram',89), 
sequence of key-value pairs ('Suhel',92),('Sangeeta',85)]

>>> pair1
[('Mohan', 95), ('Ram', 89), ('Suhel', 
92), ('Sangeeta', 85)]
>>> dict1 = dict(pair1)
>>> dict1
{'Mohan': 95, 'Ram': 89, 'Suhel': 92, 
'Sangeeta': 85}

keys() Returns a list of keys in >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95, 'Ram':89, 
the dictionary 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}

>>> dict1.keys()
dict_keys(['Mohan', 'Ram', 'Suhel', 
'Sangeeta'])

values() Returns a list of values in >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95, 'Ram':89, 
the dictionary 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}

>>> dict1.values()
dict_values([95, 89, 92, 85])

items() Returns a list of tuples(key – >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95, 'Ram':89, 
value) pair 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}

>>> dict1.items()
dict_items([( 'Mohan',  95), ('Ram', 
89), ('Suhel', 92), ('Sangeeta', 85)])

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   218 08-Apr-19   12:28:10 PM



Tuples and Dictionaries 219

get() Returns the value corresponding >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95, 'Ram':89, 
to the key passed as the 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}
argument >>> dict1.get('Sangeeta')

85
If the key is not present in the >>> dict1.get('Sohan')
dictionary it will return None

>>>
update() appends the key-value pair of >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95, 'Ram':89, 

the dictionary passed as the 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}
argument to the key-value pair >>> dict2 = {'Sohan':79,'Geeta':89}
of the given dictionary >>> dict1.update(dict2)

>>> dict1
{'Mohan': 95, 'Ram': 89, 'Suhel': 92, 
'Sangeeta': 85, 'Sohan': 79, 'Geeta': 
89}
>>> dict2
{'Sohan': 79, 'Geeta': 89}

del() Deletes the item with the given >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89, 
key 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}
To delete the dictionary from the >>> del dict1['Ram']
memory we write: >>> dict1
del Dict_name {'Mohan':95,'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta': 85}

>>> del dict1 ['Mohan']
>>> dict1
{'Suhel': 92, 'Sangeeta': 85}
>>> del dict1
>>> dict1
NameError: name 'dict1' is not defined

clear() Deletes or clear all the items of >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89, 
the dictionary 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}

>>> dict1.clear()
>>> dict1
{ }

10.12 Manipulating Dictionaries

In this chapter, we have learnt how to create a 
dictionary and apply various methods to manipulate it. 
The following programs show the application of those 
manipulation methods on dictionaries.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   219 21-May-19   12:35:47 PM



220 Computer Science – Class xi

Program 10-5	 Create a dictionary ‘ODD’ of odd numbers between 1 and 
10, where the key is the decimal number and the value is the 
corresponding number in words. Perform the following operations 
on this dictionary:

(a)	Display the keys
(b)	Display the values
(c)	Display the items
(d)	Find the length of the dictionary
(e)	Check if 7 is present or not
(f)	 Check if 2 is present or not
(g)	Retrieve the value corresponding to the key 9
(h)	Delete the item from the dictionary corresponding to the key 9
>>> ODD = {1:'One',3:'Three',5:'Five',7:'Seven',9:'Nine'}
>>> ODD
{1: 'One', 3: 'Three', 5: 'Five', 7: 'Seven', 9: 'Nine'}

(a)	Display the keys
>>> ODD.keys()
dict_keys([1, 3, 5, 7, 9])

(b)	Display the values
>>> ODD.values()
dict_values(['One', 'Three', 'Five', 'Seven', 'Nine'])

(c)	Display the items
>>> ODD.items()
dict_items([(1, 'One'), (3, 'Three'), (5, 'Five'), (7, 'Seven'), 
(9, 'Nine')])

(d)	Find the length of the dictionary
>>> len(ODD)
5

(e)	Check if 7 is present or not
>>> 7 in ODD
True

(f)	 Check if 2 is present or not
>>> 2 in ODD
False

(g)	Retrieve the value corresponding to the key 9
>>> ODD.get(9)
'Nine'

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   220 08-Apr-19   12:28:10 PM



Tuples and Dictionaries 221

(h)	Delete the item from the dictionary corresponding to the key 9
>>> del ODD[9]
>>> ODD
{1: 'One', 3: 'Three', 5: 'Five', 7: 'Seven'}

Program 10-6	 Write a program to enter names of 
employees and their salaries as input 
and store them in a dictionary.

#Program 10-6
#Program to create a dictionary which stores names of the employee
#and their salary
num = int(input("Enter the number of employees whose data to be 
stored: "))
count = 1
employee = dict()                  #create an empty dictionary
while count <= num:
     name = input("Enter the name of the Employee: ")
     salary = int(input("Enter the salary: "))
     employee[name] = salary
     count += 1
print("\n\nEMPLOYEE_NAME\tSALARY")
for k in employee:
     print(k,'\t\t',employee[k])

Output:
Enter the number of employees to be stored: 5
Enter the name of the Employee: 'Tarun'
Enter the salary: 12000
Enter the name of the Employee: 'Amina'
Enter the salary: 34000
Enter the name of the Employee: 'Joseph'
Enter the salary: 24000
Enter the name of the Employee: 'Rahul'
Enter the salary: 30000
Enter the name of the Employee: 'Zoya'
Enter the salary: 25000
EMPLOYEE_NAME    SALARY
'Tarun'          12000
'Amina'          34000
'Joseph'         24000
'Rahul'          30000
'Zoya'           25000

Program 10-7	 Write a program to count the number 
of times a character appears in a given 
string.

#Program 10-7
#Count the number of times a character appears in a given string

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   221 08-Apr-19   12:28:10 PM



222 Computer Science – Class xi

st = input("Enter a string: ")
dic = {}               #creates an empty dictionary
for ch in st:
     if ch in dic:     #if next character is already in the dictionary 
          dic[ch] += 1
     else:
          dic[ch] = 1  #if ch appears for the first time

for key in dic:
     print(key,':',dic[key]) 

Output:
Enter a string: HelloWorld
H : 1
e : 1
l : 3
o : 2
W : 1
r : 1
d : 1

Program 10-8	 Write a function to convert a number 
entered by the user into its corresponding 
number in words. For example, if the 
input is 876 then the output should be 
‘Eight Seven Six’.

# Program 10-8
# Write a function to convert number into corresponding number in 
# words
def convert(num):
     #numberNames is a dictionary of digits and corresponding number 	
	    #names
     numberNames = {0:'Zero',1:'One',2:'Two',3:'Three',4:'Four',\
                   5:'Five',6:'Six',7:'Seven',8:'Eight',9:'Nine'}
    
     result = ''
     for ch in num:
          key = int(ch)               #converts character to integer
          value = numberNames[key]
          result = result + ' ' + value
     return result

num = input("Enter any number: ")     #number is stored as string
result = convert(num)           
print("The number is:",num)
print("The numberName is:",result)

Output:
Enter any number: 6512
The number is: 6512
The numberName is: Six Five One Two

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   222 08-Apr-19   12:28:10 PM



Tuples and Dictionaries 223

Summary Notes

•	 Tuples are immutable sequences, i.e., we cannot 
change the elements of a tuple once it is created.

•	 Elements of a tuple are put in round brackets 
separated by commas.

•	 If a sequence has comma separated elements 
without parentheses, it is also treated as a tuple.

•	 Tuples are ordered sequences as each element 
has a fixed position.

•	 Indexing is used to access the elements of the 
tuple; two way indexing holds in dictionaries as 
in strings and lists.

•	 Operator ‘+’ adds one sequence (string, list, tuple) 
to the end of other.

•	 Operator ‘*’ repeats a sequence (string, list, tuple) 
by specified number of times

•	 Membership operator ‘in’ tells if an element is 
present in the sequence or not and ‘not in’ does 
the opposite.

•	 Tuple manipulation functions are: len(), tuple(), 
count(), index(), sorted(), min(), max(),sum().

•	 Dictionary is a mapping (non-scalar) data type. It 
is an unordered collection of key-value pair; key-
value pair are put inside curly braces.

•	 Each key is separated from its value by a colon.
•	 Keys are unique and act as the index.
•	 Keys are of immutable type but values can 

be mutable.

Exercise

1.	 Consider the following tuples, tuple1 and tuple2:
tuple1 = (23,1,45,67,45,9,55,45)
tuple2 = (100,200)

Find the output of the following statements: 
i. print(tuple1.index(45))
ii. print(tuple1.count(45))
iii. print(tuple1 + tuple2)
iv. print(len(tuple2))
v. print(max(tuple1))
vi print(min(tuple1))

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   223 08-Apr-19   12:28:10 PM



224 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes vii. print(sum(tuple2))
   viii. print(sorted(tuple1)) 

print(tuple1)

2.	 Consider the following dictionary stateCapital:
stateCapital = {"AndhraPradesh":"Hyderabad", 
"Bihar":"Patna","Maharashtra":"Mumbai",  
"Rajasthan":"Jaipur"}

Find the output of the following statements:
i. print(stateCapital.get("Bihar"))
ii. print(stateCapital.keys())
iii. print(stateCapital.values())
iv. print(stateCapital.items())
v. print(len(stateCapital))
vi print("Maharashtra" in stateCapital)

vii. print(stateCapital.get("Assam"))
viii. del stateCapital["Rajasthan"]

print(stateCapital)
3.	 “Lists and Tuples are ordered”. Explain.
4.	 With the help of an example show how can you 

return more than one value from a function.
5.	 What advantages do tuples have over lists?
6.	 When to use tuple or dictionary in Python. Give some 

examples of programming situations mentioning 
their usefulness.

7.	 Prove with the help of an example that the variable 
is rebuilt in case of immutable data types.

8.	 TypeError occurs while statement 2 is running. 
Give reason. How can it be corrected?
     >>> tuple1 = (5)       #statement 1
     >>> len(tuple1)        #statement 2

Programming Problems

1.	 Write a program to read email IDs of n number of 
students and store them in a tuple. Create two new 
tuples, one to store only the usernames from the 
email IDs and second to store domain names from 
the email IDs. Print all three tuples at the end of the 
program. [Hint: You may use the function split()]

2.	 Write a program to input names of n students and 
store them in a tuple. Also, input a name from the 
user and find if this student is present in the tuple or not.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   224 15-Jun-21   11:19:20 AM



Tuples and Dictionaries 225

	We can accomplish these by: Notes
(a) writing a user defined function 
(b) using the built-in function

3.	 Write a Python program to find the highest 2 values 
in a dictionary. 

4.	 Write a Python program to create a dictionary from 
a string.
Note: Track the count of the letters from the string. 
Sample string     : 'w3resource' 
Expected output : {'3': 1, 's': 1, 'r': 2, 'u': 1, 'w': 1, 'c': 1, 		
	 'e': 2, 'o': 1}

5.	 Write a program to input your friends’ names 
and their Phone Numbers and store them in the 
dictionary as the key-value pair. Perform the 
following operations on the dictionary:
a)	Display the name and phone number of all your 

friends
b)	Add a new key-value pair in this dictionary and 

display the modified dictionary
c)	 Delete a particular friend from the dictionary
d)	Modify the phone number of an existing friend
e)	 Check if a friend is present in the dictionary or 

not
f)	 Display the dictionary in sorted order of names

Case Study-based Question
For the SMIS System given in Chapter 5, let us do 
the following:
Write a program  to take in the roll number, name and 
percentage of marks for n students of Class X. Write 
user defined functions to

•	 accept details of  the n students (n is the number 
of students)

•	 search details of a particular student on the 
basis of roll number and display result 

•	 display the result of all the students
•	 find the topper amongst them
•	 find the subject toppers amongst them

(Hint: use Dictionary, where the key can be roll number 
and the value is an immutable data type containing 
name and percentage)

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   225 21-May-19   12:39:48 PM



226 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes Let’s peer review the case studies of others based on 
the parameters given under “DOCUMENTATION TIPS” 
at the end of Chapter 5 and provide a feedback to them.

Case Study-based Questions 
1.	 A bank is a financial institution which is involved in 

borrowing and lending of money. With advancement 
in technology, online banking, also known as 
internet banking allows customers of a bank to 
conduct a range of financial transactions through 
the bank’s website anytime, anywhere. As part of 
initial investigation you are suggested to
•	 collect a bank’s application form. After careful 

analysis of the form,  identify the information 
required for opening a savings account. Also 
enquire about the rate of interest offered for a 
saving account. 

•	 The basic two operations performed on an 
account are Deposit and Withdrawal. Write a 
menu driven program that accepts either of the 
two choices of Deposit and Withdrawal, then 
accepts an amount, performs the transaction 
and accordingly displays the balance. 
Remember, every bank has a requirement of 
minimum balance which needs to be taken care 
of during withdrawal operations. Enquire about 
the minimum balance required in your bank.

•	 Collect the interest rates for opening a fixed 
deposit in various slabs in a savings bank 
account. Remember, rates may be different for 
senior citizens. 

		 Finally, write a menu driven program having the 
following options (use functions and appropriate 
data types):
•	 Open a savings bank account
•	 Deposit money
•	 Withdraw money
•	 Take details, such as amount and period for a 

Fixed Deposit and display its maturity amount 
for a particular customer.

2.	 Participating in a quiz can be fun as it provides a 
competitive element. Some educational institutes 
use it as a tool to measure knowledge level, abilities 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   226 08-Apr-19   12:28:10 PM



Tuples and Dictionaries 227

and/or skills of their pupils either on a general level Notes
or in a specific field of study. Identify and analyse 
popular quiz shows and write a Python program to 
create a quiz that should also contain the following 
functionalities besides the one identified by you as 
a result of your analysis.
•	 Create an administrative user ID and password 

to categorically add, modify, delete a question
•	 Register the student before allowing her or him 

to play a quiz
•	 Allow selection of category based on subject area
•	 Display questions as per the chosen category
•	 Keep the score as the participant plays
•	 Display the final score

3.	 Our heritage monuments are our assets. They are 
a reflection of our rich and glorious past and an 
inspiration for our future. UNESCO has identified 
some of Indian heritage sites as World heritage 
sites. Collect the following information about these 
sites:
•	 What is the name of the site?
•	 Where is it located?

▪	 District
▪	 State

•	 When was it built?
•	 Who built it?
•	 Why was it built?
•	 Website link (if any).

Write a Python program to
•	 create an administrative user ID and password 

to add, modify or delete an entered heritage site 
in the list of sites

•	 display the list of world heritage sites in India
•	 search and display information of a world 

heritage site entered by the user
•	 display the name(s) of world heritage site(s) on 

the basis of the state input by the user.
4.	 Every mode of transport utilises a reservation 

system to ensure its smooth and efficient 
functioning. If you analyse you would find many 
things in common. You are required to identify 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   227 08-Apr-19   12:28:10 PM



228 Computer Science – Class xi

any one mode of transportation and prepare a 
reservation system for it. For example, let us look 
at the Railway reservation system we talked about 
earlier. The complex task of designing a good railway 
reservation system is seen as designing the different 
components of the system and then making them 
work with each other efficiently. Possible sub-
systems are shown in Figure 1. Each of them may 
be modelled using functions. 
	 Write a python code to automate the reservation 
needs of the identified mode of transport.

Trains' information Reservation  information Information about  
— days, timings, — booking open or close, staff, security, 

stations, classes and available or waiting List, railway 
births cancellation and refund infrastructure

Billing service Other details about 
Food service railways

Figure 1: Railway reservation system

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 10.indd   228 08-Apr-19   12:28:10 PM



##11##
Chapter 11

Societal Impact

11.1 Introduction “I think computer viruses 

In recent years, the world around us has seen a lot should count as life. I think it 
of changes due to use of ‘Digital Technologies’. These says something about human 
changes have made a dramatic impact on our lives, nature that the only form of 
making things more convenient, faster, and easier to life we have created so far 
handle. In the past, a letter would take days to reach, is purely destructive. We’ve 
and every recipient would get his or her own copy created life in our own image.” 
and respond separately. Today, one can send and – Stephen Hawking
receive emails to more than one person at a time. The 
instantaneous nature of electronic communications has 
made us more efficient and productive.

From the banking industry to aviation, industrial 
production to e-commerce, especially with regard to the 
delivery of their goods and services, all are now dependent 
on the use of computers and digital technologies. 
Applications of digital technologies have redefined and 
evolved all spheres of human activities. Today more 
and more people are using digital technologies through 
smartphones, computers, etc., with the help of high 
speed Internet. 

Why did the digital technologies become so 
widespread? The introduction of personal computers 
(PCs) and Internet followed by smartphones has brought 
these technologies to the common man. 

While we reap the benefits of digital technologies, In this chapter
these technologies can also be misused. Let’s look at »» Introduction
the impact of these technologies on our society and the »» Digital Footprint
best practices that can ensure a productive and safe 

»» Digital Society and 
digital environment for us. Netizen

11.2 D »» Data Protection
igital Footprints

»» Cyber Crime
Have you ever searched online for any information? »» Indian IT Act
Have you ever purchased an online ticket, or responded 
to your friend’s email, or checked the score of a »» Impact on Health

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   229 08-Apr-19   12:31:10 PM



230 Computer Science – Class xi

game online? Whenever we surf the Internet using 
Think and Reflect smartphones, tablets, computers, etc., we leave a trail 

Can your digital of data reflecting the activities performed by us online, 
footprints be used to which is our digital footprint. 
judge your attitude Our digital footprint can be created and used with 
and work ethics? or without our knowledge. It includes websites we visit, 

emails we send, and any information we submit online, 
etc., along with the computer’s IP address, location, and 
other device specific details. Such data could be used 
for targeted advertisement or could also be misused or 
exploited. Thus, it is good to be aware of the data trail we 
might be leaving behind. This awareness should make 
us cautious about what we write, upload or download 
or even browse online.

There are two kinds of digital footprints we 
leave behind. Active digital footprints which 
includes data that we intentionally submit online. 
This would include emails we write, or responses 
or posts we make on different websites or mobile 
Apps, etc. The digital data trail we leave online 
unintentionally is called passive digital footprints. 
This includes the data generated when we visit a 
website, use a mobile App, browse Internet, etc., 
as shown in Figure 11.1. 

Everyone who is connected to the Internet may 
have a digital footprint. With more usage, the trail 
grows. On examining the browser settings, we 
can find out how it stores our browsing history, 
cookies, passwords, auto fills, and many other 
types of data. 

Besides browser, most of our digital footprints 
are stored in servers where the applications are 
hosted. We may not have access to remove or 
erase that data, neither do we have any control 
on how that data will be used. Therefore, once 
a data trail is generated, even if we later try to 
erase data about our online activities, the digital 

Figure 11.1:	Exemplar web 
applications that result in digital footprints still remain. There is no guarantee that 

footprints digital footprints will be fully eliminated from the 
Internet. Therefore, we need to be more cautious 

while being online! All our online activities leave a data 
trace on the Internet as well as on the computing device 
that we use. This can be used to trace the user, his/her 
location, device and other usage details.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   230 08-Apr-19   12:31:59 PM



Societal Impact 231

11.3 Digital Society and Netizen Activity 11.1
As our society is inclined towards using more and As a digital citizen, list 
more digital technologies, we end up managing most various services that 
of our tasks digitally. In this era of digital society, our you avail online.

daily activities like communication, social networking, 
banking, shopping, entertainment, education, 
transportation, etc., are increasingly being driven by 
online transactions. 

Digital society thus reflects the growing trend of 
using digital technologies in all spheres of human 
activities. But while online, all of us need to be aware 
of how to conduct ourselves, how best to relate with 
others and what ethics, morals and values to maintain. 
Anyone who uses digital technology along with Internet 
is a digital citizen or a netizen. Being a good netizen 
means practicing safe, ethical and legal use of digital 
technology. A responsible netizen must abide by 
net etiquettes, communication etiquettes and social 
media etiquettes.
11.3.1 Net Etiquettes
We follow certain etiquettes during our social 
interactions. Similarly, we need to exhibit 
proper manners and etiquettes while being 
online as shown in Figure 11.2. One should 
be ethical, respectful and responsible while 
surfing the Internet.
(A)	 Be Ethical 

•	 No copyright violation: we should not 
use copyrighted materials without the 
permission of the creator or owner. As 
an ethical digital citizen, we need to be 
careful while streaming audio or video 
or downloading images and files from 
the Internet. We will learn more about Figure 11.2:	Net Etiquettes
copyright in Section 11.4.

•	 Share the expertise: it is good to share information 
and knowledge on Internet so that others can 
access it. However, prior to sharing information, we 
need to be sure that we have sufficient knowledge 
on that topic. The information shared should be 
true and unambiguous. Also, in order to avoid 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   231 21-May-19   12:42:48 PM



232 Computer Science – Class xi

redundant information, we should verify that the 
information is not available already on Internet.

(B)	 Be Respectful 
•	 Respect privacy: as good digital citizens we 

Remember!! have the right to privacy and the freedom of 
While surfing the Internet, personal expression. At the same time, we have 

we should be cautious to understand that other digital citizens also 
about our personal and have the same rights and freedoms. Our personal 

confidential data. communication with a digital citizen may include 
√√ Think before sharing images, documents, files, etc., that are private 

credentials with others to both. We should respect this privacy and 
on an online platform. should not share those images, documents, files, 

√√ Keep personal 
information safe and etc., with any other digital citizen without each 
protected through others’ consent.
passwords. •	 Respect diversity: in a group or public forum, 

we should respect the diversity of the people 
in terms of knowledge, experience, culture and 
other aspects.

(C)	 Be Responsible
•	 Avoid cyber bullying: any insulting, degrading 

or intimidating online behaviour like repeated 
posting of rumours, giving threats online, 
posting the victim’s personal information, sexual 
harassment or comments aimed to publicly 
ridicule a victim is termed as cyber bullying. 
It implies repeatedly targeting someone with 
intentions to hurt or embarrass. Perhaps new or 
non-frequent users of the Internet feel that things 
done online have no effect in the real world. We 
need to realise that bullying online can have very 
serious implications on the other person (victim). 
Also, remember our actions can be traced back 
using our digital footprints. 

•	 Don’t feed the troll: an Internet troll is a person 
who deliberately sows discord on the Internet by 
starting quarrels or upsetting people, by posting 
inflammatory or off topic messages in an online 
community, just for amusement. Since trolls thrive 

Activity 11.2 on attention, the best way to discourage trolls is 
not to pay any attention to their comments.

Find out how to report 
about an abusive or 11.3.2 Communication Etiquettes
inappropriate post or 
about a sender in a Digital communication includes email, texting, instant 
social network? messaging, talking on the cell phone, audio or video 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   232 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM



Societal Impact 233

conferencing, posting on forums, social 
networking sites, etc. All these are Communication Etiquettes

great ways to connect with people in 
order to exchange ideas, share data 
and knowledge. Good communication Be Be 

Precise Polite
over email, chat room and other such 
forums require a digital citizen to abide 
by the communication etiquettes as Respect Respect 
shown in Figure 11.3. Time  Data Be 

Limits Credible   
(A)	 Be Precise

•	 Respect time: we should not waste 
precious time in responding to Figure 11.3:	Communication etiquettes
unnecessary emails or comments 
unless they have some relevance for us. Also, we 
should not always expect an instant response as 
the recipient may have other priorities. 

•	 Respect data limits: For concerns related to data 
and bandwidth, very large attachments may be 
avoided. Rather send compressed files or link of 
the files through cloud shared storage like Google 
Drive, Microsoft OneDrive, Yahoo Dropbox, etc.

(B)	 Be Polite Avoid Spam!!
On receiving junk email 

Whether the communication is synchronous (happening (called Spam), neither 
in real time like chat, audio/video calls) or asynchronous reply nor open any 
(like email, forum post or comments), we should be attachment in such 
polite and non-aggressive in our communication. We email. 

should avoid being abusive even if we don’t agree with 
others’ point of view. 
(C)	 Be Credible
We should be cautious while making a comment, No Permanent Deletion!!
replying or writing an email or forum post as such acts We can post or comment 
decide our credibility over a period of time. That is how anything on Internet, and 
we decide to follow some particular person’s forum posts delete it later. 

while ignoring posts of other members of the forum. On √√ But remember, 
it cannot be 

various discussion forums, we usually try to go through permanently deleted. 
the previous comments of a person and judge their It is recorded in our 
credibility before relying on that person’s comments. Digital Footprint.

√√ This is how many 
11.3.3 Social Media Etiquettes culprits who spread 
In the current digital era, we are familiar with different hate, bully others or 
kinds social media and we may have an account on engage in criminal 

Facebook, Google+, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, or activities are traced 
and apprehended.

the YouTube channel. Social media are websites or 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   233 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM



234 Computer Science – Class xi

Choose password wisely applications that enable their users 
to participate in social networking 

Know who you befriend by creating and sharing content 
with others in the community. These 

Beware of fake information platforms encourage users to share 
their thoughts and experiences through 

Think before you upload posts or pictures. In this way users 
can interact with other online users of 

Figure 11.4:	Social media etiquettes those social media apps or channels. 
This is why the impact and outreach of 
social media has grown exponentially. 

It has begun to shape the outcome of politics, business, 
culture, education and more. In social media too, there 
are certain etiquettes we need to follow as shown in 

Don’t Meet Up!! Figure 11.4.
√√ Never arrange to (A)	 Be Secure

meet an online friend •	 Choose password wisely: it is vital for social 
because it may not network users. News of breaching or leakage of user 
be safe. data from social network often attracts headlines. 

√√ No matter how Users should be wary of such possibilities and 
genuine someone is 
appearing online, must know how to safeguard themselves and 
they might be their accounts. The minimum one can do is to 
pretending and have strong and frequently changed password. 
hiding their real Never share personal credentials like username 
identity. and password with others. 

•	 Know who you befriend: social networks usually 
encourage connecting with users (making friends), 
sometime even those whom we don’t know or have 
not met. However, we need to be careful while 

Think and Reflect befriending unknown people as their intentions 
possibly could be malicious and unsafe. 

Is having the same 
password for all your •	 Beware of fake information: fake news, messages 
accounts on different and posts are common in social networks. As a 
websites safe? user, we should be aware of them. With experience, 

we should be able to figure out whether a news, 
message or post is genuine or fake. Thus, we 
should not blindly believe in everything that we 
come across on such platforms, we should apply 
our knowledge and experience to validate such 
news, message or post. 

(B)	 Be Reliable
Play Safe!! •	 Think before uploading: we can upload almost 

Think carefully before anything on social network. However, remember 
sharing personal photos. that once uploaded, it is always there in the 

remote server even if we delete the files. Hence we 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   234 07-May-19   9:45:46 AM



Societal Impact 235

need to be cautious while uploading or sending Activity 11.3
sensitive or confidential files which have a bearing 
on our privacy. Supose someone's email 

password is ‘tecnnology’ 
which is weak. Can 

11.4 Data Protection you suggest a stronger 
password?

In this digital age, data or information protection 
is mainly about the privacy of data stored digitally. 
Elements of data that can cause substantial harm, 
embarrassment, inconvenience and unfairness to an 
individual, if breached or compromised, is called sensitive 
data. Examples of sensitive data include biometric 
information, health information, financial information, 
or other personal documents, images or audios or 
videos. Privacy of sensitive data can be implemented by 
encryption, authentication, and other secure methods 
to ensure that such data is accessible only to the 
authorised user and is for a legitimate purpose.

All over the world, each country has its own data 
protection policies (laws). These policies are legal Think and Reflect
documents that provide guidelines to the user on Why should we always 
processing, storage and transmission of sensitive mention the source 
information. The motive behind implementation of from which we got an 
these policies is to ensure that sensitive information is idea or used resources 
appropriately protected from modification or disclosure. (text, image, audio, 

video, etc.) to prepare 
11.4.1 Intellectual Property Right (IPR) a project or a writeup? 

When someone owns a house or a motorcycle, we 
say that the person owns that property. Similarly, 
if someone comes out with a new idea, this original 
idea is that person’s intellectual property. Intellectual 
Property refers to the inventions, literary and artistic 
expressions, designs and symbols, names and logos. 
The ownership of such concepts lies with the creator, 
or the holder of the intellectual property. This enables 
the creator or copyright owner to earn recognition or 
financial benefit by using their creation or invention. 
Intellectual Property is legally protected through 
copyrights, patents, trademarks,etc. 
(A)	 Copyright 
Copyright grants legal rights to creators for their original 
works like writing, photograph, audio recordings, video, 
sculptures, architectural works, computer software, 
and other creative works like literary and artistic work. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   235 21-May-19   12:44:19 PM



236 Computer Science – Class xi

Copyrights are automatically granted to creators and 
authors. Copyright law gives the copyright holder a set 

Executing IPR: say for a of rights that they alone can avail legally. The rights 
software include right to copy (reproduce) a work, right to create 

√√ Code of the software derivative works based upon it, right to distribute copies 
will be protected by of the work to the public, and right to publicly display 
a copyright or perform the work. It prevents others from copying, 

√√ Functional using or selling the work. For example, writer Rudyard 
expression of the idea 
will be protected by a Kipling holds the copyright to his novel, ‘The Jungle 
patent Book’, which tells the story of Mowgli, the jungle boy. 

√√ The name and logo It would be an infringement of the writer’s copyright if 
of the software someone used parts of the novel without permission. To 
will come under a use other’s copyrighted material, one needs to obtain a 
registered trademark license from them.

(B)	 Patent
A patent is usually granted for inventions. Unlike 
copyright, the inventor needs to apply (file) for patenting 
the invention. When a patent is granted, the owner gets 
an exclusive right to prevent others from using, selling, 
or distributing the protected invention. Patent gives full 
control to the patentee to decide whether or how the 
invention can be used by others. Thus it encourages 
inventors to share their scientific or technological 
findings with others. A patent protects an invention for 
20 years, after which it can be freely used. Recognition 
and/or financial benefit foster the right environment, and 
provide motivation for more creativity and innovation. 
(C)	 Trademark 
Trademark includes any visual symbol, word, name, 
design, slogan, label, etc., that distinguishes the 
brand or commercial enterprise, from other brands 
or commercial enterprises. For example, no company 
other than Nike can use the Nike brand to sell shoes or 
clothes. It also prevents others from using a confusingly 
similar mark, including words or phrases. For example, 
confusing brands like “Nikke” cannot be used. However, 
it may be possible to apply for the Nike trademark for 
unrelated goods like notebooks. 
11.4.2 Violation of IPR
Violation of intellectual property right may happen in 
one of the following ways:

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   236 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM



Societal Impact 237

(A)	 Plagiarism Activity 11.4
With the availability of Internet, we can instantly copy 
or share text, pictures and videos. Presenting someone Explore the follouing 

websites to know about 
else’s idea or work as one’s own idea or work is called open/public licensing:
plagiarism. If we copy some contents from Internet, (i)	creativecommons.org 
but do not mention the source or the original creator, for cc, and
then it is considered as an act of plagiarism. Further, if (ii)	gnu.org for GNU GPL
someone derives an idea or a product from an already 
existing idea or product, but instead presents it a new 
idea, then also it is plagiarism. It is a serious ethical 
offense and sometimes considered as an act of fraud. 
Even if we take contents that are open for public use, 
we should cite the author or source to avoid plagiarism. 
(B)	  Copyright Infringement
Copyright infringement is when we use other person’s 
work without obtaining their permission to use or we 
have not paid for it, if it is being sold. Suppose we 
download an image from the Internet and use it in our 
project. But if the owner of the copyright of the image 
does not permit its free usage, then using such an image 
even after giving reference of the image in our project Beware!!
is a violation of copyright. Just because it is on the √√ Plagiarism means 
Internet, does not mean that it is free for use. Hence, using other’s work 
check the copyright status of writer’s work before using and not giving 
it to avoid plagiarism. adequate citation 

for use. 
(C)	 Trademark Infringement √√ Copyright 
Trademark Infringement means unauthorised use of infringement means 
other’s trademark on products and services. An owner using another 
of a trademark may commence legal proceedings against person’s work, 

without permission 
someone who infringes its registered trademark. or without paying for 
11.4.3 Public Access and Open Source Software it, if it is being sold.

Copyright sometimes put restriction on the usage of 
the copyrighted works by anyone else. If others are 
allowed to use and built upon the existing work, it 
will encourage collaboration and would result in new 
innovations in the same direction. Licenses provide 
rules and guidelines for others to use the existing work. 
When authors share their copyrighted works with others 
under public license, it allows others to use and even 
modify the content. Open source licenses help others to 
contribute to existing work or project without seeking 
special individual permission to do so. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   237 21-May-19   12:45:19 PM



238 Computer Science – Class xi

The GNU General public license (GPL) and the 
Creative Commons (CC) are two popular categories of 
public licenses. CC is used for all kind of creative works 
like websites, music, film, literature, etc. CC enables 
the free distribution of an otherwise copyrighted work. 
It is used when an author wants to give people the right 
to share, use and build upon a work that they have 
created. GPL is primarily designed for providing public 
licence to a software. GNU GPL is another free software 
license, which provides end users the freedom to run, 
study, share and modify the software, besides getting 
regular updates. 

Remember Users or companies who distribute GPL license 
√√ CC licenses are works may charge a fee for copies or give them free of 

a set of copyright charge. This distinguishes the GPL license from freeware 
licenses that give 
the recipients, rights software licenses like Skype, Adobe Acrobat reader, 
to copy, modify and etc. that allow copying for personal use but prohibit 
redistribute the commercial distribution, or proprietary licenses where 
creative material, but copying is prohibited by copyright law.
giving the authors, 
the liberty to decide Many of the proprietary software that we use are sold 
the conditions commercially and their program code (source code) are 
of licensing. not shared or distributed. However, there are certain 

√√ GPL is the most software available freely for anyone and their source 
widely used free code is also open for anyone to access, modify, correct 
software license 
which grants the and improve. Free and open source software (FOSS) 
recipients, rights to has a large community of users and developers who are 
copy, modify and contributing continuously towards adding new features 
redistribute the 
software and that or improving the existing features. For example, Linux 
the same rights kernel-based operating systems like Ubuntu and Fedora 
are preserved in all come under FOSS. Some of the popular FOSS tools are 
derivative works. office packages, like Libre Office, browser like Mozilla 

Firefox, etc.
Software piracy is the unauthorised use or distribution 

of software. Those who purchase a license for a copy of 
the software do not have the rights to make additional 
copies without the permission of the copyright owner. It 
amounts to copyright infringement regardless of whether 
it is done for sale, for free distribution or for copier’s 
own use. One should avoid software piracy. Using a 
pirated software not only degrades the performance of a 
computer system, but also affects the software industry 
which in turn affects the economy of a country. 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   238 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM



Societal Impact 239

11.5 Cyber Crime 
Criminal activities or offences carried out in a digital 
environment can be considered as cyber crime. In such 
crimes, either the computer itself is the target or the 
computer is used as a tool to commit a crime. Cyber 
crimes are carried out against either an individual, or 
a group, or an organisation or even against a country, 
with the intent to directly or indirectly cause physical 
harm, financial loss or mental harassment. A cyber 
criminal attacks a computer or a network to reach other 
computers in order to disable or damage data or services. 
Apart from this, a cyber criminal may spread viruses and 
other malwares in order to steal private and confidential 
data for blackmailing and extortion. A computer virus is 
some lines of malicious code that can copy itself and can 
have detrimental effect on the computers, by destroying 
data or corrupting the system. Similarly, malware is 
a software designed to specifically gain unauthorised Remember!!
access to computer systems. The nature of criminal Cyber crime is defined 
activities are alarmingly increasing day-by-day, with as a crime in which 
frequent reports of hacking, ransomware attacks, computer is the medium 
denial-of-service, phishing, email fraud, banking fraud of crime (hacking, 

phishing, spamming), or 
and identity theft. the computer is used as 

a tool to commit crimes 
11.5.1 Hacking (extortion, data breaches, 
Hacking is the act of unauthorised access to a computer, theft).
computer network or any digital system. Hackers usually 
have technical expertise of the hardware and software. 
They look for bugs to exploit and break into the system. 

Hacking, when done with a positive intent, is called 
ethical hacking. Such ethical hackers are known as 
white hat hackers. They are specialists in exploring any 
vulnerability or loophole during testing of the software. 
Thus, they help in improving the security of a software. 
An ethical hacker may exploit a website in order to 
discover its security loopholes or vulnerabilities. He 
then reports his findings to the website owner. Thus, 
ethical hacking is actually preparing the owner against 
any cyber attack. Activity 11.5

A non-ethical hacker is the one who tries to gain How can you 
unauthorised access to computers or networks in order unsubscribe from a 
to steal sensitive data with the intent to damage or mail group or block an 
bring down systems. They are called black hat hackers email sender?

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   239 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM



240 Computer Science – Class xi

or crackers. Their primary focus is on security cracking 
and data stealing. They use their skill for illegal or 

Beware !! malicious purposes. Such hackers try to break through 
system securities for identity theft, monetary gain, to 

Accepting links from 
untrusted emails can be bring a competitor or rival site down, to leak sensitive 
hazardous, as they may information, etc. 

potentially contain a 
virus or link to malicious 11.5.2 Phishing and Fraud Emails

website. We should ensure Phishing is an unlawful activity where fake websites or 
to open any email link or 

attachment only when it is emails that look original or authentic are presented to 
from a trusted source and the user to fraudulently collect sensitive and personal 

doesn’t look doubtful. details, particularly usernames, passwords, banking 
and credit card details. The most common phishing 
method is through email spoofing where a fake or 
forged email address is used and the user presumes 
it to be from an authentic source. So you might get an 
email from an address that looks similar to your bank 
or educational institution, asking for your information, 
but if you look carefully you will see their URL address 
is fake. They will often use logo’s of the original, making 
them difficult to detect from the real! Phishing attempts 
through phone calls or text messages are also common 
these days.
(A)	 Identity Theft
Identity thieves increasingly use personal information 
stolen from computers or computer networks, to commit 
fraud by using the data gained unlawfully. A user’s 
identifiable personal data like demographic details, 
email ID, banking credentials, passport, PAN, Aadhaar 
number and various such personal data are stolen and 
misused by the hacker on behalf of the victim. This 
is one type of phishing attack where the intention is 
largely for monetary gain. There can be many ways in 
which the criminal takes advantage of an individual’s 
stolen identity. Given below are a few examples:

•	 Financial identity theft: when the stolen identity is 
used for financial gain.

•	 Criminal identity theft: criminals use a victim’s 
stolen identity to avoid detection of their 
true identity.

•	 Medical identity theft: criminals can seek medical 
drugs or treatment using a stolen identity.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   240 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM



Societal Impact 241

11.5.3 Ransomware Activity 11.6
This is another kind of cyber crime where the attacker Explore and find out 
gains access to the computer and blocks the user from how to file a complaint 
accessing, usually by encrypting the data. The attacker with the cyber cell in 
blackmails the victim to pay for getting access to the your area.

data, or sometimes threaten to publish personal and 
sensitive information or photographs unless a ransom 
is paid.

Ransomware can get downloaded when the users 
visit any malicious or unsecure websites or download 
software from doubtful repositories. Some ransomware 
are sent as email attachments in spam mails. It can 
also reach our system when we click on a malicious 
advertisement on the Internet.
11.5.4 Combatting and Preventing Cyber Crime
The challenges of cyber crime can be mitigated with 
the twin approach of being alert and taking legal help. 
Following points can be considered as safety measures 
to reduce the risk of cyber crime:

•	 Take regular backup of important data
•	 Use an antivirus software and keep it updated 

always
•	 Avoid installing pirated software. Always download 

software from known and secure (HTTPS) sites
•	 Always update the system software which include 

the Internet browser and other application software
•	 Do not visit or download anything from untrusted 

websites
•	 Usually the browser alerts users about doubtful 

websites whose security certificate could not be 
verified; avoid visiting such sites

•	 Use strong password for web login, and change 
it periodically. Do not use same password for 
all the websites. Use different combinations 
of alphanumeric characters including special 
characters. Ignore common words or names 
in password

•	 While using someone else’s computer, don’t allow 
browser to save password or auto fill data, and try 
to browse in your private browser window

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   241 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM



242 Computer Science – Class xi

•	 For an unknown site, do not agree to use cookies 
when asked for, through a Yes/No option. 

•	 Perform online transaction like shopping, ticketing, 
and other such services only through well-known 
and secure sites

•	 Always secure wireless network at home with strong 
password and regularly change it. 

11.6 Indian Information Technology Act (IT Act)
With the growth of Internet, many cases of cyber crimes, 

Digital signatures are frauds, cyber attacks and cyber bullying are reported. 
the digital equivalent of a 
paper certificate. Digital The nature of fraudulent activities and crimes keeps 
signatures work on a changing. To deal with such menaces, many countries 
unique digital ID issued 
by a Certified Authority have come up with legal measures for protection of 
(CA) to the user. Signing a sensitive personal data and to safeguard the rights of 
document digitally means 
attaching that user's Internet users. The Government of India’s Information 
identity which can be used Technology Act, 2000 (also known as IT Act), amended in 
to authenticate. 2008, provides guidelines to the user on the processing, 

A licensed CA who has 
been granted a license to storage and transmission of sensitive information. 
issue it under section 24 of In many Indian states, there are cyber cells in police 
the indian IT-Act 2000, can 
issue the digital signature. stations where one can report any cyber crime. The 

act provides legal framework for electronic governance 
by giving recognition to electronic records and digital 
signatures. The act outlines cyber crimes and penalties 
for them. 

Cyber Appellate Tribunal has been established 
to resolve disputes arising from cyber crime, such as 
tampering with computer source documents, hacking 
the computer system, using password of another person, 
publishing sensitive personal data of others without 
their consent, etc. The act is needed so that people can 
perform transactions over the Internet through credit 
cards without fear of misuse. Not only people, the act 
empowers government departments also to accept 

Think and Reflect filing, creation and storage of official documents in the 
digital format.

Do you follow 
precautions to stay 
healthy — physically, 11.7 Impact on Health
mentally as well as 
emotionally while As digital technologies have penetrated into different 
using digital fields, we are spending more time in front of screens, be 
technologies? it mobile, laptop, desktop, television, gaming console, 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   242 08-Apr-19   12:32:00 PM



Societal Impact 243

music or sound device. But interacting in an improper 
posture can be bad for us — both physically, and 
mentally. Besides, spending too much time on Device Safety: Ensures 
Internet can be addictive and can have a negative Good Health of a 
impact on our physical and psychological well being. Computer System

However, these health concerns can be addressed √√ Regularly clean it 
to some extent by taking care of the way we position to keep the dust 
such devices and the way we position our posture. off. Use a liquid 

solution specifically 
Ergonomics is a branch of science that deals with formulated for 
designing or arranging workplaces including the the cleaning of 
furniture, equipments and systems so that it becomes electronic screens.
safe and comfortable for the user. Ergonomics helps √√ Wipe monitor’s 
us in reducing the strain on our bodies — including screen often using 
the fatigue and injuries due to prolonged use. the regular microfibre 

soft cloth (the one 
When we continuously look at the screen for used for spectacles). 

watching, typing, chatting or playing games, our √√ Keep it away from 
eyes are continuously exposed to the glare coming direct heat, sunlight 
from the screens. Looking at small handheld and put it in a 
devices makes it worse. Eye strain is a symptom room with enough 

ventilation for air 
commonly complained by users of digital devices. circulation. 

√√ Do not eat food 
Viewing Distance 19”-24” or drink over the 

keyboard. Food 
Viewi crumbs that fall into 

ng Angl the gaps between 
e 300 the keys or spilled 

over liquid can cause 
issues to the devices.

Wrist Straight
Lumber 900

Support 
for Lower
Back

Seat Back Angle 900

900

Knee 
Angle

Adjustable
Seat 23”-28” Feet on floor
Height footrest for

shorter people

Figure 11.5:	Correct posture while sitting in front of a computer

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   243 15-Jun-21   11:19:58 AM



244 Computer Science – Class xi

Ergonomically maintaining the viewing distance and 
angle, along with the position can be of some help. 
Figure 11.5 shows the posture to be maintained in 

Maintain a Balance!! order to avoid fatigue caused due to prolonged use of 
Enjoy the exciting world of computer system and other digital devices. However, 
digital devices in tandem 

with other pursuits to get rid of dry, watering, or itchy eyes, it is better to 
of thrilling sports and periodically focus on distant objects, and take a break 

hobbies. Online friends for outdoor activities.
are good, but spending Bad posture, backaches, neck and shoulder pains 
time with friends in real 

life is very fulfilling. Often can be prevented by arranging the workspace as 
the wholesome nature of recommended by ergonomics. Overuse of keyboards 
real interactions cannot (be it physical keyboard or touchscreen-based virtual 

be compared to just online keyboard) not aligned ergonomically, can give rise to a 
social networking. painful condition of wrists and fingers, and may require 

medical help in the long run. 
Stress, physical fatigue and obesity are the other 

related impacts the body may face if one spends too 
much time using digital devices.

Summary
•	 Digital footprint is the trail of data we leave behind 

when we visit any website (or use any online 
application or portal) to fill-in data or perform 
any transaction.

•	 A user of digital technology needs to follow certain 
etiquettes like net-etiquettes, communication-
etiquettes and social media-etiquettes.

•	 Net-etiquette includes avoiding copyright 
violations, respecting privacy and diversity of 
users, and avoiding cyber bullies and cyber trolls, 
besides sharing of expertise.

•	 Communication-etiquette requires us to be precise 
and polite in our conversation so that we remain 
credible through our remarks and comments.

•	 While using social media, one needs to take care 
of security through password, be aware of fake 
information and be careful while befriending 
unknowns. Care must be taken while sharing 
anything on social media as it may create havoc 
if being mishandled, particularly our personal, 
sensitive information.

•	 Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) help in data 
protection through copyrights, patents and 
trademarks. There are both ethical and legal 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   244 08-Apr-19   12:32:01 PM



Societal Impact 245

aspects of violating IPR. A good digital citizen Notes
should avoid plagiarism, copyright infringement 
and trademark infringement.

•	 Certain software are made available for free public 
access. Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) 
allow users to not only access but also to modify 
(or improve) them.

•	 Cyber crimes include various criminal activities 
carried out to steal data or to break down 
important services. These include hacking, 
spreading viruses or malware, sending phishing 
or fraudulent emails, ransomware, etc. 

•	 Excessive usage of digital devices has a negative 
impact on our physical as well as psychological 
well-being. Ergonomic positioning of devices as 
well as our posture are important. 

Exercise
1.	 After practicals, Atharv left the computer laboratory 

but forgot to sign off from his email account. 
Later, his classmate Revaan started using the 
same computer. He is now logged in as Atharv. He 
sends inflammatory email messages to few of his 
classmates using Atharv’s email account. Revaan’s 
activity is an example of which of the following cyber 
crime? Justify your answer.
a)	 Hacking
b)	 Identity theft
c)	 Cyber bullying
d)	 Plagiarism

2.	 Rishika found a crumpled paper under her desk. 
She picked it up and opened it. It contained some 
text which was struck off thrice. But she could still 
figure out easily that the struck off text was the 
email ID and password of Garvit, her classmate. 
What is ethically correct for Rishika to do?
a)	 Inform Garvit so that he may change his 

password.
b)	 Give the password of Garvit’s email ID to all 

other classmates.
c)	 Use Garvit’s password to access his account.

3.	 Suhana is down with fever. So she decided not to 
go to school tomorrow. Next day, in the evening she 
called up her classmate, Shaurya and enquired 

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   245 08-Apr-19   12:32:01 PM



246 Computer Science – Class xi

Notes about the computer class. She also requested 
him to explain the concept. Shaurya said, “Mam 
taught us how to use tuples in python”. Further, 
he generously said, “Give me some time, I will email 
you the material which will help you to understand 
tuples in python”. Shaurya quickly downloaded 
a 2-minute clip from the Internet explaining the 
concept of tuples in python. Using video editor, 
he added the text “Prepared by Shaurya” in the 
downloaded video clip. Then, he emailed the 
modified video clip to Suhana. This act of Shaurya 
is an example of:
a)	 Fair use 
b)	 Hacking
c)	 Copyright infringement
d)	 Cyber crime

4.	 After a fight with your friend, you did the following 
activities. Which of these activities is not an example 
of cyber bullying?
a)	 You sent an email to your friend with a message 

saying that “I am sorry”.
b)	 You sent a threatening message to your friend 

saying “Do not try to call or talk to me”.
c)	 You created an embarrassing picture of your 

friend and uploaded on your account on a 
social networking site.

5.	 Sourabh has to prepare a project on “Digital India 
Initiatives”. He decides to get information from the 
Internet. He downloads three web pages (webpage 
1, webpage 2, webpage 3) containing information 
on Digital India Initiatives. Which of the following 
steps taken by Sourabh is an example of plagiarism 
or copyright infringement. Give justification in 
support of your answer. 
a)	 He read a paragraph on “ Digital India 

Initiatives” from webpage 1 and rephrased it in 
his own words. He finally pasted the rephrased 
paragraph in his project.

b)	 He downloaded three images of “ Digital India 
Initiatives” from webpage 2. He made a collage 
for his project using these images.

c)	 He downloaded “Digital India Initiative” icon 
from web page 3 and pasted it on the front 
page of his project report.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   246 08-Apr-19   12:32:01 PM



Societal Impact 247

6.	 Match the following:

Column A Column B
Plagiarism Fakers, by offering special rewards or money prize asked for 

personal information, such as bank account information

Hacking Copy and paste information from the Internet into your report 
and then organise it

Credit card fraud The trail that is created when a person uses the Internet.

Digital Foot Print Breaking into computers to read private emails and other files

7.	 You got the below shown SMS from your bank 
querying a recent transaction. Answer the following:
a)	 Will you SMS your pin number to the given 

contact number?
b)	 Will you call the bank helpline number to 

recheck the validity of the SMS received?
8.	 Preeti celebrated her birthday with her family. She 

was excited to share the moments with her friend 
Himanshu. She uploaded selected images of her 
birthday party on a social networking site so that 
Himanshu can see them. After few days, Preeti had a 
fight with Himanshu. Next morning, she deleted her 
birthday photographs from that social networking 
site, so that Himanshu cannot access them. Later 
in the evening, to her surprise, she saw that one 
of the images which she had already deleted from 
the social networking site was available with their 
common friend Gayatri. She hurriedly enquired 
Gayatri “Where did you get this picture from?”. 
Gayatri replied “Himanshu forwarded this image 
few minutes back”. 
Help Preeti to get answers for the following questions. 
Give justification for your answers so that Preeti 
can understand it clearly.
a)	 How could Himanshu access an image which I 

had already deleted? 
b)	 Can anybody else also access these deleted 

images?
c)	 Had these images not been deleted from my 

digital footprint?

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   247 08-Apr-19   12:32:01 PM



248 Computer Science – Class xi

9.	 The school offers wireless facility (wifi) to the 
Computer Science students of Class XI. For 
communication, the network security staff of the 
school have a registered URL schoolwifi.edu. On 
17 September 2017, the following email was mass 
distributed to all the Computer Science students of 
Class XI. The email claimed that the password of 
the students was about to expire. Instructions were 
given to go to URL to renew their password within 
24 hours.

A+B

a)	 Do you find any discrepancy in this email?
b)	 What will happen if the student will click on 

the given URL?
c)	 Is the email an example of cyber crime? If yes, 

then specify which type of cyber crime is it. 
Justify your answer.

10.	You are planning to go for a vacation. You surfed 
the Internet to get answers for the following queries:
a)	 Weather conditions
b)	 Availability of air tickets and fares
c)	 Places to visit
d)	 Best hotel deals

Which of your above mentioned actions might have 
created a digital footprint?

11.	How would you recognise if one of your friends is 
being cyber bullied? 
a)	 Cite the online activities which would help you 

detect that your friend is being cyber bullied? 
b)	 What provisions are in IT Act 2000, (amended 

in 2008) to combact such situations. 
12.	Write the differences between the following-

a)	 Copyrights and Patents

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   248 08-Apr-19   12:32:01 PM



Societal Impact 249

b)	 Plagiarism and Copyright infringement Notes
c)	 Non-ethical hacking and Ethical hacking
d)	 Active and Passive footprints
e)	 Free software and Free and open source 

software
13.	 If you plan to use a short text from an article on the 

web, what steps must you take in order to credit the 
sources used?

14.	When you search online for pictures, how will you 
find pictures that are available in the free public 
domain. How can those pictures be used in your 
project without copyright violations? 

15.	Describe why it is important to secure your wireless 
router at home. Search the Internet to find the rules 
to create a reasonably secure password. Create an 
imaginary password for your home router. Will you 
share your password for home router with following 
people. Justify your answer.
a)	 Parents
b)	 Friends
c)	 Neighbours
d)	 Home Tutors

16.	List down the steps you need to take in order to 
ensure
a)	 your computer is in good working condition 

for a longer time. 
b)	 smart and safe Internet surfing.

17.	What is data privacy? Websites that you visit collect 
 what type of information about you?

18.	 In the computer science class, Sunil and Jagdish 
were assigned the following task by their teacher.
a)	 Sunil was asked to find information about 

“India, a Nuclear power”. He was asked to use 
Google Chrome browser and prepare his report 
using Google Docs.

b)	 Jagdish was asked to find information about 
“Digital India”. He was asked to use Mozilla 
Firefox browser and prepare his report using 
Libre Office Writer.

	 What is the difference between technologies used 
by Sunil and Jagdish?

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   249 08-Apr-19   12:32:01 PM



250 Computer Science – Class xi

19.	Cite examples depicting that you were a victim of 
following cyber crime. Also, cite provisions in IT Act 
to deal with such a cyber crime.
a)	 Identity theft
b)	 Credit card account theft

20.	Neerja is a student of Class XI. She has opted for 
Computer Science. Neerja prepared the project 
assigned to her. She mailed it to her teacher. The 
snapshot of that email is shown below.

				   Find out which of the following email etiquettes 
are missing in it. Justify your answer. 
a)	 Subject of the mail
b)	 Formal greeting
c)	 Self-explanatory terms
d)	 Identity of the sender
e)	 Regards

21.	Sumit got good marks in all the subjects. His 
father gifted him a laptop. He would like to make 
Sumit aware of health hazards associated with 
inappropriate and excessive use of laptop. Help his 
father to list the points which he should discuss 
with Sumit.

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   250 08-Apr-19   12:32:01 PM



Notes

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   251 08-Apr-19   12:32:01 PM



Notes

Reprint 2025-26

Ch 11.indd   252 08-Apr-19   12:32:01 PM