The Lament 1

SHORT STORIES

INTRODUCTION

A short story is a brief work of prose fiction. It has a plot
which may be comic, tragic, romantic or satiric; the story
is presented to us from one of the many available points of
view, and it may be written in the mode of fantasy, realism
or naturalism.
In the ‘story of incident’ the focus of interest is on the course
and outcome of events, as in the Sherlock Holmes story.
The ‘story of character’ focuses on the state of mind and
motivation, or on the psychological and moral qualities of
the protagonist, as in Glory at Twilight. Chekov’s The Lament
focuses on form—nothing happens, or seems to happen,
except an encounter and conversations, but the story
becomes a revelation of deep sorrow.
The short story differs from the novel in magnitude. The
limitation of length imposes economy of management and
in literary effects. However, a short story can also attain a
fairly long and complex form, where it approaches the
expansiveness of the novel, which you may find in The
Third and Final Continent in this unit.

Reprint 2025-26



2 Woven Words

##1##
1 The Lament
Anton Chekhov

F Guess the meaning of these expressions from the context

gingerbread horse slough

snuffle as if he were on needles

It is twilight. A thick wet snow is slowly twirling around
the newly lighted street lamps and lying in soft thin layers
on roofs, on horses’ backs, on people’s shoulders and hats.
The cabdriver, Iona Potapov, is quite white and looks like a
phantom: he is bent double as far as a human body can
bend double; he is seated on his box; he never makes a
move. If a whole snowdrift fell on him, it seems as if he
would not find it necessary to shake it off. His little horse
is also quite white, and remains motionless; its immobility,
its angularity and its straight wooden-looking legs, even
close by, give it the appearance of a gingerbread horse
worth a kopek. It is, no doubt, plunged in deep thought. If
you were snatched from the plough, from your usual gray
surroundings, and were thrown into this slough full of
monstrous lights, unceasing noise and hurrying people,
you too would find it difficult not to think.

Iona and his little horse have not moved from their
place for a long while. They left their yard before dinner
and, up to now, not a fare. The evening mist is descending
over the town, the white lights of the lamps are replacing
brighter rays, and the hubbub of the street is getting louder.
‘Cabby for Viborg Way!’ suddenly hears Iona. ‘Cabby!’

Iona jumps and, through his snow-covered eyelashes,
sees an officer in a greatcoat, with his hood over his head.

‘Viborg way!’ the officer repeats. ‘Are you asleep, eh?
Viborg way!’

Reprint 2025-26



The Lament 3

With a nod of assent Iona picks up the reins, in
consequence of which layers of snow slip off the horse’s
back and neck. The officer seats himself in the sleigh, the
cabdriver smacks his lips to encourage his horse, stretches
out his neck like a swan, sits up and, more from habit
than necessity, brandishes his whip. The little horse also
stretches its neck, bends its wooden-looking legs, and
makes a move undecidedly.

‘What are you doing, werewolf!’ is the exclamation Iona
hears from the dark mass moving to and fro, as soon as
they have started.

‘Where the devil are you going? To the r-r-right!’
‘You do not know how to drive. Keep to the right!’ calls

the officer angrily.
A coachman from a private carriage swears at him; a

passerby, who has run across the road and rubbed his
shoulder against the horse’s nose, looks at him furiously
as he sweeps the snow from his sleeve. Iona shifts about
on his seat as if he were on needles, moves his elbows as if
he were trying to keep his equilibrium, and gasps about
like someone suffocating, who does not understand why
and wherefore he is there.

‘What scoundrels they all are!’ jokes the officer; ‘one
would think they had all entered into an agreement to jostle
you or fall under your horse.’

Iona looks around at the officer and moves his lips. He
evidently wants to say something but the only sound that
issues is a snuffle.

‘What?’ asks the officer.
Iona twists his mouth into a smile and, with an effort,

says hoarsely:
‘My son, Barin, died this week.’
‘Hm! What did he die of?’
Iona turns with his whole body towards his fare and

says: ‘And who knows! They say high fever. He was three
days in the hospital and then died… God’s will be done.’

“Turn round! The devil!’ sounds from the darkness.
‘Have you popped off, old doggie, eh? Use your eyes!’

‘Go on, go on,’ says the officer, ‘otherwise we shall not
get there by tomorrow. Hurry up a bit!’

Reprint 2025-26



4 Woven Words

The cabdriver again stretches his neck, sits up and,
with a bad grace, brandishes his whip. Several times again
he turns to look at his fare, but the latter has closed his
eyes and, apparently, is not disposed to listen. Having
deposited the officer in the Viborg, he stops by the tavern,
doubles himself up on his seat, and again remains
motionless, while the snow once more begins to cover him
and his horse. An hour, and another… Then, along the
footpath, with a squeak of galoshes, and quarrelling, come
three young men, two of them tall and lanky, the third one
short and humpbacked.

‘Cabby, to the Police Bridge!’ in a cracked voice calls
the humpback. ‘The three of us for two griveniks.’

Iona picks up his reins and smacks his lips. Two
griveniks is not a fair price, but he does not mind whether
it is a rouble or five kopeks—to him it is all the same now,
so long as they are fares. The young men, jostling each
other and using bad language, approach the sleigh and all
three at once try to get onto the seat; then begins a
discussion as to which two shall sit and who shall be the
one to stand. After wrangling, abusing each other and much
petulance, it is at last decided that the humpback shall
stand as he is the smallest.

‘Now then, hurry up!’ says the humpback in a twanging
voice, as he takes his place and breathes in Iona’s neck.
‘Old furry! Here, mate, what a cap you have! There is not a
worse one to be found in all Petersburg! …’

‘He-he—he-he’, giggles Iona. ‘Such a …’
‘Now you, ‘such a’, hurry up, are you going the whole

way at this pace? Are you...Do you want it in the neck?’
‘My head feels like bursting,’ says one of the lanky

ones. ‘Last night at the Donkmasoves, Vaska and I drank
the whole of four bottles of cognac.’

“I don’t understand what you lie for,’ says the other
lanky one angrily; ‘you lie like a brute.’

‘God strike me, it’s the truth!’
‘It’s as much the truth as that a louse coughs!’
‘He-he,’ grins Iona, ‘what gay young gentlemen!’
‘Pshaw, go to the devil!’ says the humpback indignantly.
‘Are you going to get on or not, you old pest? Is that the

Reprint 2025-26



The Lament 5

way to drive? Use the whip a bit! Go on, devil, go on, give it
to him well!’

Iona feels at his back the little man wriggling, and the
tremble in his voice. He listens to the insults hurled at
him, sees the people, and little by little the feeling of
loneliness leaves him. The humpback goes on swearing
until he gets mixed up in some elaborate six-foot oath, or
chokes with coughing. The lankies begin to talk about a
certain Nadejda Petrovna. Iona looks round at them several
times; he waits for a temporary silence, then, turning round
again, he murmurs:

‘My son… died this week.’
‘We must all die,’ sighs the humpback, wiping his lips

after an attack of coughing. ‘Now, hurry up, hurry up!
Gentlemen, I really cannot go any farther like this! When
will he get us there?’

‘Well, just you stimulate him a little in the neck!’
‘You old pest, do you hear, I’ll bone your neck for you! If

one treated the like of you with ceremony, one would have
to go on foot! Do you hear, old serpent Gorinytch! Or do you
not care a spit!”

Iona hears rather than feels the blow they deal him.
‘He-he’ he laughs. ‘They are gay young gentlemen, God

bless’em!’
‘Cabby, are you married?’ asks a lanky one.
‘I? He-he, gay young gentlemen! Now I have only a wife

and the moist ground…He, ho, ho, …that is to say, the
grave. My son has died, and I am alive…A wonderful thing,
death mistook the door…instead of coming to me, it went
to my son…’

Iona turns round to tell them how his son died  but, at
this moment, the humpback, giving a little sigh, announces,
‘Thank God, we have at last reached our destination,’ and
Iona watches them disappear through the dark entrance.
Once more he is alone, and again surrounded by silence…
His grief, which has abated for a short while, returns and
rends his heart with greater force. With an anxious and
hurried look, he searches among the crowds passing on
either side of the street to find whether there may be just
one person who will listen to him. But the crowds hurry by

Reprint 2025-26



6 Woven Words

without noticing him or his trouble. Yet it is such an
immense, illimitable, grief. Should his heart break and the
grief pour out, it would flow over the whole earth, so it
seems, and yet no one sees it. It has managed to conceal
itself in such an insignificant shell that no one can see it
even by day and with a light.

Iona sees a hall porter with some sacking and decides
to talk to him.

‘Friend, what sort of time is it?’ he asks.
‘Past nine. What are you standing here for? Move on.’
Iona moves on a few steps, doubles himself up, and

abandons himself to his grief. He sees it is useless to turn
to people for help. In less than five minutes he straightens
himself, holds up his head as if he felt some sharp pain,
and gives a tug at the reins; he can bear it no longer. ‘The
stables,’ he thinks, and the little horse, as if it understood,
starts off at a trot.

About an hour and a half later, Iona is seated by a
large dirty stove. Around the stove, on the floor, on the
benches, people are snoring; the air is thick and
suffocatingly hot. Iona looks at the sleepers, scratches
himself, and regrets having returned so early.

‘I have not even earned my fodder,’ he thinks. ‘That’s
what’s my trouble. A man who knows his job, who has had
enough to eat and his horse too, can always sleep
peacefully.’

A young cabdriver, in one of the corners, half gets up,
grunts sleepily, and stretches towards a bucket of water.

‘Do you want a drink?’ Iona asks him.
‘Don’t I want a drink!’
‘That’s so? Your good health. But listen, mate—you

know, my son is dead…Did you hear? This week, in the
hospital…It’s a long story.’

Iona looks to see what effect his words have, but sees
none—the young man has hidden his face and is fast asleep
again. The old man sighs and scratches his head. Just as
much as the young one wants to drink, the old man wants
to talk. It will soon be a week since his son died, and he
has not been able to speak about it properly to anyone.
One must tell it slowly and carefully; how his son fell ill,

Reprint 2025-26



The Lament 7

how he suffered, what he said before he died, how he died.
One must describe every detail of the funeral, and the
journey to the hospital to fetch the dead son’s clothes. His
daughter, Anissia, has remained in the village—one must
talk about her too. It is nothing he has to tell? Surely the
listener would gasp and sigh, and sympathise with him? It
is better, too, to talk to women; two words are enough to
make them sob.

‘I’ll go and look after my horse,’ thinks Iona; ‘there’s
always time to sleep. No fear of that!’

He puts on his coat and goes to the stable to his horse;
he thinks of the corn, the hay, the weather. When he is
alone, he dare not think of his son; he can speak about
him to anyone, but to think of him, and picture him to
himself, is unbearably painful.

‘Are you tucking in?’ Iona asks his horse, looking at its
bright eyes: ‘go on, tuck in, though we’ve not earned our
corn, we can eat hay. Yes I am too old to drive—my son
could have, not I. He was a first-rate cabdriver. If only he
had lived!’

Iona is silent for a moment, then continues:
‘That’s how it is, my old horse. There’s no more Kuzma

Ionitch. He has left us to live, and he went off pop. Now
let’s say you had a foal, you were the foal’s mother and,
suddenly, let’s say, that foal went and left you to live after
him. It would be sad, wouldn’t it?’

The little horse munches, listens and breathes over
its master’s hand…

Iona’s feelings are too much for him and he tells the
little horse the whole story.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Anton Chekhov (1810–1904) was born in a
middle-class family in Russia. He studied
medicine at Moscow University.  His first
short story appeared in 1880 and, in the
next seven years, he produced more than

Reprint 2025-26



8 Woven Words

six hundred stories. He also wrote plays— Seagull, Uncle
Vanya, The Three Sisters and The Cherry Orchards are among
the more famous ones. His work greatly influenced the
modern short story and drama.

The main theme of Chekov’s short stories is life’s pathos,
caused by the inability of human beings to respond to, or
even to communicate with, one another. The present story
illustrates this point beautifully.

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. Comment on the indifference that meets Iona’s attempts to
share his grief with his fellow human beings.

2. What impression of the character of Iona do you get from this
story?

3. How does the horse serve as a true friend and companion to
Iona?

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss the following in pairs

1. Empathy and understanding are going out of modern society.
The individual experiences intense alienation from the society
around him or her.

2. Behind the public face of the people in various occupations is a
whole saga of personal suffering and joy which they wish to
share with others.

APPRECIATION

1. The story begins with a description of the setting. How does this
serve as a fitting prelude to the events described in the story?

2. Comment on the graphic detail with which the various
passengers who took Iona’s cab are described.

3. This short story revolves around a single important event.
Discuss how the narrative is woven around this central fact.

4. The story begins and ends with Iona and his horse. Comment
on the significance of this to the plot of the story.

Reprint 2025-26



The Lament 9

LANGUAGE WORK

1. Look at the following set of words and mention what is common
to them both in form and meaning

snuffle snort sniffle snore

2. Look at the words given in the box below

snigger wriggle sneak squeak

squawk titter pant chuckle

giggle jeer chortle guffaw

sigh sidle boo shriek

scramble croak straggle plod

gasp

Now classify them according to their closeness in meaning to
the words given below

             A      B    C                   D              E

          snigger              wriggle          squeak           jeer           sigh

3. Explain the associations that the colour ‘white’  has in the story.

4. What does the phrase ‘as if he were on needles’ mean? Can you
think of another phrase with a similar meaning substituting
the word ‘needles’?

SUGGESTED READING

1. ‘What Men Live by’ by Leo Tolstoy

2. ‘The Overcoat’ by N. Gogol.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



10 Woven Words

2
##2##
A Pair of Mustachios

Mulk Raj Anand

F Guess the meaning of these expressions from the context

nouveau riche commercial bourgeoise

blue blood the bluff of a rascal

asked sourly goods and chattels

There are various kinds of mustachios worn in my country
to mark the boundaries between the various classes of
people. Outsiders may think it stupid to lay down, or rather
to raise, lines of demarcation of this kind, but we are
notorious in the whole world for sticking to our queer old
conventions, prides and prejudices, even as the Chinese or
the Americans or, for that matter, the English… And, at
any rate, some people may think it easier and more
convenient to wear permanent boundary-lines, like
mustachios, which only need a smear of grease to keep
them bright and shiny, rather than to wear frock coats,
striped trousers and top hats, which constantly need to be
laundered and dry-cleaned, and the maintenance of which
is already leading to the bankruptcy of the European ruling
classes. With them clothes make the man but, to us,
mustachios make the man. So we prefer the various styles
of mustachios to mark the differences between the classes.

And very unique and poetical symbols they are too.
For instance, there is the famous lion moustache, the
fearsome upstanding symbol of that great order of
resplendent rajas, maharajas, nawabs and English army
generals who are so well known for their devotion to the
King Emperor. Then there is the tiger moustache, the
uncanny, several-pointed moustache worn by the
unbending, unchanging survivals from the ranks of the

Reprint 2025-26



A Pair of Mustachios 11

feudal gentry who have nothing left but pride in their
greatness and a few mementoes of past glory, scrolls of
honour granted by the former emperors, a few gold trinkets,
heirlooms and bits of land. Next there is the goat
moustache—a rather unsure brand, worn by the nouveau
riche, the new commercial bourgeoisie and the shopkeeper
class who somehow don’t belong—an indifferent, thin little
line of a moustache, worn so that its tips can be turned up
or down as the occasion demands—a show of power to some
coolie or humility to a prosperous client. There is the Charlie
Chaplin moustache worn by the lower middle class, by
clerks and professional men, a kind of half-and-half affair,
deliberately designed as a compromise between the
traditional full moustache and the clean-shaven Curzon
cut of the sahibs like them to keep mustachios at all. There
is the sheep moustache of the coolies and the lower orders,
the mouse moustache of the peasants, and so on.

In fact, there are endless styles of mustachios, all
appropriate to the wearers and indicative of the various
orders, as rigorously adhered to as if they had all been
patented by the Government of India or had been sanctioned
by special appointment with His Majesty, the King, or Her
Majesty, the Queen. And any poaching on the style of one
class by members of another is resented, and the rising
ratio of murders in my country is interpreted by certain
authorities as being indicative of the increasing jealousy
with which each class is guarding its rights and privileges
in regard to the mark of the mustachio.

Of course, the analysis of the expert is rather too
abstract and not all the murders can be traced to this
cause but, certainly, it is true that the preferences of the
people in regard to their mustachios are causing a lot of
trouble in our parts.

For instance, there was a rumpus in my own village
the other day about a pair of mustachios.

It so happened that Seth Ramanand, the grocer and
moneylender, who had been doing well out of the recent
fall in the price of wheat by buying up whole crops cheap
from the hard-pressed peasants and then selling them at
higher prices, took it into his head to twist the goat

Reprint 2025-26



12 Woven Words

moustache, integral to his order and position in society, at
the tips, so that it looked nearly like a tiger moustache.

Nobody seemed to mind very much because most of
the mouse-moustached peasants in our village are beholden
to the local moneylender, either because they owe him
interest on a loan, or an instalment on a mortgage of
jewellery or land. Besides, the Seth had been careful enough
to twist his moustache so that it seemed nearly, though
not quite, like a tiger moustache.

But there lives in the vicinity of our village, in an old
dilapidated Moghul style house, a mussulman named Khan
Azam Khan, who claims descent from an ancient Afghan
family whose heads were noblemen and councillors in the
court of the great Moghuls. Khan Azam Khan, a tall, middle-
aged man, is a handsome and dignified person, and he
wears a tiger moustache and remains adorned with the
faded remnants of a gold-brocaded waistcoat, though he
hasn’t even a patch of land left.

Some people, notably the landlord of our village and
the moneylender, maliciously say that he is an impostor,
and that all his talk about his blue blood is merely the
bluff of a rascal. Others, like the priest of the temple,
concede that his ancestors were certainly attached to the
Court of the Great Moghuls, but as sweepers. The landlord,
the moneylender and the priest are manifestly jealous of
anyone’s long ancestry, however, because they have all risen
from nothing—and it is obvious from the stately ruins
around Khan Azam Khan what grace was once his and his
forefathers. Only Khan Azam Khan’s pride is greatly in
excess of his present possessions and he is inordinately
jealous of his old privileges and rather foolish and
headstrong in safeguarding every sacred brick of his
tottering house against vandalism.

Khan Azam Khan happened to go to the moneylender’s
shop to pawn his wife’s gold nose-ring one morning and he
noticed the upturning tendency of the hair on Ramanand’s
upper lip which made the moneylender’s goat moustache
look almost like his own tiger moustache.

‘Since when have the lentil-eating shopkeepers become
noblemen?’ he asked sourly.

Reprint 2025-26



A Pair of Mustachios 13

‘I don’t know what you mean, Khan’, Ramanand
answered.

‘You know  what I mean, seed of a donkey!’ said the
Khan. Look at the way you have turned the tips of your
moustache upwards. It almost looks like my tiger
moustache. Turn the tips down to the style proper to the
goat that you are! Fancy the airs of people nowadays!’

‘Oh, Khan, don’t get so excited,’ said the moneylender,
who was nothing if he was not amenable, having built up
his business on the maxim that the customer is always
right.

‘I tell you, turn the tip of your moustache down if you
value your life!’ raged Khan Azam Khan.

‘If that is all the trouble, here you are’, said Ramanand,
brushing one end of his moustache with his oily hand so
that it dropped like a dead fly. ‘Come, show me the trinkets.
How much do you want for them?’

Now that Khan Azam Khan’s pride was appeased, he
was like soft wax in the merchant’s sure hand. His need,
and the need of his family, for food, was great and he humbly
accepted the value which the moneylender put on his wife’s
nose-ring.

But as he was departing, after negotiating his business,
he noticed that though one end of the moneylender’s moustache
had come down at his behest, the other end was still up.

Reprint 2025-26



14 Woven Words

‘A strange trick you have played on me, you swine,’ the
Khan said.

‘I have paid you the best value for your trinket, Khan,
that any moneylender will pay in these parts,’ he said,
‘especially in these days when the sarkars of the whole
world are threatening to go off the gold standard.’

‘It has nothing to do with the trinket,’ said Azam Khan,
‘but one end of your moustache is still up like my tiger
moustache though you have brought down the other to
your proper goat’s style. Bring that other end down also so
that there is no aping by your moustache of mine.’

‘Now Khan,’ said the moneylender, ‘I humbled myself
because you are doing business with me. You can’t expect
me to become a mere worm just because you have pawned
a trinket with me. If you were pledging some more expensive
jewellery I might consider obliging you a little more. Anyhow,
my humble milk-skimmer doesn’t look a bit like your valiant
tiger moustache.’

‘Bring that tip down!’ Khan Azam Khan roared, for, the
more he had looked at the moneylender’s moustache the
more the still upturned tip seemed to him like an effort at
an imitation of his own.

‘Now, be sensible, Khan,’ the moneylender said, waving
his hand with an imperturbable calm.

‘I tell you, turn that tip down or I shall wring your
neck,’ said the Khan.

‘All right, the next time you come to do business with
me, I shall bring that tip down,’ answered the moneylender
cunningly.

‘That is fair,’ said Chaudhary Chottu Ram, the landlord
of the village, who was sitting under the tree opposite.

‘To be sure! To be sure!’ some peasants chimed in
sheepishly.

Khan Azam Khan managed to control his murderous
impulses and walked away. But he could not quell his
pride, the pride of generations of his ancestors who had
worn the tiger moustache as a mark of their high position.
To see the symbol of his honour imitated by a
moneylender—this was too much for him. He went home
and fetched a necklace which had come down to his family

Reprint 2025-26



A Pair of Mustachios 15

through seven generations and, placing it before the
moneylender, said:

‘Now will you bring that tip of your moustache down?’
‘By all means, Khan,’ said the moneylender. ‘But let

us see about this necklace. How much do you want for it?’
‘Any price will do, so long as you bring the tip of your

moustache down,’ answered Azam Khan.
After they had settled the business, the moneylender

said: ‘Now Khan, I shall carry out your will.’ And he
ceremoniously brushed the upturned tip of his moustache
down.

As Azam Khan was walking away, however, he noticed
that the other tip of the moneylender’s moustache had now
gone up and stood dubiously like the upturned end of his
own exalted tiger moustache. He turned on his feet and
shouted:

‘I shall kill you if you don’t brush that moustache into
the shape appropriate to your position as a lentil-eating
moneylender!’

‘Now, now, Khan, come to your senses. You know it is
only the illusion of a tiger’s moustache and nowhere like
your brave and wonderful adornment,’ said the greasy
moneylender.

‘I tell you I won’t have you insulting the insignia of my
order!’ shouted Azam Khan. ‘You bring that tip down!’

‘I wouldn’t do it, Khan, even if you pawned all the
jewellery you possess to me,’ said the moneylender.

‘I would rather lose all my remaining worldly
possessions, my pots and pans, my clothes, even my house,
than see the tip of your moustache turned up like that!’
spluttered Azam Khan.

‘Achcha, if you care so little for all your goods and
chattels you sell them to me and then I shall turn that tip
of my moustache down,’ said the moneylender. ‘And what
is more, I shall keep it flat. Now, is that a bargain?’

‘That seems fair enough,’ said the landlord from under
the tree where he was preparing for a siesta.

‘But what proof have I that you will keep your word?’
said Azam Khan. ‘You oily lentil-eaters never keep your
promises.’

Reprint 2025-26



16 Woven Words

‘We shall draw up a deed, here and now,’ said the
moneylender. ‘And we shall have it signed by the five elders
of the village who are seated under that tree. What more
do you want?’

‘Now, there is no catch in that,’ put in the landlord. ‘I
and four other elders will come to court as witnesses on
your behalf if he doesn’t keep his moustache to the goat
style ever afterwards.’

‘I shall excommunicate him from religion if he doesn’t
keep his word,’ added the priest, who had arrived on the
scene on hearing the hubbub.

‘Achcha,’ agreed Azam Khan.
And he forthwith had a deed prepared by the petition

writer of the village, who sat smoking his hubble-bubble
under the tree. And this document, transferring all his
household goods and chattels, was signed in the presence of
the five elders of the village and sealed. And the moneylender
forthwith brought both tips of his moustache down and kept
them glued in the goat style appropriate to his order.

Only, as soon as Khan Azam Khan’s back was turned
he muttered to the peasants seated nearby: ‘My father was
a Sultan.’

And they laughed to see the Khan give a special twist
to his moustache as he walked away maintaining the valiant
uprightness to the symbol of his ancient and noble family,
though he had become a pauper.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Mulk Raj Anand (1905–2004), one of the
most celebrated Indian novelists who wrote
in English, was born in Peshawar and
educated at the universities of Lahore,
London and Cambridge.

His novels include The Untouchable,
Coolie, The Sword and the Sickle, Private Life
of an Indian Prince, Seven Summers and
Morning Face. He also published a number of short stories
which reveal a lively sense of humour, a keen eye for the
pretensions of the people and a feeling of warm compassion.

Reprint 2025-26



A Pair of Mustachios 17

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. What do you understand of the natures of Ramanand and Azam
Khan from the episode described?

2. Identify instances in the story that show the business acumen
of Ramanand.

3. Both Ramanand and Azam Khan seem to have very fixed views.
How does Ramanand  score over Azam Khan towards the end of
the story?

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss the following in groups of three or four

1. The episode has been narrated in a light vein. What social mores
does the author seem to ridicule?

2. What do you think are the reasons for the references made to
the English people and the British monarchy?

3. What do you think is the message that the author seems to
convey through the story?

Compare your group’s views with that of the other groups.

APPRECIATION

1. Comment on the way in which the theme of the story has been
introduced.

2. How does the insertion of dialogue in the story contribute to its
interest?

LANGUAGE WORK

1. Nouveau riche and bourgeoise are French words. Collect from
newspapers, magazines and other sources some more French
words or expressions that are commonly used in English.

2. Locate expressions in the text which reflect the Indian idiom,
for example, the pride of the generations of his ancestors.

3. We ‘draw up a deed’. Complete the following phrases with
appropriate words

a.   ………….. one’s word                  b.  …………….. one’s will

c.  …………… ends meet                  d.   …………….. a loan

e.  …………….a deaf ear to

Reprint 2025-26



18 Woven Words

SUGGESTED READING

1. The Barber’s Trade Union and Other Stories by Mulk Raj Anand.

F Read and Enjoy

MAY THE BEST BEARD WIN

HANDLEBAR HEROES: There were men with Fu Manchu
moustaches and contestants with long flowing Gandalf
beards.

Some 220 contestants from all over the world have gathered
in Berlin for Saturday’s biannual world beard and
moustache championships.

THE WACKIER THE BETTER: German Elmar Weisser
supports a Brandenburg Gate on his chin. Countryman
Juergen Reinl’s spikes give porcupines a complex. And,
finally, grandpa Willi Chevalier is in a class of his own.

BUT BEAT THIS SANTA : Entrants in the freestyle section
turned up with Christmas tree beards.

From the Hindustan Times, 2-10-05.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



##3##
The Rocking-horse Winner 19

3 The Rocking-horse Winner
D.H. Lawrence

F Look for these expressions in the story and guess the meaning
from the context

turned to dust careered

sequin overwrought

reiterated brazening it out

There was a woman who was beautiful, who started with
all the advantages, yet she had no luck. She married for
love and love turned to dust. She had bonny children, yet,
she felt they had been thrust upon her and she could not
love them. They looked at her coldly as if they were finding
fault with her. And hurriedly she felt she must cover up
some fault in herself. Yet what it was that she must cover
up she never knew. Nevertheless, when her children were
present, she always felt the centre of her heart go hard.
This troubled her and, in her manner, she was all the
more gentle and anxious for her children as if she loved
them very much. Only she herself knew that at the centre
of her heart was a hard little place that could not feel love,
no, not for anybody. Everybody else said of her: ‘She is
such a good mother. She adores her children.’ Only she
herself, and her children themselves, knew it was not so.
They read it in each other’s eyes.

There were a boy and two little girls. They lived in a
pleasant house, with a garden, and they had discreet servants,
and felt themselves superior to anyone in the neighbourhood.

Although they lived in style, they felt always an anxiety
in the house. There was never enough money.

The mother had a small income and the father had a
small income but not nearly enough for the social position

Reprint 2025-26



20 Woven Words

which they had to keep up. The father went into town to
some office. But though he had good prospects, these
prospects never materialised. There was always the grinding
sense of the shortage of money though the style was always
kept up.

At last the mother said: ‘I will see if I can’t make
something.’ But she did not know where to begin. She racked
her brains, and tried this thing and the other but could
not find anything successful. The failure made deep lines
come into her face. Her children were growing up; they
would have to go to school. There must be more money,
there must be more money. The father, who was always
very handsome and expensive in his tastes, seemed as if
he never would be able to do anything worth doing. And
the mother, who had a great belief in herself, did not succeed
any better, and her tastes were just as expensive.

And so the house came to be haunted by the unspoken
phrase: ‘There must be more money! There must be more
money!’ The children could hear it all the time, though
nobody said it aloud. They heard it at Christmas, when
expensive and splendid toys filled the nursery. Behind
the shining modern rocking-horse, behind the smart doll’s
house, a voice would start whispering: ‘There must be
more money! There must be more money!’ And the children
would stop playing, to listen for a moment. They would
look into each other’s eyes to see if they had all heard.
And each one saw in the eyes of the other two that they
too had heard. ‘There must be more money! There must
be more money!’

It came whispering from the springs of the still-swaying
rocking-horse and even the horse, bending his wooden,
champing head, heard it. The big doll, sitting so pink and
smirking in her new pram, could hear it quite plainly and
seemed to be smirking all the more self-consciously because
of it. The foolish puppy, too, that took the place of the
teddy-bear, he was looking so extraordinarily foolish for no
other reason but that he heard the secret whisper all over
the house: ‘There must be more money!’

Yet nobody ever said it aloud. The whisper was
everywhere and therefore no one spoke it. Just as no one

Reprint 2025-26



The Rocking-horse Winner 21

ever says ‘we are breathing’ in spite of the fact that breath
is coming and going all the time.

‘Mother,’ said the boy Paul one day, ‘why don’t we keep
a car of our own? Why do we always use uncle’s, or else a
taxi?’

‘Because we’re the poor members of the family,’ said
the mother.

‘But why are we, mother?’
‘Well—I suppose,’ she said slowly and bitterly, ‘it’s

because your father has no luck.’
The boy was silent for some time.
‘Is luck money, mother?’ he asked, rather timidly.
‘No, Paul, not quite. It’s what causes you to have money.’
‘Oh!’, said Paul vaguely. ‘I thought when Uncle Oscar

said filthy lucre, it meant money.’
‘Filthy lucre does mean money,’ said the mother. ‘But

it’s lucre, not luck.’
‘Oh,’ said the boy. ‘Then what is luck, mother?’
‘It’s what causes you to have money. If you’re lucky

you have money. That’s why it’s better to be born lucky
than rich. If you’re rich, you may lose your money. But if
you’re lucky, you will always get more money.’

‘Oh! Will you? And is father not lucky?’
‘Very unlucky, I should say,’ she said bitterly.
The boy watched her with unsure eyes.
‘Why?’ he asked.
‘I don’t know. Nobody ever knows why one person is

lucky and another unlucky.’
‘Do they? Nobody at all? Does nobody know?’
‘Perhaps God. But He never tells.’
‘He ought to, then. And aren’t you lucky either, mother?’
‘I can’t be, if I married an unlucky husband.’
‘But by yourself, aren’t you?’
‘I used to think I was, before I married. Now I think I

am very unlucky indeed.’
‘Why?’
‘Well—never mind! Perhaps I’m not really,’ she said.

The child looked at her to see if she meant it. But he saw,
by the lines of her mouth, that she was only trying to hide
something from him.

Reprint 2025-26



22 Woven Words

‘Well, anyhow,’ he said stoutly, ‘I’m a lucky person.’
‘Why?’ said his mother, with a sudden laugh.
He stared at her. He didn’t even know why he had said

it.
‘God told me,’ he asserted, brazening it out.
‘1 hope He did, dear,’ she said, again with a laugh, but

rather bitter.
‘He did, mother!’
‘Excellent!’ said the mother, using one of her husband’s

exclamations.
The boy saw she did not believe him; or rather, that

she paid no attention to his assertion. This angered him
somewhat and made him want to compel her attention.

He went off by himself, vaguely, in a childish way,
seeking for the clue to ‘luck’. Absorbed, taking no heed of
other people, he went about with a sort of stealth, seeking
inwardly for luck. He wanted luck. He wanted it, he wanted
it. When the two girls were playing dolls in the nursery, he
would sit on his big rocking-horse, charging madly into
space, with a frenzy that made the little girls peer at him
uneasily. Wildly the horse careered. The waving dark hair
of the boy tossed, his eyes had a strange glare in them. The
little girls dared not speak to him.

When he had ridden to the end of his mad little journey,
he climbed down and stood in front of his rocking-horse,
staring fixedly into its lowered face. Its red mouth was
slightly open, its big eye was wide and glassy-bright.

‘Now!’ he would silently command the snorting steed.
‘Now, take me to where there is luck. Now take me!’

And he would slash the horse on the neck with the
little whip he had asked Uncle Oscar for. He knew the horse
could take him to where there was luck if only he forced it.
So he would mount again and start on his furious ride,
hoping at last to get there. He knew he could get there.

‘You’ll break your horse, Paul!’ said the nurse.
‘He’s always riding like that, I wish he’d leave off ’,

said his sister, Joan.
But he only glared down on them in silence. Nurse

gave him up. She could make nothing of him. Anyhow, he
was growing beyond her.

Reprint 2025-26



The Rocking-horse Winner 23

One day his mother and his Uncle Oscar came in when
he was on one of his furious rides. He did not speak to
them.

‘Hello, you young jockey! Riding a winner?’ said his
uncle.

‘Aren’t you growing too big for a rocking-horse? You’re
not a very little boy any longer, you know,’ said his mother.

But Paul only gave a blue glare from his big, rather
close-set eyes. He would speak to nobody when he was in
full tilt. His mother watched him with an anxious
expression on her face.

At last he suddenly stopped forcing his horse into the
mechanical gallop and slid down.

‘Well, I got there,’ he announced fiercely, his blue eyes
still flaring and his sturdy long legs straddling apart.

‘Where did you get to?’ asked his mother.
‘Where I wanted to go,’ he flared back at her.
‘That’s right, son!’ said Uncle Oscar, ‘Don’t you stop

till you get there. What’s the horse’s name?’
‘He doesn’t have a name,’ said the boy.
‘Gets on without all right?’ asked the uncle.
‘Well, he has different names. He was called Sansovino

last week.’
‘Sansovino, eh? Won the Ascot. How did you know his

name?’
‘He always talks about horse-races with Bassett,’ said

Joan.
The uncle was delighted to find that his small nephew

was posted with all the racing news. Bassett, the young
gardener, who had been wounded in the left foot in the war
and had got his present job through Oscar Cresswell whose
batman he had been, was a perfect blade of the ‘turf’. He
lived in the racing events, and the small boy lived with
him.

Oscar Cresswell got it all from Bassett.
‘Master Paul comes and asks me so I can’t do more

than tell him, sir,’ said Bassett, his face terribly serious,
as if he were speaking of religious matters.

‘And does he ever put anything on a horse he fancies?’
‘Well—I don’t want to give him away—he’s a young sport, a

Reprint 2025-26



24 Woven Words

fine sport, sir. Would you mind asking himself? He sort of
takes a pleasure in it and perhaps he’d feel I was giving
him away, sir, if you don’t mind.’

Bassett was serious as a church.
The uncle went back to his nephew and took him off

for a ride in the car.
‘Say, Paul, old man, do you ever put anything on a

horse?’ the uncle asked.
The boy watched the handsome man closely.
‘Why, do you think I oughtn’t to?’ he parried.
‘Not a bit of it! I thought perhaps you might give me a

tip for the Lincoln.’
The car sped on into the country, going down to Uncle

Oscar’s place in Hampshire.
‘Honour bright?’ said the nephew.
‘Honour bright, son!’ said the uncle.
‘Well, then, Daffodil.’
‘Daffodil! I doubt it, sonny. What about Mirza?’
‘I only know the winner,’ said the boy. ‘That’s Daffodil.’
‘Daffodil, eh?’
There was a pause. Daffodil was an obscure horse

comparatively.
‘Uncle!’
‘Yes, son?’
‘You won’t let it go any further, will you? I promised

Bassett.’
‘Bassett be damned, old man! What’s he got to do with it?’
‘We’re partners. We’ve been partners from the first.

Uncle, he lent me my first five shillings which I lost. I
promised him. Honour bright, it was only between me and
him; only you gave me that ten-shilling note I started
winning with so I thought you were lucky. You won’t let it
go any further, will you?’

The boy gazed at his uncle from those big, hot, blue
eyes, set rather close together. The uncle stirred and laughed
uneasily.

‘Right you are, son! I’ll keep your tip private. Daffodil,
eh? How much are you putting on him?’

‘All except twenty pounds,’ said the boy. ‘I keep that in
reserve.’

Reprint 2025-26



The Rocking-horse Winner 25

The uncle thought it a good joke.
‘You keep twenty pounds in reserve, do you, you young

romancer? What are you betting, then?’
I’m betting three hundred,’ said the boy gravely. ‘But

it’s between you and me Uncle Oscar! Honour bright?’
The uncle burst into a roar of laughter.
‘It’s between you and me all right, you young Nat

Gould,’ he said, laughing. ‘But where’s your three hundred?’
‘Bassett keeps it for me. We’re partners.’
‘You are, are you? And what is Bassett putting on

Daffodil?’
‘He won’t go quite as high as I do, I expect. Perhaps

he’ll go a hundred and fifty.’
‘What pennies?’ laughed the uncle.
‘Pounds,’ said the child, with a surprised look at his

uncle.
‘Bassett keeps a bigger reserve than I do.’ Between

wonder and amusement, Uncle Oscar was silent. He
pursued that matter no further but he determined to take
his nephew with him to the Lincoln races.

‘Now, son,’ he said, ‘I’m putting twenty on Mirza and
I’ll put five on for you on any horse you fancy. What’s your
pick?’

‘Daffodil, uncle.’
‘No, not the fiver on Daffodil.’
‘I should if it was my own fiver,’ said the child.
‘Good! Good! Right you are! A fiver for me and a fiver

for you on Daffodil.’
The child had never been to a race-meeting before,

and his eyes were blue fire. He pursed his mouth tight and
watched. A Frenchman, just in front, had put his money
on Lancelot. Wild with excitement, he flayed his arms up
and down, yelling ‘Lancelot! Lancelot!’ in his French accent.
Daffodil came in first, Lancelot second, Mirza third. The
child, flushed and with eyes blazing, was curiously serene.
His uncle brought him four five-pound notes, four to one.

‘What am I to do with these?’ he cried, waving them
before the boy’s eyes.

“I suppose we’ll talk to Bassett,’ said the boy. ‘I expect I
have fifteen hundred now and twenty in reserve; and this twenty.’

Reprint 2025-26



26 Woven Words

His uncle studied him for some moments.
‘Look here, son!’ he said, ‘You’re not serious about

Bassett and that fIfteen hundred, are you?’
‘Yes, I am. But it’s between you and me, uncle.

Honour bright?’
‘Honour bright all right, son! But I must talk to Bassett.’
‘If you’d like to be a partner, uncle, with Bassett and

me, we could all be partners. Only, you’d have to promise,
Honour bright, uncle, not to let it go beyond us three.
Bassett and I are lucky, and you must be lucky, because it
was your ten shillings I started winning with...’

Uncle Oscar took both Bassett and Paul into Richmond
Park for an afternoon, and there they talked.

‘It’s like this, you see, sir,’ Bassett said. ‘Master Paul
would get me talking about racing events, spinning yarns,
you know, sir. And he was always keen on knowing if I’d
made or if I’d lost. It’s about a year since now that I put
five shillings on Blush of Dawn for him; and we lost. Then
the luck turned, with that ten shillings he had from you:
that we put on Singhalese. And since that time, it’s been
pretty steady, all things considering. ‘What do you say,
Master Paul?’

‘We’re all right when we’re sure,’ said Paul. ‘It’s when
we’re not quite sure that we go down.’

‘Oh, but we’re careful then,’ said Bassett.
‘But when are you sure?’ smiled Uncle Oscar.
‘It’s Master Paul, sir,’ said Bassett in a secret, religious

voice. ‘It’s as if he had it from heaven. Like Daffodil, now,
for the Lincoln. That was as sure as eggs.’

‘Did you put anything on Daffodil?’ asked Oscar Cresswell.
‘Yes, sir. I made my bit.’
‘And my nephew?’
Bassett was obstinately silent, looking at Paul.
‘I made twelve hundred, didn’t I, Bassett? I told uncle I

was putting three hundred on Daffodil.’
‘That’s right,’ said Bassett, nodding.
‘But where’s the money?’ asked the uncle.
‘I keep it safe locked up, sir. Master Paul, he can have

it any minute he likes to ask for it.’
‘What, fifteen hundred pounds?’

Reprint 2025-26



The Rocking-horse Winner 27

‘And twenty. And forty, that is, with the twenty he
made on the course.’

‘It’s amazing,’ said the uncle.
‘If Master Paul offers you to be partners, sir, I would, if

I were you: if you’ll excuse me,’ said Bassett.
Oscar Cresswell thought about it.
‘I’ll see the money,’ he said.
They drove home again and, sure enough, Bassett came

round to the garden-house with fifteen hundred pounds in
notes. The twenty pounds reserve was left with Joe Gleen,
in the Turf Commission deposit.

‘You see, it’s all right, uncle, when I’m sure. Then we
go strong, for all we’re worth. Don’t we, Bassett?’

‘We do that, Master Paul.’
‘And when are you sure?’ said the uncle, laughing.
‘Oh, well, sometimes I’m absolutely sure, like about

Daffodil,’ said the boy; ‘and sometimes I have an idea; and
sometimes I haven’t even an idea, have I, Bassett? Then
we’re careful, because we mostly go down.’

‘You do, do you? And when you’re sure, like about
Daffodil, what makes you sure, sonny?’

‘Oh, well, I don’t know,’ said the boy uneasily. ‘I’m sure,
you know, uncle; that’s all.’

‘It’s as if he had it from heaven, sir,’ Bassett reiterated.
‘I should say so!’ said the uncle.
But he became a partner. And when the Leger was

coming on, Paul was ‘sure’ about Lively Spark which was a
quite inconsiderable horse. The boy insisted on putting a
thousand on the horse, Bassett went for five hundred and
Oscar Cresswell two hundred. Lively Spark came in first
and the betting had been ten to one against him. Paul had
made ten thousand.

‘You see,’ he said, ‘I was absolutely sure of him.’
Even Oscar Cresswell had cleared two thousand.
‘Look here, son,’ he said, ‘this sort of thing makes me

nervous.’
‘It needn’t, uncle! Perhaps I shan’t be sure again for a

long time.’
‘But what are you going to do with your money?’ asked

the uncle.

Reprint 2025-26



28 Woven Words

‘Of course,’ said the boy, ‘I started it for mother. She
said she had no luck because father is unlucky, so I thought
if I was lucky, it might stop whispering.’

‘What might stop whispering?’
‘Our house. I hate our house for whispering.’
‘What does it whisper?’
‘Why—why—’ the boy fidgeted—‘why, I don’t know. But

it’s always short of money, you know, uncle.’
‘I know it, son, I know it.’
‘You know people send mother writs, don’t you, uncle?’
‘I’m afraid I do,’ said the uncle.
‘And then the house whispers, like people laughing at

you behind your back. It’s awful, that is why I thought if I
was lucky—’

‘You might stop it,’ added the uncle.
The boy watched him with big blue eyes that had an

uncanny cold fire in them, and he said never a word.
‘Well, then,’ said the uncle. ‘What are we doing?’
‘I shouldn’t like mother to know I was lucky,’ said the

boy.
‘Why not, son?’
‘She’d stop me.’
‘I don’t think she would.’
‘Oh!’—and the boy writhed in an odd way—‘I don’t want

her to know, uncle.’
‘All right, son! We’ll manage it without her knowing.’

They managed it very easily. Paul, at the other’s suggestion,
handed over five thousand pounds to his uncle, who
deposited it with the family lawyer, who was then to inform
Paul’s mother that a relative had put five thousand pounds
into his hands, which sum was to be paid out a thousand
pounds at a time, on the mother’s birthday, for the next
five years.

‘So she’ll have a birthday present of a thousand pounds
for five successive years,’ said Uncle Oscar. ‘I hope it won’t
make it all the harder for her later.’

‘Paul’s mother had her birthday in November. The
house had been ‘whispering’ worse than ever lately
and, even in spite of his luck, Paul could not bear up
against it. He was very anxious to see the effect of

Reprint 2025-26



The Rocking-horse Winner 29

the birthday letter  te l l ing his mother about the
thousand pounds.

When there were no visitors, Paul now took his meals
with his parents as he was beyond the nursery control.
His mother went into town nearly every day. She had
discovered that she had an odd knack of sketching furs
and dress materials, so she worked secretly in the studio
of a friend who was the chief ‘artist’ for the leading drapers.
She drew the figures of ladies in furs and ladies in silk and
sequins for the newspaper advertisements. This young
woman artist earned several thousand pounds a year; but
Paul’s mother only made several hundreds and she was
again dissatisfied. She so wanted to be first in something,
and she did not succeed, even in making sketches for
drapery advertisements.

She was down to breakfast on the morning of her
birthday. Paul watched her face as she read her letters.
He knew the lawyer’s letter. As his mother read it, her face
hardened and became more expressionless. Then, a cold
determined look came on her mouth. She hid the letter
under the pile of others and said not a word about it.

‘Didn’t you have anything nice in the post for your
birthday, mother?’ said Paul.

‘Quite moderately nice,’ she said, her voice cold and absent.
She went away to town without saying more.
But in the afternoon Uncle Oscar appeared. He said

Paul’s mother had had a long interview with the lawyer,
asking if the whole five thousand could not be advanced at
once, as she was in debt.

‘What do you think, uncle?’ said the boy.
‘I leave it to you, son.’
‘Oh, let her have it, then! We can get some more with

the other,’ said the boy.
‘A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush, laddie!’

said Uncle Oscar.
‘But I’m sure to know for the Grand National; or the

Lincolnshire; or else the Derby. I’m sure to know for one of
them,’ said Paul.

So Uncle Oscar signed the agreement and Paul’s mother
touched the whole five thousand. Then something very

Reprint 2025-26



30 Woven Words

curious happened. The voices in the house suddenly went
mad, like a chorus of frogs on a spring evening. There were
certain new furnishings, and Paul had a tutor. He was
really going to Eton, his father’s school, in the following
autumn. There were flowers in the winter and a blossoming
of the luxury Paul’s mother had been used to. And yet the
voices in the house, behind the sprays of mimosa and
almond-blossoms, and from under the piles of iridescent
cushions, simply trilled and screamed in a sort of ecstasy:
‘There must be more money! Oh-h-h! There must be more
money! Oh, now, now-w! Now-w-w there must be more
money—more than ever! More than ever!’

It frightened Paul terribly. He studied away at his Latin
and Greek with his tutor. But his intense hours were spent
with Bassett. The Grand National had gone by; he had not
‘known,’ and had lost a hundred pounds. Summer was at
hand. He was in agony for the Lincoln. But even for the
Lincoln he didn’t ‘know,’ and he lost fifty pounds. He became
wild-eyed and strange as if something were going to explode
in him.

‘Let it alone, son! Don’t you bother about it,’ urged
Uncle Oscar. But it was as if the boy couldn’t really hear
what his uncle was saying.

‘I’ve got to know for the Derby! I’ve got to know for the
Derby!’ the child reiterated, his big blue eyes blazing with
a sort of madness.

His mother noticed how overwrought he was.
You’d better go to the seaside. Wouldn’t you like to go

now to the seaside, instead of waiting? I think you’d better,’
she said, looking down at him anxiously, her heart curiously
heavy because of him.

But the child lifted his uncanny blue eyes.
‘I couldn’t possibly go before the Derby, mother!’ he said.

‘I couldn’t possibly!’
‘Why not?’ she said, her voice becoming heavy when

she was opposed. ‘Why not? You can still go from the seaside
to see the Derby with your Uncle Oscar, if that’s what you
wish. No need for you to wait here. Besides, I think you
care too much about these races. It’s a bad sign. My family
had been a gambling family and you won’t know till you

Reprint 2025-26



The Rocking-horse Winner 31

grow up how much damage it has done. But it has done
damage. I shall have to send Bassett away and ask Uncle
Oscar not to talk racing to you, unless you promise to be
reasonable about it: go away to the seaside and forget it.
You’re all nerves!’

‘I’ll do what you like, mother, so long as you don’t send
me away till after the Derby’, the boy said.

‘Send you away from where? Just from this house?’
‘Yes,’ he said, gazing at her.
‘Why, you curious child, what makes you care about

this house so much, suddenly? I never knew you loved it.’
He gazed at her without speaking. He had a secret

within a secret, something he had not divulged, even to
Bassett or to his Uncle Oscar.

But his mother, after standing undecided and a little
bit sullen for some moments, said:

‘Very well, then! Don’t go to the seaside till after the
Derby, if you don’t wish it. But promise me you won’t let
your nerves go to pieces. Promise you won’t think so much
about horse-racing and events, as you call them.’

‘Oh, no,’ said the boy casually. ‘I won’t think much
about them, mother. You needn’t worry. I wouidn’t worry,
mother, if I were you.’

‘If you were me and I were you,’ said his mother, ‘I
wonder what we should do!’

‘But you know you needn’t worry, mother, don’t you?’
the boy repeated.

‘I should be awfully glad to know it,’ she said wearily.
‘Oh, well, you can, you know, I mean, you ought to

know, you needn’t worry,’ he insisted.
‘Ought I? Then I’ll see about it,’ she said.
Paul’s secret of secrets was his wooden horse, that

which had no name. Since he was emancipated from a
nurse and a nursery-governess, he had had his rocking-
horse removed to his own bedroom at the top of the house.

‘Surely you’re too big for a rocking-horse’, his mother
had remonstrated.

‘Well, you see, mother, till I can have a real horse, I
like to have some sort of animal about,’ had been his quaint
answer.

Reprint 2025-26



32 Woven Words

‘Do you feel he keeps you company?’ She laughed.
‘Oh, yes! He’s very good, he always keeps me company

when I’m there,’ said Paul.
So the horse, rather shabby, stood in an arrested prance

in the boy’s bedroom.
The Derby was drawing near and the boy grew more

and more tense. He hardly heard what was spoken to him,
he was very frail, and his eyes were really uncanny. His
mother had sudden strange seizures of uneasiness about
him. Sometimes for half an hour, she would feel a sudden
anxiety about him that was almost anguish. She wanted to
rush to him at once and know that he was safe.

Two nights before the Derby, she was at a big party in
town, when one of her rushes of anxiety about her boy, her
fIrstborn, gripped her heart till she could hardly speak.
She fought with the feeling, might and main, for she believed
in common sense. But it was too strong. She had to leave
the dance and go downstairs to telephone to the country.
The children’s nursery-governess was terribly surprised
and startled at being rung up in the night.

‘Are the children all right, Miss Wilmot?’
‘Oh yes, they are quite all right.’
‘Master Paul? Is he all right?’
‘He went to bed as right as a trivet. Shall I run up and

look at him?’
‘No,’ said Paul’s mother reluctantly. ‘No. Don’t trouble.

It’s all right. Don’t sit up. We shall be home fairly soon.’
She did not want her son’s privacy intruded upon.

‘Very good,’ said the governess.
It was about one o’clock when Paul’s mother and father

drove up to their house. All was still. Paul’s mother went
to her room and slipped off her white fur cloak. She had
told her maid not to wait up for her. She heard her husband
downstairs, mixing a whisky and soda.

And then, because of the strange anxiety at her heart,
she stole upstairs to her son’s room. Noiselessly she went
along the upper corridor. Was there a faint noise? What
was it?

She stood, with arrested muscles, outside his door,
listening. There was a strange, heavy and yet not loud

Reprint 2025-26



The Rocking-horse Winner 33

noise. Her heart stood still. It was a soundless noise, yet
rushing and powerful. Something huge in violent, hushed
motion. What was it? What in God’s name was it? She
ought to know. She felt that she knew the noise. She knew
what it was.

Yet she could not place it. She couldn’t say what it
was. And on and on it went, like a madness.

Softly, frozen with anxiety and fear, she turned the
door handle.

The room was dark. Yet in the space near the window,
she heard and saw something move to and fro. She gazed
in fear and amazement.

Then suddenly she switched on the light and saw her
son, in his green pyjamas, madly surging on the rocking-
horse. The blaze of light suddenly lit him up, as he urged
the wooden horse, and lit her up, as she stood, blonde, in
her dress of pale green and crystal in the doorway.

‘Paul,’ she cried. ‘Whatever are you doing?’
‘It’s Malabar!’ he screamed in a powerful, strange voice.

It’s Malabar!’
His eyes blazed at her for one strange and senseless

second, as he ceased urging his wooden horse. Then he fell
with a crash to the ground and she, all her tormented
motherhood flooding upon her, rushed to gather him up.

But he was unconscious, and unconscious he remained,
with some brain-fever. He talked and tossed, and his mother
sat stonily by his side.

‘Malabar! It’s Malabar! Bassett! Bassett, I know! It’s
Malabar!’

So the child cried, trying to get up and urge the rocking-
horse that gave him his inspiration.

‘What does he mean by Malabar?’ asked the heart-
frozen mother. ‘I don’t know,’ said the father stonily.

‘What does he mean by Malabar?’ she asked her brother
Oscar.

‘It’s one of the horses running for the Derby,’ was the
answer.

And, in spite of himself, Oscar Cresswell spoke to
Bassett, and himself put a thousand on Malabar: at fourteen
to one.

Reprint 2025-26



34 Woven Words

The third day of the illness was critical: they were
waiting for a change. The boy, with his rather long, curly
hair, was tossing ceaselessly on the pillow. He neither slept
nor regained consciousness, and his eyes were like blue
stones. His mother sat, feeling her heart had gone, turned
actually into a stone.

In the evening, Oscar Cresswell did not come, but
Bassett sent a message, saying could he come up for a
moment, just one moment? Paul’s mother was very angry
at the intrusion but, on second thought, she agreed. The
boy was the same. Perhaps Bassett might bring him to
consciousness.

The gardener, a shortish fellow with a little brown
moustache and sharp little brown eyes, tiptoed into the
room, touched his imaginary cap to Paul’s mother, and
stole to the bedside, staring with glittering, smallish eyes
at the tossing, dying child.

‘Master Paul,’ he whispered, ‘Master Paul! Malabar
came in first all right, a clean win. I did as you told me.
You’ve made over seventy thousand pounds, you have; you’ve
got over eighty thousand. Malabar came in all right, Master
Paul.’

‘Malabar! Malabar! Did I say Malabar, mother? Did I
say Malabar? Do you think I’m lucky, mother? I knew
Malabar, didn’t I? Over eighty thousand pounds! I call that
lucky, don’t you, mother? Over eighty thousand pounds! I
knew, didn’t I know I knew? Malabar came in all right. If I
ride my horse till I’m sure, then I tell you, Bassett, you can
go as high as you like. Did you go for all you were worth,
Bassett?

‘I went a thousand on it, Master Paul.’
‘I never told you, mother, that if I can ride my horse,

and get there, then I’m absolutely sure—oh, absolutely
mother, did I ever tell you? I am lucky!’

‘No, you never did,’ said his mother.
But the boy died in the night.
And even as he lay dead, his mother heard her

brother’s voice saying to her: ‘My God, Hester, you’re
eighty-odd thousand to the good, and a poor devil of a
son to the bad. But, poor devil, poor devil, he’s best

Reprint 2025-26



The Rocking-horse Winner 35

gone out of a life where he rides his rocking-horse to
find a winner.’

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

D.H. Lawrence (1895–1930) was born in a mining village
near Nottingham in England. His father was a
coal miner and his mother a genteel and
ambitious lady who had worked previously as
a schoolmistress. Their conflicting interests had
had a powerful impact on the physical and
imaginative build-up of young Lawrence.
Lawrence wrote novels, poems, short stories,

criticism and miscellaneous prose. His work,
at its best, is marked by intensity of feeling,
psychological insight and vivid evocation of events, places
and nature.

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. What was the reason for young Paul’s restlessness at the
beginning of the story? How did it find expression?

2. Why do you think Paul’s mother was not satisfied with the yearly
birthday gift of 1,000 pounds for five years?

3. What was the reason for the anxiety of Paul’s mother as he
grew older?

4. Paul’s final bet made the family rich but cost him his life.
Explain.

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss the following in pairs or in small groups

1. ‘Luck is necessary for success in life’.

2. Although Paul’s mother liked to be rich she did not approve of
betting on horses.

3. What were the voices that Paul heard? Did they lead him to
success in the real sense?

Reprint 2025-26



36 Woven Words

APPRECIATION

1. Examine the communication channels in the story between

a. Paul and his mother
b. Paul and Bassett
c. Paul and his uncle
d. Bassett and Paul’s uncle
e. Paul’s mother and his uncle.

2. How has the author linked the symbol of the rocking-horse to
Paul’s triumphs at the races?

3. The ending of the story is an instance of irony. Suppose Paul
had not died at the end, how would you have reacted to the story?

LANGUAGE WORK

1. ‘A bird in hand is worth two in the bush’.
a. Explain the above statement in the literal sense.
b. Explain it in the context in which it is mentioned in the story.
c. Is there a corresponding proverb in your own language?

2. Explain the following phrases

u Sure as eggs
u Spinning yarns
u Turned to dust
Use them in sentences of your own.

3. Given below is the dictionary meaning of

Smirk : to smile in a silly or unpleasant way that shows that you
are pleased with yourself.

Look up the dictionary for the following words which are also
related to facial expressions and write down the meaning of each

smile grin grimace sneer

SUGGESTED READING

1. ‘Sun and Moon’ by Katherine Mansfield.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



##4##
The Adventure of the Three Garridebs 37

4 The Adventure of the Three
Garridebs

Arthur Conan Doyle

F Look for these expressions in the text and guess what they mean
from the context

with a disconsolate air            of sinister and murderous  reputation
want of imaginative intuition      penitentiary

devilish ingenuity confederate in crime

shamefaced grin dissipated dreams

rigmarole of lies syncopated dialogue

cadaverous face

It may have been a comedy, or it may have been a tragedy.
It cost one man his reason, it cost me a blood-letting, and
it cost yet another man the penalties of the law. Yet there
was certainly an element of comedy. Well, you shall judge
for yourselves.

I remember the date very well, for, it was in the same
month that Holmes refused a knighthood for services which
may perhaps some day be described. I only refer to the
matter in passing, for, in my position of partner and
confidant I am obliged to be particularly careful to avoid
any indiscretion. I repeat, however, that this enables me to
fix the date, which was the latter end of June 1902, shortly
after the conclusion of the South African War. Holmes had
spent several days in bed, as was his habit from time to
time, but he emerged that morning with a long foolscap
document in his hand and a twinkle of amusement in his
austere grey eyes.

‘There is a chance for you to make some money, friend
Watson,’ said he. ‘Have you ever heard the name of Garrideb?’

Reprint 2025-26



38 Woven Words

I admitted that I had not.
‘Well, if you can lay your hand upon a Garrideb, there’s

money in it.’
‘Why?’
‘Ah, that’s a long story—rather a whimsical one, too. I

don’t think in all our explorations of human complexities
we have ever come upon anything more singular. The fellow
will be here presently for cross-examination, so I won’t
open the matter up till he comes. But meanwhile, that’s
the name we want.’

The telephone directory lay on the table beside me and
I turned over the pages in a rather hopeless quest. But to
my amazement there was this strange name in its due
place. I gave a cry of triumph.

Here you are Holmes! Here it is!’
Holmes took the book from my hand.
‘Garrideb, N.’ he read, ‘136, Little Ryder Street, W. Sorry

to disappoint you, my dear Watson, but this is the man
himself. That is the address upon his letter. We want
another to match him.’

Mrs Hudson had come in with a card upon a tray. I
took it up and glanced at it.

‘Why, here it is!’ I cried in amazement. ‘This is a different
initial. John Garrideb, Counsellor at Law, Moorville, Kansas, U.S.A.’

Holmes smiled as he looked at the card. ‘I am afraid
you must make yet another effort, Watson,’ said he. ‘This
gentleman is also in the plot already, though I certainly
did not expect to see him this morning. However, he is in a
position to tell us a good deal which I want to know.’

A moment later he was in the room. Mr John Garrideb,
Counsellor at Law, was a short, powerful man with the
round, fresh clean-shaven face characteristic of so many
American men of affairs. The general effect was chubby
and rather childlike, so that one received the impression
of quite a young man with a broad set smile upon his face.
His eyes, however, were arresting. Seldom in any human
head have I seen a pair which bespoke a more intense
inward life, so bright were they, so alert, so responsive to
every change of thought. His accent was American but was
not accompanied by any eccentricity of speech.

Reprint 2025-26



The Adventure of the Three Garridebs 39

‘Mr Holmes?’ he asked, glancing from one to the other.
‘Ah, yes! Your pictures are not unlike  you, sir, if I may say
so I believe you have had a letter from my namesake, Mr
Nathan Garrideb, have you not?’

‘Pray sit down,’ said Sherlock Holmes. We shall, I fancy,
have a good deal to discuss.’ He took up his sheets of
foolscap.

You are, of course, the Mr John Garrideb mentioned in this
document. But surely you have been in England some time?’

‘Why do you say that, Mr Holmes?’ I seemed to read
sudden suspicion in those expressive eyes.

‘Your whole outfit is English.’
Mr Garrideb forced a laugh. ‘I’ve read of your tricks,

Mr Holmes, but I never thought I would be the subject of
them. Where do you read that?’

‘The shoulder cut of your coat, the toes of your boots—
could anyone doubt it?’

‘Well, well, I had no idea I was so obvious a Britisher.
But business brought me over here some time ago and so,
as you say, my outfit is nearly all London. However, I guess
your time is of value and we did not meet to talk about the
cut of my socks. What about getting down to that paper
you hold in your hand?’

Holmes had, in some way, ruffled our visitor, whose
chubby face had assumed a far less amiable expression.

‘Patience! Patience, Mr Garrideb!’ said my friend in a
soothing voice. ‘Dr Watson would tell you that these little
digressions of mine sometimes prove in the end to have
some bearing on the matter. But why did Mr Nathan
Garrideb not come with you?’

‘Why did he ever drag you into it at all?’ asked our
visitor, with a sudden outflame of anger. ‘What in thunder
had you to do with it? Here was a bit of professional business
between two gentlemen, and one of them must need call in
a detective! I saw him this morning and he told me this
fool-trick he had played on me, and that’s why I am here.
But I feel bad about it, all the same.’

‘There was no reflection upon you, Mr Garrideb. It was
simply zeal upon his part to gain your end—an end which
is, I understand, equally vital for both of you. He knew that

Reprint 2025-26



40 Woven Words

I had means of getting information and, therefore, it was
very natural that he should apply to me.’

Our visitor’s angry face gradually cleared.
‘Well, that puts it different,’ said he, ‘When I went to

see him this morning and he told me he had sent for a
detective, I just asked for your address and came right
away. I don’t want police butting into a private matter. But
if you are content just to help us find the man, there can
be no harm in that.’

‘Well, that is just how it stands,’ said Holmes. ‘And
now, sir, since you are here, we had best have a clear
account from your own lips. My friend here knows nothing
of the details.’

Mr Garrideb surveyed me with not too friendly a gaze.
‘Need he know?’ he asked.
‘We usually work together.’
‘Well, there’s no reason it should be kept a secret.

I’ll give you the facts as short as I can make them. If
you came from Kansas I would not need to explain to
you who Alexander Hamilton Garrideb was. He made
his money in real estate and, afterwards, in the wheat
pit at Chicago, but he spent it in buying up as much
land as would make one of your counties, lying along
the Arkansas River, west of Fort Dodge. It’s grazing land
and lumber land and Arabic land and mineralised land,
and just every sort of land that brings dollars to the
man that owns it.

‘He had no kith nor kin—or, if he had, I never heard of
it. But he took a kind of pride in the queerness of his
name. That was what brought us together. I was in the law
at Topeka, and one day I had a visit from the old man and
he was tickled to death to meet another man with his own
name. It was his pet fad and he was dead set to find out if
there were any more Garridebs in the world. ‘Find me
another!’ said he. I told him I was a busy man and could
not spend my life hiking round the world in search of
Garridebs. ‘None the less,’ said he, ‘that is just what you
will do if things pan out as I planned them.’ I thought he
was joking, but there was a powerful lot of meaning in the
words, as I was soon to discover.

Reprint 2025-26



The Adventure of the Three Garridebs 41

‘For he died within a year of saying them and he left a
will behind him. It was the queerest will that has ever
been filed in the State of Kansas. His property was divided
into three parts and I was to have one on condition that I
found two Garridebs who would share the remainder. It’s
five million dollars for each if it is a cent, but we can’t lay a
finger on it until we all three stand in a row.

‘It was so big a chance that I just let my legal practice
slide and I set forth looking for Garridebs. There is not one
in the United States. I went through it, sir, with a fine-
toothed comb and never a Garrideb could I catch. Then I
tried the old country. Sure enough there was the name in
the London Telephone Directory. I went after him two days
ago and explained the whole matter to him. But he is a
lone man, like myself, with some women relations, but no
men. It says three adult men in the will. So you see we still
have a vacancy and if you can help to fill it we will be very
ready to pay your charges.’

‘Well, Watson,’ said Holmes, with a smile, ‘I said it was
rather whimsical, did I not? I should have thought, sir,
that your obvious way was to advertise in the agony
columns of the papers.’

‘I have done that, Mr Holmes. No replies.’
‘Dear me! Well, it is certainly a most curious little

problem. I may take a glance at it in my leisure. By the
way, it is curious that you should have come from Topeka.
I used to have a correspondent—he is dead now—old Dr
Lysander Starr, who was Mayor in 1890.’

‘Good old Dr Starr!’ said our visitor. ‘His name is still
honoured. Well, Mr Holmes, I suppose all we can do is to
report to you and let you know how we progress. I reckon
you will hear within a day or two.’ With this assurance our
American bowed and departed.

Holmes had lit his pipe, and he sat for some time with
a curious smile upon his face.

‘Well?’ I asked at last.
‘I am wondering, Watson—just wondering!’
‘At what?’
Holmes took his pipe from his lips.
‘I was wondering, Watson, what on earth could be the

Reprint 2025-26



42 Woven Words

object of this man in telling us such a rigmarole of lies. I
nearly asked him so—for there are times when a brutal
frontal attack is the best policy—but I judged it better to
let him think he had fooled us. Here is a man with an
English coat frayed at the elbow and trousers bagged at
the knee with a year’s wear, and yet by this document and
by his own account he is a provincial American lately landed
in London. There have been no advertisements in the agony
columns. You know that I miss nothing there. They are my
favourite covert for putting up a bird and I would never
have overlooked such a cock pheasant as that. I never knew
a Dr Lysander Starr of Topeka. Touch him where you would
he was false. I think the fellow is really an American, but
he has worn his accent smooth with years of London. What
is his game, then, and what motive lies behind this
preposterous search for Garridebs? It’s worth our attention,
for, granting that the man is a rascal, he is certainly a
complex and ingenious one. We must now find out if our
other correspondent is a fraud also. Just ring him up,
Watson.’

I did so, and heard a thin, quavering voice at the other
end of the line.

‘Yes, yes, I am Mr Nathan Garrideb. Is Mr Holmes there?
I should very much like to have a word with Mr Holmes.’

My friend took the instrument and I heard the usual
syncopated dialogue.

‘Yes, he has been here. I understand that you don’t
know him… How long? Only two days!... Yes, yes, of course
it is a most captivating prospect. Will you be at home this
evening? I suppose your namesake will not be there?...
Very good, we will come then, for I would rather have a
chat without him… Dr Watson will come with me… I
understood from your note that  you did not go out often…
Well, we shall be round about six. You need not mention it
to the American lawyer… Very good. Good-bye!’

It was twilight of a lovely spring evening and even Little
Ryder Street, one of the smaller offshoots from the Edgware
Road, within a stone-cast of old Tyburn Tree of evil memory,
looked golden and wonderful in the slanting rays of the
setting sun. The particular house to which we were directed

Reprint 2025-26



The Adventure of the Three Garridebs 43

was a large, old-fashioned, Early Georgian edifice with a
fat brick face broken only by two deep bay windows on the
ground floor. It was on this ground floor that our client
lived and, indeed, the low windows proved to be the front of
the huge room in which he spent his waking hours. Holmes
pointed as we passed to the small brass plate which bore
the curious name.

‘Up some years, Watson,’ he remarked, indicating its
discoloured surface. ‘It’s his real name, anyhow, and that
is something to note.’

The house had a common stair and there were a
number of names painted in the hall, some indicating offices
and some private chambers. It was not a collection of
residential flats, but rather the abode of Bohemian
bachelors. Our client opened the door for us himself and
apologised by saying that the woman in charge left at four
o’clock. Mr Nathan Garrideb proved to be a very tall, loose
jointed, round-backed person, gaunt and bald, some sixty-
odd years of age. He had a cadaverous face, with the dull
dead skin of a man to whom exercise was unknown. Large
round spectacles and a small projecting goat’s beard
combined with his stooping attitude to give him an
expression of peering curiosity. The general effect, however,
was amiable, though eccentric.

The room was as curious as its occupant. It looked like
a small museum. It was both broad and deep, with
cupboards and cabinets all round, crowded with specimens,
geological and anatomical. Cases of butterflies and moths
flanked each side of the entrance. A large table in the centre
was  littered with all sorts of debris, while the tall brass
tube of a powerful microscope bristled up amongst them.
As I glanced round I was surprised at the universality of
the man’s interests. Here was a case of ancient coins. There
was a cabinet of flint instruments. Behind his central table
was a large cupboard of fossil bones. Above was a line of
plaster skulls with such names as ‘Neanderthal’,
‘Heidelberg,’ ‘Cromagnan’ printed beneath them. It was clear
that he was a student of many subjects. As he stood in
front of us now, he held a piece of chamois leather in his
right hand with which he was polishing a coin.

Reprint 2025-26



44 Woven Words

‘Syracusan—of the best period,’ he explained, holding
it up. ‘They degenerated greatly towards the end. At their
best I hold them supreme, though some prefer the
Alexandrian school. You will find a chair here, Mr Holmes.
Pray allow me to clear these bones. And you, sir—ah, yes,
Dr Watson—if you would have the goodness to put the
Japanese vase to one side. You see round me my little
interests in life. My doctor lectures me about never going
out, but why should I go out when I have so much to hold
me here? I can assure you that the adequate cataloguing
of one of those cabinets would take me three good months.’

Holmes looked round him with curiosity.
‘But do you tell me that you never go out?’ he said.
‘Now and again I drive down to Sotheby’s or Christie’s.

Otherwise I very seldom leave my room. I am not too strong
and my researches are very absorbing. But you can
imagine, Mr Holmes, what a terrific shock—pleasant but
terrific—it was for me when I heard of this unparalleled
good fortune. It only needs one more Garrideb to complete
the matter and surely we can find one; I had a brother, but
he is dead, and female relatives are disqualified. But there
must surely be others in the world. I had heard that you
handled strange cases, and that was why I sent for you. Of
course, this American gentleman is quite right, and I should
have taken his advice first, but I acted for the best.’

‘I think you acted very wisely indeed,’ said Holmes.
‘But are you really anxious to acquire an estate in America?’

‘Certainly not, sir. Nothing would induce me to leave
my collection. But this gentleman has assured me that
he will buy me out as soon as we have established our
claim. Five million dollars was the sum named. There are
a dozen specimens in the market at the present moment
which fill gaps in my collection, and which I am unable to
purchase for want of a few hundred pounds. Just think
what I could do with five million dollars. Why, I have the
nucleus of a national collection. I shall be the Hans Sloane
of my age.’

His eyes gleamed behind his great spectacles. It was
very clear that no pains would be spared by Mr Nathan
Garrideb in finding a namesake.

Reprint 2025-26



The Adventure of the Three Garridebs 45

‘I merely called to make your acquaintance and there
is no reason why I should interrupt your studies,’ said
Holmes. ‘I prefer to establish personal touch with those
with whom I do business. There are few questions I need
ask, for I have your very clear narrative in my pocket and I
filled up the blanks when this American gentleman called.
I understand that up to this week you were unaware of his
existence.’

‘That is so. He called last Tuesday.’
‘Did he tell you of our interview today?’
‘Yes, he came straight back to me. He had been very

angry.’
‘Why should he be angry?’
‘He seemed to think it was some reflection on his

honour. But he was quite cheerful again when he returned.’
‘Did he suggest any course of action?’
‘No, sir, he did not.’
‘Has he had, or asked for, any money from you?’
‘No, sir, never!’
‘You see no possible object he has in view?’
‘None, except what he states.’
‘Did you tell him of our telephone appointment?’
‘Yes, sir, I did.’
Holmes was lost in thought. I could see that he was

puzzled.
‘Have you any articles of great value in your collection?’
‘No, sir. I am not a rich man. It is a good collection, but

not a very valuable one.’
‘You have no fear of burglars?’
‘Not the least.’
‘How long have you been in these rooms?’
‘Nearly five years.’
Holmes’s cross-examination was interrupted by an

imperative knocking at the door. No sooner had our client
unlatched it than the American lawyer burst excitedly into
the room.

‘Here you are!’ he cried, waving a paper over his head.
‘I thought I should be in time to get you. Mr Nathan Garrideb,
my congratulations! You are a rich man, sir. Our business
is happily finished and all is well. As to you, Mr Holmes,

Reprint 2025-26



46 Woven Words

we can only say we are sorry if we have given you any
useless trouble.’

He handed over the paper to our client, who stood
staring at a marked advertisement. Holmes and I leaned
forward and read it over his shoulder. This is how it ran—

HOWARD GARRIDEB

Constructor of Agricultural Machinery. Binders, reapers’
steam and hand plows, drills, harrows, farmers’ carts,
buck-boards, and all other appliances. Estimates for
Artesian Wells. Apply Grosvenor Buildings, Aston.

‘Glorious!’ gasped our host. ‘That makes our third man.’
‘I had opened up inquiries in Birmingham,’ said the

American, ‘and my agent there has sent me this
advertisement from a local paper. We must hustle and put
the thing through. I have written to this man and told him
that you will see him in his office tomorrow afternoon at
four o’clock.’

‘You want me to see him?’
‘What do you say, Mr Holmes? Don’t you think it would

be wiser? Here am I, a wandering American with a wonderful
tale. Why should he believe what I tell him? But you are a
Britisher with solid references and he is bound to take
notice of what you say. I would go with you if you wished,
but I have a very busy day tomorrow and I could always
follow you if you are in any trouble.’

‘Well, I have not made such a journey for years.’
‘It is nothing, Mr Garrideb. I have figured out your

connections. You leave at twelve and should be there soon
after two. Then you can be back the same night. All you
have to do is to see this man, explain the matter and get
an affidavit of his existence. By the Lord!’ he added, hotly,
‘considering I’ve come all the way from the centre of America,
it is surely little enough if you go a hundred miles in order
to put this matter through.’

‘Quite so,’ said Holmes. ‘I think what this gentleman
says is very true.’

Mr Nathan Garrideb shrugged his shoulders with a
disconsolate air. ‘Well, If you insist I shall go,’ said he. ‘It is

Reprint 2025-26



The Adventure of the Three Garridebs 47

certainly hard for me to refuse you anything, considering
the glory of hope that you have brought into my life.’

‘Then that is agreed,’ said Holmes, ‘and no doubt you
will let me have a report as soon as you can.’

‘I’ll see to that,’ said the American. ‘Well,’ he added,
looking at his watch, ‘I’ll have to get on. I’ll call tomorrow,
Mr Nathan, and see you off to Birmingham. Coming my
way, Mr Holmes? Well, then, good-bye and we may have
good news for you tomorrow night.’

I noticed that my friend’s face cleared when the
American left the room and the look of thoughtful perplexity
had vanished.

‘I wish I could look over your collection, Mr Garrideb,’
said he. ‘In my profession all sorts of odd knowledge comes
useful and this room of yours is a storehouse of it.’

Our client shone with pleasure and his eyes gleamed
from behind his big glasses.

‘I had always heard, sir, that you were a very intelligent
man,’ said he. ‘I could take you round now, if you have the
time.’

‘Unfortunately, I have not. But these specimens are so
well labelled and classified that they hardly need your
personal explanation. If I should be able to look in tomorrow,
I presume that there would be no objection to my glancing
over them?’

‘None at all. You are most welcome. The place will, of
course, be shut up, but Mrs Saunders is in the basement
up to four o’clock and would let you in with her key.’

‘Well, I happen to be clear tomorrow afternoon. If you
would say a word to Mrs Saunders it would be quite in
order. By the way, who is your house-agent?’

Our client was amazed at the sudden question.
‘Holloway and Steele, in the Edgware Road. But why?’
‘I am a bit of an archaeologist myself when it comes to

houses,’ said Holmes, laughing. ‘I was wondering if this
was Queen Anne or Georgian.’

‘Georgian, beyond doubt.’
‘Really. I should have thought a little earlier. However,

it is easily ascertained. Well, good-bye, Mr Garrideb and
may you have every success in your Birmingham journey.’

Reprint 2025-26



48 Woven Words

The house-agent’s was close by, but we found that it
was closed for the day, so we made our way back to Baker
Street. It was not till after dinner that Holmes reverted to
the subject.

‘Our little problem draws to a close,’ said he. ‘No doubt
you have outlined the solution in your own mind.’

‘I can make neither head nor tail of it.’
‘The head is surely clear enough and the tail we should

see tomorrow. Did you notice nothing curious about that
advertisement?’

‘I saw that the word ‘plough’ was misspelt.’
‘Oh, you did notice that, did you? Come, Watson, you

improve all the time. Yes, it was bad English but good
American. The printer had set it up as received. Then the
buckboards. That is American also. And artesian wells are
commoner with them than with us. It was a typical
American advertisement, but purporting to be from an
English firm. What do you make of that?’

‘I can only suppose that this American lawyer put it in
himself. What his object was I fail to understand.’

‘Well, there are alternative explanations. Anyhow, he
wanted to get this good old fossil up to Birmingham. That
is very clear. I might have told him that he was clearly
going on a wild-goose chase, but, on second thoughts, it
seemed better to clear the stage by letting him go. Tomorrow,
Watson—well, tomorrow will speak for itself.’

Holmes was up and out early. When he returned at
lunch-time I noticed  that his face was very grave.

‘This is a more serious matter than I had expected,
Watson,’ said he. ‘It is fair to tell you so, though I know it
will only be an additional reason to you for running your
head into danger. I should know my Watson by now. But
there is danger, and you should know it.’

‘Well, it is not the first we have shared, Holmes. I hope
it may not be the last. What is the particular danger this
time?’

‘We are up against a very hard case. I have identified
Mr John Garrideb, Counsellor at Law. He is none other
than ‘Killer’ Evans, of sinister and murderous reputation.’

‘I fear I am none the wiser.’

Reprint 2025-26



The Adventure of the Three Garridebs 49

‘Ah, it is not part of your profession to carry about a
portable Newgate Calendar in your memory. I have been
down to see friend Lestrade at the Yard. There may be an
occasional want of imaginative intuition down there, but
they lead the world for thoroughness and method. I had an
idea that we might get on the track of our American friend
in their records. Sure enough, I found his chubby face
smiling up at me from the Rogues’ Portrait Gallery. James
Winter, alias Morecroft, alias Killer Evans, was the
inscription below.’ Holmes drew an envelope from his pocket.
‘I scribbled down a few points from his dossier. Aged forty
four. Native of Chicago. Known to have shot three men in
the States. Escaped from penitentiary through political
influence. Came to London in 1893. Shot a man over cards
in a night club in the Waterloo Road in January, 1895.
Man died, but he was shown to have been the aggressor in
the row. Dead man was identified as Rodger Presbury,
famous as forger and coiner in Chicago. Killer Evans
released in 1901. Has been under police supervision since,
but so far as known has led an honest life. Very dangerous
man, usually carries arms and is prepared to use them.
That is our bird, Watson—a sporting bird, as you must
admit.’

‘But what is his game?’
‘Well, it begins to define itself. I have been to the house-

agents. Our client, as he told us, has been there five years.
It was unlet for a year before then. The previous tenant
was a gentleman at large named Waldron. Waldron’s
appearance was well remembered at the office. He had
suddenly vanished and nothing more been heard of him.
He was a tall, bearded man with very dark features. Now,
Presbury, the man whom Killer Evans had shot, was,
according to Scotland Yard, a tall, dark man with a beard.
As a working hypothesis, I think we may take it that
Presbury, the American criminal, used to live in the very
room which our innocent friend now devotes to his museum.
So at last we get a link, you see.’

‘And the next link?’
‘Well, we must go now and look for that.’
He took a revolver from the drawer and handed it to me.

Reprint 2025-26



50 Woven Words

‘I have my old favourite with me. If our Wild West friend
tries to live up to his nickname, we must be ready for him.
I’ll give you an hour for a siesta, Watson, and then I think
it will be time for our Ryder Street adventure.’

It was just four o’clock when we reached the curious
apartment of Nathan Garrideb. Mrs Saunders, the
caretaker, was about to leave but she had no hesitation in
admitting us, for the door shut with a spring lock and
Holmes promised to see that all was safe before we left.
Shortly afterwards the outer door closed, her bonnet passed
the bow window and we knew that we were alone in the
lower floor of the house. Holmes made a rapid examination
of the premises. There was one cupboard in a dark corner
which stood out a little from the wall. It was behind this
that we eventually crouched, while Holmes in a whisper
outlined his intentions.

‘He wanted to get our amiable friend out of his room—
that is very clear and, as the collector never went out, it
took some planning to do it. The whole of this Garrideb
invention was apparently for no other end. I must say,
Watson, that there is a certain devilish ingenuity about it,
even if the queer name of the tenant did give him an opening
which he could hardly have expected. He wove his plot
with remarkable cunning.’

‘But what did he want?’
‘Well, that is what we are here to find out. It has nothing

whatever to do with our client, so far as I can read the
situation. It is something connected with the man he
murdered—the man who may have been his confederate in
crime. There is some guilty secret in the room. That is how
I read it. At first I thought our friend might have something
in his collection more valuable than he knew—something
worth the attention of a big criminal. But the fact that
Rodger Presbury of evil memory inhabited these rooms points
to some deeper reason. Well, Watson, we can but possess
our souls in patience and see what the hour may bring.’

That hour was not long in striking. We crouched closer
in the shadow as we heard the outer door open and shut.
Then came the sharp, metallic snap of a key and the
American was in the room. He closed the door softly behind

Reprint 2025-26



The Adventure of the Three Garridebs 51

him, took a sharp glance around him to see that all was
safe, threw off his overcoat and walked up to the central
table with the brisk manner of one who knows exactly what
he has to do and how to do it. He pushed the table to one
side, tore up the square of carpet on which it rested, rolled
it completely back and then, drawing a jimmy from his
inside pocket, he knelt down and worked vigorously upon
the floor. Presently we heard the sound of sliding boards
and, an instant later, a square had opened in the planks.
Killer Evans struck a match, lit a stump of candle, and
vanished from our view.

Clearly our moment had come. Holmes touched my
wrist as a signal and together we stole across to the
open trapdoor. Gently as we moved, however, the old floor
must have creaked under our feet, for the head of our
American, peering anxiously round, emerged suddenly
from the open space. His face turned upon us with a
glare of baffled rage, which gradually softened into a
rather shamefaced grin as he realised that two pistols
were pointed at his head.

‘Well, well!’ said he, coolly as he scrambled to the
surface. ‘I guess you have been one too many for me, Mr
Holmes. Saw through my game, I suppose and played me
for a sucker from the first. Well, sir, I hand it to you; you
have me beat and—’

In an instant he had whisked out a revolver from his
breast  pocket and had fired two shots. I felt a sudden hot
sear as if a red-hot iron had been pressed to my thigh.
There was a crash as Holmes’s pistol came down on the
man’s head. I had a vision of him sprawling upon the floor
with blood running down his face while Holmes rummaged
him for weapons. Then my friend’s wiry arms were round
me and he was leading me to a chair.

‘You’re not hurt, Watson? For God’s sake, say that you
are not hurt!’

It was worth a wound—it was worth many wounds—to
know the depth of loyalty and love which lay behind that
cold mask. The clear, hard eyes were dimmed for a moment
and the firm lips were shaking. For the one and only time I
caught a glimpse of a great heart as well as of a great

Reprint 2025-26



52 Woven Words

brain. All my years of humble but single-minded service
culminated in that moment of revelation.

‘It’s nothing, Holmes. It’s a mere scratch.’
He had ripped up my trousers with his pocket-knife.
‘You are right,’ he cried, with an immense sigh of relief.

‘It is quite superficial.’ His face set like flint as he glared at
our prisoner who was sitting up with a dazed face. ‘By the
Lord, it is as well for you. If you had killed Watson, you
would not have got out of this room alive. Now, sir, what
have you to say for yourself?’

He had nothing to say for himself. He only lay and
scowled. I leaned on Holmes’s arm and together we looked
down into the small cellar which had been disclosed by the
secret flap. It was still illuminated by the candle which
Evans had taken down with him. Our eyes fell upon a
mass of rusted machinery, great rolls of paper, a litter of
bottles and, neatly arranged upon a small table, a number
of neat little bundles.

‘A printing press—a counterfeiter’s outfit,’ said Holmes.
‘Yes, sir,’ said our prisoner, staggering slowly to his

feet and then sinking into the chair. ‘The greatest
counterfeiter London ever saw. That’s Presbury’s machine
and those bundles on the table are two thousand of
Presbury’s notes worth a hundred each and fit to pass
anywhere. Help yourselves, gentlemen. Call it a deal and
let me beat it.’

Holmes laughed.
‘We don’t do things like that, Mr Evans. There is no

bolt-hole for you in this country. You shot this man,
Presbury, did you not?’

‘Yes, sir, and got five years for it, though it was he who
pulled on me. Five years—when I should have had a medal
the size of a soup plate. No living man could tell a Presbury
from a Bank of England, and if I hadn’t put him out he
would have flooded London with them. I was the only one in
the world who knew where he made them. Can you wonder
that I wanted to get to the place? And can you wonder that
when I found this crazy boob of a bughunter with the queer
name squatting right on the top of it, and never quitting his
room, I had to do the best I could to shift him? Maybe I

Reprint 2025-26



The Adventure of the Three Garridebs 53

would have been wiser if I had put him away. It would have
been easy enough, but I’m a soft-hearted guy that can’t begin
shooting unless the other man has a gun also. But say, Mr
Holmes, what have I done wrong, anyhow? I’ve not used this
plant. I’ve not hurt this old stiff. Where do you get me?’

‘Only attempted murder, so far as I can see,’ said Holmes.
‘But that’s not our job. They take that at the next stage.
What we wanted at present was just your sweet self. Please
give the Yard a call, Watson. It won’t be entirely unexpected.’

So those were the facts about Killer Evans and his
remarkable invention of the three Garridebs. We heard later
that our poor old friend never got over the shock of his
dissipated dreams. When his castle in the air fell down, it
buried him beneath the ruins. He was last heard of at a
nursing home in Brixton. It was a glad day at the Yard
when the Presbury outfit was discovered for, though they
knew that it existed, they had never been able, after the
death of the man, to find out where it was. Evans had
indeed done great service and caused several worthy CID
men to sleep the sounder, for the counterfeiter stands in a
class by himself as a public danger. They would willingly
have subscribed to that soup-plate medal of which the
criminal had spoken, but an unappreciative Bench took a
less favourite view and the Killer returned to those shades
from which he had just emerged.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Arthur Conan Doyle (1859–1930), who was
a medical practitioner, is well known for his
detective stories. His creations—the
detective Sherlock Holmes and the
chronicler, Dr Watson—are well known the
world over. The collections of his short stories
include The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes
and The Return of Sherlock Holmes. The stories are full of
suspense, excitement and humour. At the same time, they
develop a structure of keen, analytical intelligence, with a
deep human appeal.

Reprint 2025-26



54 Woven Words

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. What clues did Sherlock Holmes work upon to get at the fact
that the story of the three Garridebs was a ruse?

2. What was John Garrideb’s objective in inventing the story of
Alexander Hamilton Garrideb and his legacy?

3. Why didn’t John Garrideb like the idea of including Holmes in
the hunt for the third Garrideb?

4. Who was Roger Presbury and how was John Garrideb connected
with him?

5. How did Holmes guess that John Garrideb would go to 136,
Little Ryder Street? Did he expect to find what he ultimately did
before he went there?

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss the following in pairs or in small groups

1. ‘It was worth a wound—it was worth many wounds—to know
the depth of loyalty and love that lay behind that cold mask’—
how does this comment throw light on the kind of relationship
between Holmes and Watson?

2. The cleverest of criminals leave behind clues to their crime.

3. How did Holmes’ digressions sometimes prove in the end to have
a bearing on the matter on hand? Discuss this with reference
to all the apparently irrelevant points he was trying to gather
information from.

APPRECIATION

1. Examine the structure of the short story ‘Adventure of the Three
Garridebs’ with the help of this framework

♦ The narrator of the story
♦ Introduction of the topic of the story
♦ Introduction of the main characters in the plot
♦ Development of the plot
♦ Climax
♦ Resolution of the mystery.

2. Examine the subtle humour in the narration of the story that
lightens the gravity of the subject matter.

Reprint 2025-26



The Adventure of the Three Garridebs 55

LANGUAGE WORK

1. a. Identify the words in the advertisement that gave away the
fact that it was placed by John Garrideb.

b. Make a list of words which are spelt differently in American
and British English.

2. Look at the highlighted expressions in the following sentences
from the text and explain their figurative meaning

♦ ‘I went through it, sir, with a fine-toothed comb and never
a Garrideb could I catch.’

♦ ‘They are my favourite covert for putting up a bird, and I
would never have overlooked a cock pheasant as that.’

♦ ‘There is no bolt-hole for you in this country.’
♦ ‘When his castle in the air fell down, it buried him beneath

the ruins.’

SUGGESTED READING

1. The Case-book of Sherlock Holmes by Arthur Conan Doyle

2. The Valley of Fear by Arthur Conan Doyle

3. Tales of Adventure and Medical Life by Arthur Conan Doyle.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



56 Woven Words

##5##
5 Pappachi’s Moth
Arundhati Roy

F Guess the meaning of the following expressions from the context

ignominy of retirement conical corneas

slouch around weaving

sullen circles entomologist

taxonomic reshuffle lepidopterists

pernicious ghost

Mammachi had started making pickles commercially soon
after Pappachi retired from government service in Delhi
and came to live in Ayemenem. The Kottayam Bible Society
was having a fair and asked Mammachi to make some of
her famous banana jam and tender mango pickle. It sold
quickly, and Mammachi found that she had more orders
than she could cope with. Thrilled with her success, she
decided to persist with the pickles and jam, and soon found
herself busy all year round. Pappachi, for his part, was
having trouble coping with the ignominy of retirement. He
was seventeen years older than Mammachi and realised
with a shock that he was an old man when his wife was
still in her prime.

Though Mammachi had conical corneas and was
already practically blind, Pappachi would not help her with
the pickle-making, because he did not consider pickle-
making a suitable job for a high-ranking ex-government
official. He had always been a jealous man so he greatly
resented the attention his wife was suddenly getting. He
slouched around the compound in his immaculately tailored
suits, weaving sullen circles around mounds of red chillies
and freshly powdered yellow turmeric, watching Mammachi
supervise the buying, the weighing, the salting and drying,

Reprint 2025-26



Pappachi’s Moth 57

of limes and tender mangoes. Every night he beat her with
a brass flower vase. The beatings weren’t new. What was
new was only the frequency with which they took place.
One night Pappachi broke the bow of Mammachi’s violin
and threw it in the river.

Then Chacko came home for a summer vacation from
Oxford. He had grown to be a big man and was, in those
days, strong from rowing for Balliol. A week after he arrived
he found Pappachi beating Mammachi in the study. Chacko
strode into the room, caught Pappachi’s vase-hand and
twisted it around his back.

‘I never want this to happen again,’ he told his father,
‘Ever.’

For the rest of that day Pappachi sat in the verandah
and stared stonily out at the ornamental garden, ignoring
the plates of food that Kochu Maria brought him. Late at
night he went into his study and brought out his favourite
mahogany rocking chair. He put it down in the middle of
the driveway and smashed it into little bits with a plumber’s
monkey wrench. He left it there in the moonlight, a heap of
varnished wicker and splintered wood. He never touched
Mammachi again. But he never spoke to her either as long
as he lived. When he needed anything he used Kochu Maria
or Baby Kochamma as intermediaries.

In the evenings, when he knew visitors were expected,
he would sit on the verandah and sew buttons that weren’t
missing onto his shirts, to create the impression that
Mammachi neglected him. To some small degree he did
succeed in further corroding Ayemenem’s view of working
wives.

He bought the skyblue Plymouth from an old
Englishman in Munnar. He became a familiar sight in
Ayemenem, coasting importantly down the narrow road in
his wide car, looking outwardly elegant but sweating freely
inside his woollen suits. He wouldn’t allow Mammachi or
anyone else in the family to use it, or even to sit in it. The
Plymouth was Pappachi’s revenge.

Pappachi had been an Imperial Entomologist at the
Pusa Institute. After Independence, when the British left,
his designation was changed from Imperial Entomologist

Reprint 2025-26



58 Woven Words

to Joint Director, Entomology. The year he retired, he had
risen to a rank equivalent to Director.

His life’s greatest setback was not having had the moth
that he had discovered named after him.

It fell into his drink one evening while he was sitting
in the verandah of a rest house after a long day in the
field. As he picked it out he noticed its unusually dense
dorsal tufts. He took a closer look. With growing excitement
he mounted it, measured it and the next morning placed it
in the sun for a few hours for the alcohol to evaporate.
Then he caught the first train back to Delhi. To taxonomic
attention and, he  hoped, fame. After six unbearable months
of anxiety, to Pappachi’s intense disappointment, he was
told that his moth had finally been identified as a slightly
unusual race of a well-known species that belonged to the
tropical family, Lymantriidae.

The real blow came twelve years later, when, as a
consequence of a radical taxonomic reshuffle, lepidopterists
decided that Pappachi’s moth was in fact a separate species
and genus hitherto unknown to science. By then, of course,
Pappachi had retired and moved to Ayemenem. It was too
late for him to assert his claim to the discovery. His moth
was named after the Acting Director of the Department of
Entomology, a junior officer whom Pappachi had always
disliked.

In the years to come, even though he had been ill-
humoured long before he discovered the moth, Pappachi’s
Moth was held responsible for his black moods and sudden
bouts of temper. Its pernicious ghost—grey, furry and with
unusually dense dorsal tufts—haunted every house that
he ever lived in. It tormented him and his children and his
children’s children.

Until the day he died, even in the stifling Ayemenem
heat, every single day, Pappachi wore a well-pressed three-
piece suit and his gold pocket watch. On his dressing table,
next to his cologne and silver hair brush, he kept a picture
of himself as a young man, with his hair slicked down,
taken in a photographer’s studio in Vienna where he had
done the six-month diploma course that had qualified him
to apply for the post of Imperial Entomologist. It was during

Reprint 2025-26



Pappachi’s Moth 59

those few months they spent in Vienna that Mammachi
took her first lessons on the violin. The lessons were
abruptly discontinued when Mammachi’s teacher, Launsky-
Tieffenthal, made the mistake of telling Pappachi that his
wife was exceptionally talented and, in his opinion,
potentially concert class.

Mammachi pasted, in the family photograph album,
the clipping from the Indian Express that reported
Pappachi’s death. It said:

Noted entomologist, Shri Benaan John Ipe, son of late Rev.E.
John Ipe of Ayemenem (popularly known as Punnyan
Kunju), suffered a massive heart attack and passed away
at the Kottayam General Hospital last night. He developed
chest pains around 1.05 a.m. and was rushed to hospital.
The end came at 2.45 a.m. Shri Ipe had been keeping
indifferent health since last six months. He is survived by
his wife Soshamma and two children.
At Pappachi’s funeral, Mammachi cried and her contact

lenses slid around in her eyes. Ammu told the twins that
Mammachi was crying more because she was used to him
than because she loved him. She was used to having him
slouching around the pickle factory, and was used to being
beaten from time to time. Ammu said that human beings
were creatures of habit, and it was amazing the kind of
things they could get used to. You only had to look around
you, Ammu said, to see that beatings with brass vases
were the least of them.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Arundhati Roy, (born 1961) an architect by
training, is a novelist and screen writer. Her
first novel, The God of Small Things, from which
this extract has been selected, is the winner
of the 1997 Booker Prize, a prestigious literary
award. She now lives in New Delhi and is an activist.

Reprint 2025-26



60 Woven Words

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. Comment on the relationship shared by Mammachi and
Pappachi.

2. How does Mammachi stand out as an independent and resilient
woman in the text?

3. Why does John Ipe consider retirement to be a dishonour?

4. What was the underlying reason for John Ipe’s disgust with the
world?

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss in pairs

1. Chacko’s firmness in dealing with the irrational behaviour of
his father.

2. The contrast between the outward elegance of a person and his
private behaviour.

3. Approval from the outside world and approval within the family.

APPRECIATION

1. How does the author succeed in raising crucial social issues
not through open criticism but through subtle suggestion?

2. Within a few pages the author has packed the important events
in the lives of John Ipe and his wife. Discuss how conciseness
and economy of expression can achieve effective portrayal of
entire lives.

3.    Identify instances of ironical comment in the story.

LANGUAGE WORK

1. Entomologist and lepidopterist are mentioned in the text and
you must have guessed the meanings of these words or found
them out from the dictionary.

Now match the kinds of scientists given below with the work
they do:

                        A                                            B

ornithologist study of the skin

gerontologist                       study of cells

Reprint 2025-26



Pappachi’s Moth 61

ergonomist                          study of birds

dermatologist                      study of old age

cytologist study of design of equipment

2. A short report announcing the death of a person in a newspaper
is called an ‘obituary’. Where would you find the following

a citation an epitaph a glossary

an abstract a postscript

F Necessity is said to be the mother of invention. Read this piece
below on the invention of the Braille system to help the visually
impaired.

READING FOR THE BLIND

Until 1819, learning material for the blind was provided by
using letters of the alphabet made of wood, lead, twigs or,
sometimes, pins arranged in large pincushions. The Royal
Institute for Young Blind Persons in Paris used three-inch
deep letters made from cloth.

In 1918, a ten year old blind boy named Louis Braille enrolled
at the Institute. It was around this time that Captain Barbier
de la Serre devised an alphabet of raised dots and dashes
embossed on strips of cardboard. He called it ‘night writing’
because soldiers could use it to ‘read’ with their fingertips
when in action at night.

His system, however, was not a success because it was too
complicated: it used an arrangement of twelve dots to each
letter. Braille, now a teenager, became interested in this
system. He simplified it and developed the present
internationally used Braille system.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



62 Woven Words

##6##
6 The Third and Final Continent
Jhumpa Lahiri

F Guess what these words and phrases mean from the context

LSE Grundig reel-to-reel hollered

heralded clamorous stucco

forsythia bushes ruffles chapped

foyer mortified

I left India in 1964 with a certificate in commerce and the
equivalent, in those days, of ten dollars to my name. For
three weeks I sailed on the SS Roma, an Italian cargo vessel,
in a third-class cabin next to the ship’s engine, across the
Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, the Mediterranean and, finally,
to England. I lived in north London, in Finsbury Park, in a
house occupied entirely by penniless Bengali bachelors like
myself, at least a dozen and sometimes more, all struggling
to educate and establish ourselves abroad.

I attended lectures at the LSE and worked at the
university library to get by. We lived three or four to a
room, shared a single, icy toilet, and took turns cooking
pots of egg curry, which we ate with our hands on a table
covered with newspapers. Apart from our jobs we had few
responsibilities. On weekends we lounged barefoot in
drawstring pyjamas, drinking tea and smoking Rothmans,
or set out to watch cricket at Lord’s. Some weekends the
house was crammed with still more Bengalis to whom we
had introduced ourselves at the greengrocer or on the Tube,
and we made yet more egg curry, and played Mukesh on a
Grundig reel-to-reel, and soaked our dirty dishes in the
bathtub. Every now and then someone in the house moved
out to live with a woman whom his family back in Calcutta
had determined he was to wed. In 1969, when I was thirty-

Reprint 2025-26



The Third and Final Continent 63

six years old, my own marriage was arranged. Around the
same time, I was offered a full-time job in America, in the
processing department of a library at MIT. The salary was
generous enough to support a wife, and I was honoured to
be  hired by a world-famous university, and so I obtained a
sixth-preference green card and prepared to travel farther
still.

By now I had enough money to go by plane. I flew first
to Calcutta, to attend my wedding, and a week later I flew
first to Boston, to begin my new job. During the flight I
read The Student Guide to North America, a paperback volume
that I’d bought before leaving London, for seven shillings
six pence on Tottenham Court Road for, although I was no
longer a student, I was on a budget all the same. I learned
that Americans drove on the right side of the road, not the
left, and that they called a lift an elevator and an engaged
phone busy. ‘The pace of life in North America is different
from Britain as you will soon discover,’ the guidebook
informed me. ‘Everybody feels he must get to the top. Don’t
expect an English cup of tea.’ As the plane began its descent
over Boston Harbour, the pilot announced the weather and
time, and that President Nixon had declared a national
holiday: two American men had landed on the moon.
Several passengers cheered. ‘God bless America!’ one of
them hollered. Across the aisle, I saw a woman praying.

I spent my first night at the YMCA in Central Square,
Cambridge, an  inexpensive accommodation recommended
by my guidebook. It was walking distance from MIT, and
steps away from the post office and a supermarket called
Purity Supreme. The room contained a cot, a desk and a
small wooden cross on one wall. A sign on the door said
cooking was strictly forbidden. A bare window overlooked
Massachusetts Avenue, a major thoroughfare with traffic
in both directions. Car horns, shrill and prolonged, blared
one after another. Flashing sirens heralded endless
emergencies and a fleet of buses rumbled past, their doors
opening and closing with a powerful hiss, throughout the
night. The noise was constantly distracting, at times
suffocating. I felt it deep in my ribs, just as I had felt the
furious drone of the engine on the SS Roma. But there was

Reprint 2025-26



64 Woven Words

no ship’s deck to escape to, no glittering ocean to thrill my
soul, no breeze to cool my face, no one to talk to. I was too
tired to pace the gloomy corridors of the YMCA in my
drawstring pyjamas. Instead I sat at the desk and stared
out the window, at the city hall of Cambridge and a row of
small shops. In the morning I reported to my job at the
Dewey Library, a beige fortlike building by Memorial Drive.
I also opened a bank account, rented a post office box, and
bought a plastic bowl and a spoon at Woolworth’s, a store
whose name I recognised  from London. I went to Purity
Supreme, wandering up and down the aisles, converting
ounces to grams and comparing prices to things in England.
In the end I bought a small carton of milk and a box of
cornflakes. This was my first meal in America. I ate it at
my desk. I preferred it to hamburgers or hot dogs, the only
alternative I could afford in the coffee shops on
Massachusetts Avenue, and, besides, at the time I had yet
to consume any beef. Even the simple chore of buying milk
was new to me; in London we’d had bottles delivered each
morning to our door.

In a week I had adjusted, more or less. I ate cornflakes
and milk, morning and night, and bought some bananas
for variety, slicing them into the bowl with the edge of my
spoon. In addition I bought tea bags and a flask, which the
salesman in Woolworth’s referred to as a thermos (a flask,
he informed me, was used to store whiskey, another thing
I had never consumed). For the price of one cup of tea at a
coffee shop, I filled the flask with boiling water on my way
to work each morning, and brewed the four cups I drank in
the course of a day. I bought a larger carton of milk, and
learned to leave it on the shaded part of the windowsill, as
I had seen another resident at the YMCA do. To pass the
time in the evenings I read the Boston Globe downstairs, in
a spacious room with stained glass windows. I read every
article and advertisement so that I would grow familiar
with things and, when my eyes grew tired, I slept. Only I
did not sleep well. Each night I had to keep the window
wide open; it was the only source of air in the stifling room,
and the noise was intolerable. I would lie on the cot with
my fingers pressed into my ears but when I drifted off to

Reprint 2025-26



The Third and Final Continent 65

sleep, my hands fell away and the noise of the traffic would
wake me up again. Pigeon feathers drifted onto the window-
sill and, one evening, when I poured milk over my
cornflakes, I saw that it had soured. Nevertheless I resolved
to stay at the YMCA for six weeks, until my wife’s passport
and green card were ready. Once she arrived I would have
to rent a proper apartment and so, from time to time, I
studied the classified section of the newspaper, or stopped
in at the housing office at MIT during my lunch-break, to
see what was available in my price range. It was in this
manner that I discovered a room, for immediate occupancy,
in a house on a quiet street, the listing said, for eight
dollars per week. I copied the number into my guidebook
and dialled from a pay telephone, sorting through the coins
with which I was still unfamiliar, smaller and lighter than
shillings, heavier and brighter than paisas.

‘Who is speaking?’ a woman demanded. Her voice was
bold and clamorous.

‘Yes, good afternoon, madame. I am calling about the
room, for rent.’

‘Harvard or Tech?’
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘Are you from Harvard or Tech?’
Gathering that Tech referred to the Massachusetts

Institute of Technology, I replied, ‘I work at Dewey Library’,
adding tentatively, ‘at Tech’.

I was given an address and an appointment for seven
o’clock that evening. Thirty minutes before the hour I set
out, my guidebook in my pocket, my breath fresh with
Listerine. I turned down a street shaded with trees,
perpendicular to Massachusetts Avenue. Stray blades of
grass poked between the cracks of the footpath. In spite of
the heat I wore a coat and a tie, regarding the event as I
would any other interview; I had never lived in the home of
a person who was not Indian. The house, surrounded by a
chain-link fence, was off-white with dark brown trim.
Unlike the stucco row house I’d lived in, in London, this
house, fully detached, was covered with wooded shingles,
with a tangle of forsythia bushes plastered against the
front and sides. When I pressed the calling bell, the woman

Reprint 2025-26



66 Woven Words

with whom I had spoken on the phone hollered from what
seemed to be just the other side of the door, ‘One minute
please!’

Several minutes later the door was opened by a tiny,
extremely old woman. A mass of snowy hair was arranged
like a small sack on top of her head. As I stepped into the
house, she sat down on a wooden bench positioned at the
bottom of a narrow carpeted staircase. Once she was settled
on the bench, in a small pool of light, she peered up at me
with undivided attention. She wore a long black skirt that
spread like a stiff tent to the floor, and a starched white
shirt edged with ruffles at the throat and cuffs. Her hands,
folded together in her lap, had long pallid fingers, with
swollen knuckles and tough yellow nails. Age had battered
her features so that she almost resembled a man, with
sharp, shrunken eyes and prominent creases on either side
of her nose. Her lips, chapped and faded, had nearly
disappeared, and her eyebrows were missing altogether.
Nevertheless she looked fierce.

‘Look up!’ she commanded. She shouted even though I
stood only a few feet away. ‘Fasten the chain and firmly
press that button on the knob! This is the first thing you
shall do when you enter, is that clear?’

I locked the door as directed and examined the house.
Next to the bench on which the woman sat was a small
round table, its legs fully concealed, much like the woman’s,
by a skirt of lace. The table held a lamp, a transistor radio,
a leather change purse with a silver clasp and a telephone.
A thick wooden cane coated with a layer of dust was propped
against one side. There was a parlour to my right, lined
with bookcases and filled with shabby claw-footed furniture.
In the corner of the parlour I saw a grand piano with its
top down, piled with papers. The piano’s bench was missing;
it seemed to be the one on which the woman was sitting.
Somewhere in the house a clock chimed seven times.

‘You’re punctual!’ the woman proclaimed. ‘ I expect you
shall be so with the rent!’

‘I have a letter, madame.’ In my jacket pocket was a
letter confirming my employment from MIT, which I had
brought along to prove that I was indeed from Tech.

Reprint 2025-26



The Third and Final Continent 67

She stared at the letter, then handed it back to me
carefully, gripping it with her fingers as if it were a dinner
plate heaped with food instead of a sheet of paper. She did
not wear glasses and I wondered if she’d read a word of it.
‘The last boy was always late! Still owes me eight dollars!
Harvard boys aren’t what they used to be! Only Harvard
and Tech in this house! How’s Tech, boy?’

‘It is very well.’
‘You checked the lock?’
‘Yes, madame.’
She slapped the space beside her on the bench with

one hand and told me to sit down. For a moment she was
silent. Then she intoned, as if she alone possessed this
knowledge:

‘There is an American flag on the moon!’
‘Yes, madame.’ Until then I had not thought very much

about the moon shot. It was in the newspaper, of course,
article upon article. The astronauts had landed on the
shores of the Sea of Tranquillity, I had read, travelling
farther than anyone in the history of civilization. For a few
hours they explored the moon’s surface. They gathered rocks
in their pockets, described their surroundings (a
magnificent desolation, according to one astronaut), spoke
by phone to the President and planted a flag in lunar soil.
The voyage was hailed as man’s most awesome achievement.
I had seen full-page photographs in the Globe, of the
astronauts in their inflated costumes, and read about what
certain people in Boston had been doing at the exact moment
the astronauts landed, on a Sunday afternoon. A man said
that he was operating a swan boat with a radio pressed to
his ear; a woman had been baking rolls for her
grandchildren.

The woman bellowed, ‘A flag on the moon, boy! I heard
it on the radio! Isn’t that splendid?’

‘Yes, madame.’
But she was not satisfied with my reply. Instead she

commanded, ‘Say ‘splendid’!’
I was both baffled and somewhat insulted by the

request. It reminded me of the way I was taught
multiplication tables as a child, repeating after the master,

Reprint 2025-26



68 Woven Words

sitting cross-legged, without shoes or pencils, on the floor
of my one-room Tollygunge school. It also reminded me of
my wedding when I had repeated endless Sanskrit verses
after the priest, verses I barely understood, which joined
me to my wife. I said nothing.

‘Say ‘splendid’!’ the woman bellowed once again.
‘Splendid,’ I murmured. I had to repeat the word a

second time at the top of my lungs so she could hear. I am
soft-spoken by nature and was especially reluctant to raise
my voice to an elderly woman whom I had met only moments
ago, but she did not appear to be offended. If anything the
reply pleased her because her next command was:

‘Go see the room!’
I rose from the bench and mounted the narrow carpeted

staircase. There were five doors, two on either side of an
equally narrow hallway and one at the opposite end. Only
one door was partly open. The room contained a twin bed
under a sloping ceiling, a brown oval rug, a basin with an
exposed pipe, and a chest of drawers. One door, painted
white, led to a closet, another to a toilet and a tub. The
walls were covered with gray and ivory striped paper. The
window was open; net curtains stirred in the breeze. I lifted
them away and inspected the view: a small backyard, with
a few fruit trees and an empty clothesline. I was satisfied.
From the bottom of the stairs I heard the woman demand,
‘What is your decision?’

When I returned to the foyer and told her, she picked
up the leather change purse on the table, opened the clasp,
fished about with her fingers, and produced a key on a
thin wire hoop. She informed me that there was a kitchen
at the back of the house, accessible through the parlour. I
was welcome to use the stove as long as I left it as I found
it. Sheets and towels were provided but keeping them clean
was my own responsibility. The rent was due Friday
mornings on the ledge above the piano keys. ‘And no lady
visitors!’

‘I am a married man, madame.’ It was the first time I
had announced this fact to anyone.

But she had not heard. ‘No lady visitors!’ she insisted.
She introduced herself as Mrs Croft.

Reprint 2025-26



The Third and Final Continent 69

My wife’s name was Mala. The marriage had been
arranged by my older brother and his wife. I regarded the
proposition with neither objection nor enthusiasm. It was
a duty expected of me as it was expected of every man. She
was the daughter of a school teacher in Beleghata. I was
told that she could cook, knot, embroider, sketch landscapes
and recite poems by Tagore, but these talents could not
make up for the fact that she did not possess a fair
complexion and so a string of men had rejected her to her
face. She was twenty-seven, an age when her parents had
begun to fear that she would never marry, and so they
were willing to ship their only child halfway across the
world in order to save her from spinsterhood.

For five nights we shared a bed. Each of those nights,
after applying cold cream and braiding her hair, which she
tied up at the end with a black cotton string, she turned
from me and wept; she missed her parents. Although I
would be leaving the country in a few days, custom dictated
that she was now a part of my household, and for the next
six weeks she was to live with my brother and his wife,
cooking, cleaning, serving tea and sweets to guests. I did
nothing to console her. I lay on my own side of the bed,
reading my guidebook by flashlight and anticipating my
journey. At times I thought of the tiny room on the other
side of the wall which had belonged to my mother. Now the
room was practically empty; the wooden pallet on which
she’d once slept was piled with trunks and old bedding.
Nearly six years ago, before leaving for London, I had watched
her die on that bed, had found her playing with her
excrement in her final days. Before we cremated her I had
cleaned each of her fingernails with a hairpin and then,
because my brother could not bear it, I had assumed the
role of eldest son, and had touched the flame to her temple,
to release her tormented soul to heaven.

The next morning I moved into the room in Mrs Croft’s
house. When I unlocked the door, I saw that she was sitting
on the piano bench, on the same side as the previous
evening. She wore the same black skirt, the same starched
white blouse and had her hands folded together the same
way in her lap. She looked so much the same that I wondered

Reprint 2025-26



70 Woven Words

if she’d spent the whole night on the bench. I put my suitcase
upstairs, filled my flask with boiling water in the kitchen,
and headed off to work. That evening when I came home
from the university, she was still there.

‘Sit down, boy!’ She slapped the space beside her.
I perched beside her on the bench. I had a bag of

groceries with me—more milk, more cornflakes and more
bananas, for, my inspection of the kitchen earlier in the
day had revealed no spare pots, pans, or cooking utensils.
There were only two saucepans in the refrigerator, both
containing some orange broth, and a copper kettle on the
stove.

‘Good evening, madame.’
She asked me if I had checked the lock. I told her I

had.
For a moment she was silent. Then suddenly she

declared, with equal measures of disbelief and delight as
the night before, ‘There’s an American flag on the moon,
boy!’

‘Yes, madame.’
‘A flag on the moon! Isn’t that splendid?’
I nodded, dreading what I knew was coming. ‘Yes,

madame.’
‘Say ‘splendid’!’
This time I paused, looking to either side in case anyone

were there to overhear me, though I knew perfectly well
that the house was empty. I felt like an idiot. But is was a
small enough thing to ask. ‘splendid!’ I cried out.

Within days it became our routine. In the mornings,
when I left for the library, Mrs Croft was either hidden
away in her bedroom, on the other side of the staircase, or
she was sitting on the bench, oblivious to my presence,
listening to the news or classical music on the radio. But
each evening when I returned the same thing happened:
she slapped the bench, ordered me to sit down, declared
that there was a flag on the moon, and declared that it was
splendid. I said it was splendid, too, and then we sat in
silence. As awkward as it was, and as endless as it felt to
me then, the nightly encounter lasted only about ten
minutes; inevitably she would drift off to sleep, her head

Reprint 2025-26



The Third and Final Continent 71

falling abruptly toward her chest, leaving me free to retire
to my room. By then, of course, there was no flag on the
moon. The astronauts, I had read in the paper, had taken
it down before flying back to earth. But I did not have the
heart to tell her.

Friday morning, when my first week’s rent was due, I
went to the piano in the parlour to place my money on the
ledge. The piano keys were dull and discoloured. When I
pressed one, it made no sound at all. I had put eight one-
dollar bills in an envelope and written Mrs Croft’s name on
the front of it; I was not in the habit of leaving money
unmarked and unattended. From where I stood I could see
the profile of her tent-shaped skirt. She was sitting on the
bench, listening to the radio. It seemed unnecessary to
make her get up and walk all the way to the piano. I never
saw her walking about and assumed, from the cane always
propped against the round table at her side, that she did
so with difficulty. When I approached the bench, she peered
up at me and demanded:

‘What is your business?’
‘The rent, madame.’
‘On the ledge above the piano keys!’
‘I have it here.’ I extended the envelope toward her, but

her fingers, folded together in her lap, did not budge. I
bowed slightly and lowered the envelope, so that it hovered
just above her hands. After a moment she accepted, and
nodded her head.

That night when I came home, she did not slap the
bench but out of habit I sat beside her as usual. She asked
me if I had checked the lock but she mentioned nothing
about the flag on the moon. Instead she said:

‘It was very kind of you!’
‘I beg your pardon, madame?’
‘Very kind of you!’
She was still holding the envelope in her hands.
On Sunday there was a knock on my door. An elderly

woman introduced herself: she was Mrs Croft’s daughter,
Helen. She walked into the room and looked at each of the
walls as if for signs of change, glancing at the shirts that
hung in the closet, the neckties draped over the doorknob,

Reprint 2025-26



72 Woven Words

the box of cornflakes on the chest of drawers, the dirty
bowl and spoon in the basin. She was short and thick-
waisted, with cropped silver hair and bright pink lipstick.
She wore a sleeveless summer dress, a row of white plastic
beads and spectacles on a chain that hung like a swing
against her chest. The backs of her legs were mapped with
dark blue veins and her upper arms sagged like the flesh
of a roasted eggplant. She told me she lived in Arlington, a
town farther up Massachusetts Avenue. ‘I come once a week
to bring Mother groceries. Has she sent you packing yet?’

‘It is very well, madame.’
‘Some of the boys run screaming. But I think she likes

you. You’re the first boarder she’s ever referred to as a
gentleman.’

‘Not at all, madame.’
She looked at me, noticing my bare feet (I still felt

strange wearing shoes indoors, and always removed them
before entering my room). ‘Are you new to Boston?’

‘New to America, madame.’
‘From?’ She raised her eyebrows.
‘I am from Calcutta, India.’
‘Is that right? We had a Brazilian fellow, about a year

ago. You’ll find Cambridge a very international city.’
I nodded, and began to wonder how long our

conversation would last. But at that moment we heard
Mrs Croft’s electrifying voice rising up the stairs. When we
stepped into the hallway we heard her hollering:

‘You are to come downstairs immediately!’
‘What is it?’ Helen hollered back.
‘Immediately!’
I put on my shoes at once. Helen sighed.
We walked down the staircase. It was too narrow for

us to descend side by side, so I followed Helen, who seemed
to be in no hurry, and complained at one point that she
had a bad knee. ‘Have you been walking without your cane?’
Helen called out. ‘You know you’re not supposed to walk
without that cane.’ She paused, resting her hand on the
banister, and looked back at me. ‘She slips sometimes.’

For the first time Mrs Croft seemed vulnerable. I
pictured her on the floor in front of the bench, flat on her

Reprint 2025-26



The Third and Final Continent 73

back, staring at the ceiling, her feet pointing in opposite
directions. But when we reached the bottom of the staircase
she was sitting there as usual, her hands folded together
in her lap. Two grocery bags were at her feet. When we
stood before her she did not slap the bench, or ask us to sit
down. She glared.

‘What is it, Mother?’
‘It’s improper!’
‘What’s improper?’
‘It is improper for a lady and gentleman who are not

married to one another to hold a private conversation
without a chaperone!’

Helen said she was sixty-eight years old, old enough to
be my mother, but Mrs Croft insisted that Helen and I
speak to each other downstairs, in the parlour. She added
that it was also improper for a lady of Helen’s station to
reveal her age, and to wear a dress so high above the ankle.

 ‘For your information, Mother, it’s 1969. What would
you do if you actually left the house one day and saw a girl
in a miniskirt?’

Mrs Croft sniffed, ‘I’d have her arrested.’
Helen shook her head and picked up one of the grocery

bags. I picked up the other one and followed her through
the parlour and into the kitchen. The bags were filled with
cans of soup, which Helen opened up one by one with a few
cranks of a can opener. She tossed the old soup in the
saucepans into the sink, rinsed the pans under the tap,
filled them with soup from the newly opened cans, and put
them back in the refrigerator. ‘A few years ago she could
still open the cans herself,’ Helen said. ‘She hates that I do
it for her now. But the piano killed her hands.’ She put on
her spectacles, glanced at the cupboards, and spotted my
tea bags. ‘Shall we have a cup?’

I filled the kettle on the stove. ‘ I beg your pardon,
madame. The piano?’

‘She used to give lessons. For forty years. It was how
she raised us after my father died.’ Helen put her hands on
her hips, staring at the open refrigerator. She reached into
the back, pulled out a wrapped stick of butter, frowned,
and tossed it into the garbage. ‘That ought to do it,’ she

Reprint 2025-26



74 Woven Words

said, and put the unopened cans of soup in the cupboard. I
sat at the table and watched as Helen washed the dirty
dishes, tied up the garbage bag, watered a spider plant
over the sink, and poured boiling water into two cups. She
handed one to me without milk, the string of the tea bag
trailing over the side, and sat down at the table.

‘Excuse me, madame, but is it enough?’
Helen took a sip of her tea. Her lipstick left a smiling

pink stain on the inside rim of the cup. ‘Is what enough?’
‘The soup in the pans. Is it enough food for Mrs Croft?’
‘She won’t eat anything else. She stopped eating solids

after she turned one hundred. That was, let’s see, three
years ago.’

I was mortified. I had assumed Mrs Croft was in her
eighties, perhaps as old as ninety. I had never known a
person who had lived for over a century. That this person
was a widow who lived alone mortified me further still. It
was widowhood that had driven my own mother insane.
My father, who worked as a clerk at the General Post Office
of Calcutta, died of encephalitis when I was sixteen. My
mother refused to adjust to life without him; instead, she
sank deeper into a world of darkness from which neither I,
nor my brother, nor concerned relatives, nor psychiatric
clinics on Rashbihari Avenue could save her. What pained
me most was to see her so unguarded, to hear her burp
after meals or expel gas in front of company without the
slightest embarrassment. After my father’s death my brother
abandoned his schooling and began to work in the jute
mill he would eventually manage, in order to keep the
household running. And so it was my job to sit by my
mother’s feet and study for my exams as she counted and
recounted the bracelets on her arm as if they were the
beads of an abacus. We tried to keep an eye on her. Once
she had wandered half naked to the tram depot before we
were able to bring her inside again.

‘I am happy to warm Mrs Croft’s soup in the evenings,’
I suggested, removing the tea bag from my cup and
squeezing out the liquor. ‘It is no trouble.’

Helen looked at her watch, stood up, and poured
the rest of her tea into the sink. ‘ I  wouldn’t i f  I

Reprint 2025-26



The Third and Final Continent 75

were you. That’s the sort of thing that would kill
her altogether.’

That evening, when Helen had gone back to Arlington
and Mrs Croft and I were alone again, I began to worry.
Now that I knew how very old she was, I worried that
something would happen to her in the middle of the night,
or when I was out during the day. As vigorous as her voice
was, and imperious as she seemed, I knew that even a
scratch or a cough could kill a person that old; each day
she lived, I knew, was something of a miracle. Although
Helen had seemed friendly enough, a small part of me
worried that she might accuse me of negligence if anything
were to happen. Helen didn’t seem worried. She came and
went, bringing soup for Mrs Croft, one Sunday after the
next.

In this manner the six weeks of that summer passed. I
came home each evening, after my hours at the library,
and spent a few minutes on the piano bench with Mrs
Croft. I gave her a bit of my company, and assured her that
I had checked the lock, and told her that the flag on the
moon was splendid. Some evenings I sat beside her long
after she had drifted off to sleep, still in awe of how many
years she had spent on this earth. At times I tried to picture
the world she had been born into, in 1866—a world, I
imagined, filled with women in long black skirts and chaste
conversations in the parlour. Now when I looked at her
hands with their swollen knuckles folded together in her
lap, I imagined them smooth and slim, striking the piano
keys. At times I came downstairs, before going to sleep, to
make sure that she was sitting upright on the bench, or
was safe in her bedroom. On Fridays I made sure to put
the rent in her hands. There was nothing I could do for her
beyond these simple gestures. I was not her son and apart
from those eight dollars, I owed her nothing.

At the end of August, Mala’s passport and green card
were ready. I received a telegram with her flight information;
my brother’s house in Calcutta had no telephone. Around
that time I also received a letter from her, written only a few
days after we had parted. There was no salutation; addressing
me by name would have assumed an  intimacy we had not

Reprint 2025-26



76 Woven Words

yet discovered. It contained only a few lines. ‘I write in English
in preparation for the journey. Here I am very much lonely. Is
it very cold there. Is there snow. Yours, Mala.’

I was not touched by her words. We had spent only a
handful of days in each other’s company. And yet we were
bound together; for six weeks she had worn an iron bangle
on her wrist, and applied vermilion powder to the part in
her hair, to signify to the world that she was a bride. In
those six weeks I regarded her arrival as I would the arrival
of a coming month, or season—something inevitable but
meaningless at the time. So little did I know her that, while
details of her face sometimes rose to my memory, I could
not conjure up the whole of it.

A few days after receiving the letter, as I was walking
to work in the morning, I saw an Indian woman on the
other side of Massachusetts Avenue, wearing a sari with
its free end nearly dragging on the footpath, and pushing a
child in a stroller. An American woman with a small black
dog on a leash was walking to one side of her. Suddenly the
dog began barking. From the other side of the street I
watched as the Indian woman, startled, stopped in her
path, at which point the dog leapt up and seized the end of
the sari between its teeth. The American woman scolded
the dog, appeared to apologise, and walked quickly away,
leaving the Indian woman to fix her sari in the middle of
the footpath, and quiet her crying child. She did not see
me standing there and eventually she continued on her
way. Such a mishap, I realised that morning, would soon
be my concern. It was my duty to take care of Mala, to
welcome her and protect her. I would have to buy her her
first pair of snow boots, her first winter coat. I would have
to tell her which streets to avoid, which way the traffic
came, tell her to wear her sari so that the free end did not
drag on the footpath. A five-mile separation from her
parents, I recalled with some irritation, had caused her to
weep.

Unlike Mala, I was used to it all by then: used to
cornflakes and milk, used to Helen’s visits, used to sitting
on the bench with Mrs Croft. The only thing I was not used
to was Mala. Nevertheless I did what I had to do. I went to

Reprint 2025-26



The Third and Final Continent 77

the housing office at MIT and found a furnished apartment
a few blocks away, with a double bed and a private kitchen
and bath, for forty dollars a week. One last Friday I handed
Mrs Croft eight one-dollar bills in an envelope, brought my
suitcase downstairs, and informed her that I was moving.
She put my key into her change purse. The last thing she
asked me to do was to hand her the cane propped against
the table so that she could walk to the door and lock it
behind me. ‘Good-bye, then,’ she said, and retreated back
into the house. I did not expect any display of emotion but
I was disappointed all the same. I was only a boarder, a
man who paid her a bit of money and passed in and out of
her home for six weeks. Compared to a century, it was no
time at all.

At the airport I recognised Mala immediately. The free
end of her sari did not drag on the floor but was draped in
a sign of bridal modesty over her head, just as it had draped
my mother until the day my father died. Her thin brown
arms were stacked with gold bracelets, a small red circle
was painted on her forehead and the edges of her feet were
tinted with a decorative red dye. I did not embrace her, or
kiss her, or take her hand. Instead I asked her, speaking
Bengali for the first time in America, if she was hungry.

I told her I had prepared some egg curry at home. ‘What
did they give you to eat on the plane?’

‘I didn’t eat.’
‘All the way from Calcutta?’
‘The menu said oxtail soup.’
‘But surely there were other items.’
‘The thought of eating an ox’s tail made me lose my

appetite.’
When we arrived home, Mala opened up one of her

suitcases and presented me with two pullover sweaters,
both made with bright blue wool, which she had knitted in
the course of our separation, one with a V neck, the other
covered with cables. I tried them on; both were tight under
the arms. She had also brought me two new pairs of
drawstring pyjamas, a letter from my brother and a packet
of loose Darjeeling tea. I had no present for her apart from
the egg curry. We sat at a bare table, each of us staring at

Reprint 2025-26



78 Woven Words

our plates. We ate with our hands, another thing I had not
yet done in America.

‘The house is nice,’ she said, ‘also the egg curry’. With
her left hand she held the end of her sari to her chest, so it
would not slip off her head.

‘I don’t know many recipes.’
She nodded, peeling the  skin off each of her potatoes

before eating them. At one point the sari slipped to her
shoulders. She readjusted it at once.

‘There is no need to cover your head,’ I said. ‘I don’t
mind. It doesn’t matter here.’

She kept it covered anyway.
I waited to get used to her, to her presence at my side,

at my table and in my bed, but a week later we were still
strangers. I still was not used to coming home to an
apartment that smelled of steamed rice, and finding that
the basin in the bathroom was always wiped clean, our
two toothbrushes lying side by side, a cake of Pears soap
from India resting in the soap dish. I was not used to the
fragrance of the coconut oil she rubbed every other night
into her scalp, or the delicate sound her bracelets made as
she moved about the apartment. In the mornings she was
always awake before I was. The first morning when I came
into the kitchen she had heated up the leftovers and set a
plate with a spoonful of salt on its edge on the table,
assuming I would eat rice for breakfast, as most Bengali
husbands did. I told her cereal would do and the next
morning when I came into the kitchen she had already
poured the cornflakes into my bowl. One morning she walked
with me down Massachusetts Avenue to MIT, where I gave
her a short tour of the campus. On the way we stopped at a
hardware store and I made a copy of the key, so that she
could let herself into the apartment. The next morning
before I left for work she asked me for a few dollars. I
parted with them reluctantly but I knew that this, too, was
now normal. When I came home from work there was a
potato peeler in the kitchen drawer, and a tablecloth on
the table, and chicken curry made with fresh garlic and
ginger on the stove. We did not have a television in those
days. After dinner I read the newspaper, while Mala sat at

Reprint 2025-26



The Third and Final Continent 79

the kitchen table, working on a cardigan for herself with
more of the bright blue wool, or writing letters home.

At the end of our first week, on Friday, I suggested
going out. Mala set down her knitting and disappeared
into the bathroom. When she emerged I regretted the
suggestion; she had put on a clean silk sari and extra
bracelets, and coiled her hair with a flattering side part on
top of her head. She was prepared as if for a party, or at
the very least for the cinema, but I had no such destination
in mind. The evening air was balmy. We walked several
blocks down Massachusetts Avenue, looking into the
windows of restaurants and shops. Then, without thinking,
I led her down the quiet street where for so many nights I
had walked alone.

‘This is where I lived before you came,’ I said, stopping
at Mrs Croft’s chain-link fence.

‘In such a big house?’
‘I had a small room upstairs. At the back.’
‘Who else lives there?’
‘A very old woman.’
‘With her family?’
‘Alone.’
‘But who takes care of her?’
I opened the gate. ‘For the most part she takes care of

herself.’
I wondered if Mrs Croft would remember me; I wondered

if she had a new boarder to sit with her on the bench each
evening. When I pressed the bell I expected the same long
wait as that day of our first meeting, when I did not have a
key. But this time the door was opened almost immediately,
by Helen. Mrs Croft was not sitting on the bench. The bench
was gone.

‘Hello there,’ Helen said, smiling with her bright pink
lips at Mala.

‘Mother’s in the parlour. Will you be visiting awhile?’
‘As you wish, madame.’
‘Then I think I’ll run to the store, if you don’t mind.

She had a little accident. We can’t leave her alone these
days, not even for a minute.’

I locked the door after Helen and walked into the

Reprint 2025-26



80 Woven Words

parlour. Mrs Croft was lying flat on her back, her head on
a peach-coloured cushion, a thin white quilt spread over
her body. Her hands were folded together on top of her
chest. When she saw me she pointed at the sofa and told
me to sit down. I took my place as directed but Mala
wandered over to the piano and sat on the bench which
was now positioned where it belonged.

‘I broke my hip! ’ Mrs Croft announced, as if no time
had passed.

‘Oh dear, madame.’
‘I fell off the bench!’
‘I am so sorry, madame.’
‘It was the middle of the night! Do you know what I

did, boy?’
I shook my head.
‘I called the police!’
She stared up at the ceiling and grinned sedately,

exposing a crowded row of long grey teeth. Not one was
missing. ‘What do you say to that, boy?’

As stunned as I was, I knew what I had to say.With no
hesitation at all, I cried out, ‘Splendid!’

Mala laughed then. Her voice was full of kindness, her
eyes bright with amusement. I had never heard her laugh
before, and it was loud enough so that Mrs Croft had heard,
too. She turned to Mala and glared.

‘Who is she, boy?’
‘She is my wife, madame.’
Mrs Croft pressed her head at an angle against the

cushion to get a better look, ‘Can you play the piano?’
‘No, madame,’ Mala replied.
‘Then stand up!’
Mala rose to her feet, adjusting the end of her sari

over her head and holding it to her chest, and, for the first
time since her arrival, I felt sympathy. I remembered my
first days in London, learning how to take the tube to Russell
Square, riding an escalator for the first time, being unable
to understand that when the man cried ‘piper’ it meant
‘paper’, being unable to decipher, for a whole year, that the
conductor said ‘mind the gap’ as the train pulled away
from each station. Like me, Mala had travelled far from

Reprint 2025-26



The Third and Final Continent 81

home. Not knowing where she was going, or what she would
find, for no reason other than to be my wife. As strange as
it seemed, I knew in my heart that one day her death would
affect me and, stranger still, that mine would affect her. I
wanted somehow to explain this to Mrs Croft, who was still
scrutinising Mala from top to toe with what seemed to be
placid disdain. I wondered if Mrs Croft had ever seen a
woman in a sari, with a dot painted on her forehead and
bracelets stacked on her wrists. I wondered what she would
object to. I wondered if she could see the red dye still vivid
on Mala’s feet, all but obscured by the bottom edge of her
sari. At last Mrs Croft declared, with equal measures of
disbelief and delight I knew well:

‘She is a perfect lady!’
Now it was I who laughed. I did so quietly and Mrs

Croft did not hear me. But Mala had heard, and, for the
first time, we looked at each other and smiled.

I like to think of that moment in Mrs Croft’s parlour as
the moment when the distance between Mala and me began
to lessen. Although we were not yet fully in love, I like to
think of the months that followed as a honeymoon of sorts.
Together we explored the city and met other Bengalis, some
of whom are still friends today. We discovered that a man
named Bill sold fresh fish on Prospect Street, and that a
shop in Harvard Square, called Cardullo’s, sold bay leaves
and cloves. In the evenings we walked to the Charles River
to watch sailboats drift across the water, or had ice cream
cones in Harvard Yard. We bought an Instamatic camera
with which to document our life together, and I took pictures
of her posing in front of the Prudential building so that she
could send them to her parents. At night we kissed, shy at
first but quickly bold, and discovered pleasure and solace
in each other’s arms. I told her about my voyage on the SS
Roma, and about Finsbury Park and the YMCA, and my
evenings on the bench with Mrs Croft. When I told her
stories about my mother, she wept. It was Mala who
consoled me when, reading the Globe one evening, I came
across Mrs Croft’s obituary. I had not thought of her in
several months—by then those six weeks of the summer
were already a remote interlude in my past—but when I

Reprint 2025-26



82 Woven Words

learned of her death I was stricken, so much so that when
Mala looked up from her knitting she found me staring at
the wall, the newspaper neglected in my lap, unable to
speak. Mrs Croft’s was the first death I mourned in America,
for, hers was the first life I had admired; she had left this
world at last, ancient and alone, never to return.

As for me, I have not strayed much farther: Mala and I
live in a town about twenty miles from Boston, on a tree-
lined street much like Mrs Croft’s, in a house we own, with
a garden that saves us from buying tomatoes in summer,
and room for guests. We are American citizens now so that
we can collect social security when it is time. Though we
visit Calcutta every few years, and bring back more
drawstring pyjamas and Darjeeling tea, we have decided
to grow old here. I work in a small college library. We have
a son who attends Harvard University. Mala no longer
drapes the end of her sari over her head, or weeps at night
for her parents but, occasionally, she weeps for our son.
So we drive to Cambridge to visit him, or bring him home
for a weekend, so that he can eat rice with us with his
hands and speak in Bengali, things we sometimes worry
he will no longer do after we die.

Whenever we make that drive, I always make it a point
to take Massachusetts Avenue, in spite of the traffic. I
barely recognise the buildings now but each time I am
there I return instantly to those six weeks as if they were
only the other day, and I slow down and point to Mrs Croft’s
street, saying to my son, here was my first home in America
where I lived with a woman who was 103. ‘Remember?’
Mala says, and smiles, amazed, as I am, that there was
ever a time that we were strangers. My son always expresses
his astonishment, not at Mrs Croft’s age, but at how little I
paid in rent, a  nearly inconceivable amount to him as a
flag on the moon was to a woman born in 1866. In my son’s
eyes I see the ambition that had first hurled me across the
world. In a few years he will graduate and pave his way,
alone and unprotected. But I remind myself that he has a
father who is still living, a mother who is happy and strong.
Whenever he is discouraged, I tell him that if I can survive
on three continents, then there is no obstacle he cannot

Reprint 2025-26



The Third and Final Continent 83

conquer. While the astronauts, heroes forever, spent mere
hours on the moon, I have remained in this new world for
nearly thirty years. I know that my achievement is quite
ordinary. I am not the only man to seek his fortune far
from home and certainly I am not the first. Still, there are
times I am bewildered by each mile I have travelled, each
meal I have eaten, each person I have known, each room in
which I have slept. As ordinary as it all appears, there are
times when it is beyond my imagination.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Jhumpa Lahiri, an Indian Bengali, born in
London (1967), lives in New York with her
husband and son. This story is from her
collection, Interpreter of Maladies (1999), a
bestseller in 2000 both in U.S.A. and elsewhere.
In addition to the Pulitzer Prize, she has received
a number of awards for the work which has been
translated into twenty-nine languages.

Her stories revolve around the lives of Indians in
diasporic situations, i.e., of  Indians living abroad,  Indians
who have been brought up in traditional India but are now
encountering the baffling new world [U.S.A.].

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. Indicate the details that tell us that the narrator was not very
financially comfortable during his stay in London.

2. How did the narrator adjust to the ways of life first in London
and then in Cambridge, U.S.A.?

3. What do you understand of the character of Mrs Croft from the
story?

4. What kind of a relationship did Mrs Croft share with her
daughter Helen?

5. How does the narrator bring out the contrast between the Indian
way of life and American society? Do you think his wife Mala
adjusted comfortably to the new way of life?

6. How does the bond of affection between Mrs Croft and the
narrator evolve?

Reprint 2025-26



84 Woven Words

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss in pairs or in small groups

1. Living abroad is challenging in many ways.

2. The Indian family system offers more security to the aged than
what is found in the West.

3. The eccentricities of the old are often endearing.

APPRECIATION

1. Discuss the manner in which the author interweaves details of
the narrator’s family with the flow of the main narrative.

2. ‘Mrs Croft’s was the first death I mourned in America, for, hers
was the first life I had  admired; she had left this world at last,
ancient and alone, never to return’—how do these lines
encapsulate the bond that is possible between two strangers?

3. Examine the pieces of conversation in the story. How do they
reflect the worldview of  each of the speakers?

4. There are many instances of gentle humour in the story.  Point
out some of these and state how this contributes to the interest
of the narration.

LANGUAGE WORK

1. ‘Don’t expect an English cup of tea’—how does this phrase bring
out the contrast between the English and American attitudes?

2. How did the narrator learn to distinguish between ‘a flask’ and
‘a thermos’?

3. It took the narrator quite some time to understand that what
he heard as ‘piper’, in fact, meant ‘paper’ and the phrase ‘mind
the gap’ in the Tube. What do you think caused the problem?

4. Make a list of items that are referred to differently in British
and American English, for example, ‘lift’ (BE) ‘elevator’ (AmE).

5. See if you understand what the following words that are parts
of a house mean. Look up the dictionary if you don’t.

parlour foyer lounge porch

lobby attic portico

SUGGESTED READING

1. Interpreter of Maladies by Jhumpa Lahiri.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



##7##
Glory at Twilight 85

7 Glory at Twilight
 Bhabani Bhattacharya

F Look for these expressions in the story and guess the meaning
from the context

brusquely attuned himself

queer rhythmic frenzy wrenching

flush of prosperity daze of bewilderment

wide-eyed wonder and eager homage

talking animatedly tremulous deliberation

on terms of a perpetual feud

The slow, narrow-gauge Indian train with its awkward freak
of an engine had a way of making unauthorised stops for
no good reason, between fields of corn or at the foot of a
village—it was said that the guard signalled a halt to pluck
a pumpkin or ripe melons from its stem or to buy fistfuls of
green gram from a peasant. Some of the passengers
grumbled and sat with drawn brows, composing in their
minds angry letters to Authority, or to the Press, but others
seized the chance to slip merrily out of doors for a breath
of air and a view of the green fields.

Satyajit, languid on the cushioned bench now vacated
by the other occupants, reached out for his cigarettes but,
on second thought, withdrew his hand brusquely. That won’t
do, he told himself with a stern shake of his head. His
smoke was rationed. He had attuned himself in the past
month to a fast-growing list of denials, large and small,
and this was one. How can he afford the unrestricted luxury
of chain smoking? Life lay sharpening to realities that still
had the semblance of an undreamable dream.

He winced, the turning wheel of fortune in his unhappy
eye, as always. Along the orbit of reminiscence he went

Reprint 2025-26



86 Woven Words

round and round, pulled by a force beyond his will. The
banking establishment of which he had attained control.
The amazing tempo of it all. Luck had come his way,
undeniably, but behind it was his mind, his initiative, grit,
energy. Starting as a mere clerk he had become Managing
Director. And now? What now?

Tall, thin, near forty, he had sharp features, the hair
receding on his temple in wide shiny smooth patches. His
eyes hated glare and he wore smart eye-glasses to shield
them. His mouth, thin-lipped, would tighten in repose to a
line that suggested strength of will but might have been
only pride.

‘What now?’ he said to himself in an underbreath. Those
words had become his obsession. ‘What now?’

He had no business to be on this wretched train on a
neglected railroad, travelling away from the city where he
must look for work, for the means of living. With the sudden
collapse of his bank, all his private assets were gone
overnight; the equities; the house on Tagore Street; even
the two cars, his and his wife’s. A mercy that she was
away from the scene, with her parents at Delhi, and
unaware of the full extent of the ruin. A telegram had come
last Tuesday announcing the safe birth of her child. Their
first-born, for he had married late in life. His son, his heir.
And he had sold off his diamond ring to send his young
wife a remittance for the name-giving rites.

She had married a man of fortune—that made it harder
for him in this crisis. True, she knew all about his earlier
life. But that was story-book stuff. It could be narrated
happily to their first-born when he grew older. The story
lay killed by its sequel—failure. Glory was all overlaid with
dark shame. Glory was dead.

It would be easy enough today if there were none else
to think of except himself. Born in a humble village home,
self-educated, struggle had been his life-breath. How
grateful he was for the clerkship he secured. A turning of
the wheel of fortune? he had wondered. The next turning,
a year after, was more dramatic. What made him give a
fixed look to the man beyond the brass grille of the counter?
The cheque presented for encashment was not a large sum.

Reprint 2025-26



Glory at Twilight 87

Eye upon eye. Alarm vivid in the face and the hand on the
counter shaking curiously. Surprised, stirred by a quick
impulse, he took the cheque to the accounts desk, compared
the signature with the one on record. It tallied. But that
face, that hand. A hundred reasons, none connected with
the cheque, could explain the face and hand. Even so, the
impulse led him to the telephone. ‘Sir, have you signed a
bearer cheque for Rs 2,000? It has yesterday’s date...’ ‘Rs
2,000? No.’ His heart felt pain for lack of air. ‘Sir, are you
sure? The signature seems okay.’ In the next instance he
was back to his counter in a rush. Where was the man?
There, close to the exit, and the face turning back for a
moment wore stark fear. He was going away.

Feet bounded up the counter. The bank clerk hunted
down his prey on the gravel path, twenty paces from the
front door. There was no struggle. The man crumpled down
in a heap. He squatted with head between his hands, looking
down, tears rolling down. ‘Why did you have to commit
forgery?’ ‘She has TB.’ ‘She?’ ‘She is dying for want of
medicine.’ ‘Who?’ ‘My wife. I saw no other means. I give
lessons in Maths to the rich man’s son. That money...’ The
head between the hands wagged from side to side in a
queer rhythmic frenzy.

That was the way the clerk grew into an accountant.
He deserved what he had gained. He was not made to be a
mere clerk. Lost in the thrill, he had honest contempt for
his stepping-stone, the forgerer. You could not commit such
a crime even to save your dying wife. But today, as he sat
on his lone bench on the train, he saw mind-pictures and
felt troubled. The crouched figure on the gravel path
wrapped in mute grieving. The prisoner at the bar, face
frozen, as though he had died within himself. Had he
anything to say to the Court? the Judge had asked. ‘Punish
me.’ ‘Is that all?’ ‘Punish me as a killer.’ ‘Killer?’ ‘I have put
my wife to shame. Shame kills as fast as TB.’

Yes, that wretched one had turned the wheel for him
with his trembling hand. From that point the wheel attained
a volition of its own, moving continuously. He had every
reason to be grateful to the forgerer. Too late now to seek
him out, give him a chance to live?

Reprint 2025-26



88 Woven Words

Too late. He himself sorely needed a chance to live.
The banking business lay around him in a broken mass
and there was he, prostrate on his face in the wreckage,
sucking its dust. All his fault. He had tried to overreach
himself. Each wrong step was now clear in time’s
perspective. The run on the bank had come all too suddenly
though. Failure had a tempo far faster than success.

He had great need to fly from himself—that was why he
was on this train. A letter had come in the nick of time offering
him an excuse, a temporary relief from the wrenching within.

‘The wedding of my fifth daughter, Beena, is to take
place on the twentieth of this month. I have kept you posted
with the progress of negotiations. I seek your benediction as
in the case of my second, third and fourth daughters—
Kamini, Damini and Suhashi. With Beena wedded, there
will be only Aruna left, and she is in her tenth year. Your
benediction alone can pull me through the present daughter
crisis. That is all I have to say—Your helpless Uncle Srinath.’

Daughter crisis, indeed! mused Satyajit with a dim
smile. Uncle Srinath, a neighbour at Shantipur village but
no blood relation, seemed to have been producing his
numerous daughters secure in the faith that others would
bear the brunt of the repeated crises of their marriage
needs. And Satyajit, in the flush of prosperity, had been
more than open-handed. It was a matter of pride, self-
satisfaction.

In his younger days, the village people had not thought
much of him, had not seen in him any special gift or
brilliance. One of the common herd. That was all the more
reason why he enjoyed success. He needed the wide-eyed
wonder and eager homage of Uncle Srinath and the like
while they had use and longing for his money. It was plain
give-and-take.

All that was over. Fallen from his castle in the clouds,
Satyajit must tread the earthly ways of humble folk. But
he could not deny the old man altogether. He must send
some help. He had pondered over the amount. He had to
ponder over each rupee before he spent it.

Then, all at once, he had come to a decision. He would
go to Shantipur and attend the marriage. This would be a

Reprint 2025-26



Glory at Twilight 89

welcome relief—the city was suffocating him. His mind
would be freshened, his strength renewed for the coming
struggle by a return to the physical scene which had been
his starting point in life. Let that be his starting point once
more, outwardly as much as in the spirit. He would also
take this chance to look at his ancestral house and fish-
pond, both leased out, bits of property still intact amid the
vast demolition. Those he must pass on to his wife as his
last gift. And he had sent word to Uncle Srinath about his
arrival on the marriage day.

The engine came to life with a shrill of warning.
The passenger hurried back. Another half-hour and it
was Shantipur. Satyajit leaned out of the door, his eyes
looking for Uncle Srinath on the station platform, where
many people stood crowded together,  alert and
apparently excited, one of them holding aloft the national
flag on a bamboo pole. A political celebrity on the train?
Strange that Uncle Srinath, who had always feared
politics, was leading the group. Suddenly, there was a
rush of legs towards Satyajit as he stepped down. The
legs stopped and a booming chorus followed. Swagatam!
Welcome!’

A small girl with an awestruck face stepped up with a
jasmine garland in her hand. Satyajit stood in a daze of
bewilderment as the girl rose on tiptoe to place the chain
of flowers around his neck. He bent mechanically to receive
the offer, not knowing what it meant. It was obviously a
mistake, a very curious one.

‘Welcome!’ the voices rang again. Then, an expectant
hush. Uncle Srinath turned round to the group. On the
high cheekbones and grey stubble of his face was a clear
coating of strong elation.

‘Friends and brothers! Bengal has seen greatness in
almost every field of action. I shall not belittle your
knowledge by citing names. It is only in trade and industry
that Bengal has lagged behind sadly—the plums of
business have gone to people from upcountry or from
overseas. That is why our hearts grow big with pride at
the sight of a son of Bengal, a son of our own Shantipur
village, who has attained great success in that field, that

Reprint 2025-26



90 Woven Words

forbidden field, and become the glory of the motherland,
Swagatam! Welcome!’

‘Swagatam!’ the combined voices roared while the
tricolour flag on its tall pole nodded approvingly.

When Satyajit slipped down from the ox cart at the
door of a mud-brick house, a knot of women waiting tensely
with brass water-bowls rushed up and stooped over his
feet, scrambling for the privilege to wash his feet with cool
water. Satyajit shrank back, embarrassed.

‘It’s my Beena’s privilege,’ cried Srinath, smiling. ‘This
is her day. Let Beena alone wash and wipe the reverent
feet. All her life she will remember this honour befalling
her on the auspicious day of her marriage.’

Satyajit looked at the girl who stepped forward, shy,
slender with large pensive eyes in a graceful face. ‘So this is
the bride,’ he smiled at her and touched her hair in the gesture
of blessing. ‘I hope the groom is worthy of this girl,’ he said as
she knelt down to unlace his
shoes. She slipped off his socks
and poured cool water to freshen
his feet, washing them with keen
care. As her slim fingers went
between his toes, he
wiggled them, for he
felt ticklish. Presently
he sat on a carpet in
the inner verandah
with a plateful of
sweets and a glass of
whey while Kamini,
Damini and Suhashi
sat near him on their
haunches and waved
palm leaf fans with
all their energy, as
though each passing
minute had to be fully
used before their
hands were deprived
of the privilege. Sweat

Reprint 2025-26



Glory at Twilight 91

broke out on their faces and they shifted their fans from right
hand to left and again to the right. Their mother, who stood
by, now spoke in a murmur, husky with emotion.

‘You have been more of a father to these girls than he,’
jerking her head at her invisible husband. ‘But for the
bigness of your heart, they would still be maids under this
room, shooting up in years and in height with no chance of
having husband and home.’ She lifted her sari fringes to
her eyes, wiping off two grateful tears.

The meal over, Uncle Srinath, who had been shuttling
between the inner verandah and the outer quarters, now
stopped, leaning over his guest.

‘Beena has been given the old jewellery of her mother,’
he confided. ‘So, that part of the dowry problem has been
met. Her three married sisters, whom you see before you
and who owe all their bliss in life to your benediction, have
given her the marriage gifts she must have: sari, jacket,
chemise. Also brass utensils for her new household.’

‘Good! Good!’ Satyajit cried happily. He had Rs 200
in his purse and had wondered how much of it had to go
into the marriage pool. May be Rs 100; or, rather, Rs
101, since a figure ending with zero was not propitious.
During the meal he had been slowly adding to that figure:
ten, twenty, finally stopping at an additional fifty. Now
that Beena had got all she needed, he could just as well
slice a goodly bit off the amount. Let it be Rs 101. The
fifty rupees saved would buy a perambulator for his
newborn son.

‘Your benediction is our blind-man’s staff,’ Srinath went
on. ‘Do I have to say more?’ He apparently decided that he
did not, for he changed the topic abruptly. ‘My house has
become a place of pilgrimage. You are the pride of the village,
its strength. In you the people see their own inmost dream
fulfilled. Will you now show yourself for a minute to the
devotees who sit waiting—’

Satyajit followed his host. His devotees were seated on
a floor mat, talking animatedly, and at the sight of him
there was an instant hush. Hands joined to his chest,
Satyajit made salutation to all. He caught sight of the
schoolmaster who had taught him as a boy and made a

Reprint 2025-26



92 Woven Words

deep obeisance. Swelled with pride, the old man swept the
floor mat group with a superior glance before he spoke:

‘Didn’t I say? Didn’t I say a hundred and one times in
those far off days that the light of genius blazed on the face
of my young pupil? That he stood apart from every other
young pig—’ He broke short and yielded to a violent fit of
coughing to cover up the slip. Presently he resumed: ‘That
he with the light of genius on his face was afar from the
world where the other youngsters dwelt? Why, I predicted
that he would be a High Court Judge—’

Satyajit burst into a laugh. ‘Alas, I am no High Court
Judge’. ‘Even more, much more!’ counted the old man. His
good memory reached back to the boy with whom he had
been on terms of a perpetual feud. Always bent on some
kind of mischief—he did have an inventive mind that way!
Arithmetic was his bogey. How does he count all his pile of
money? He owns a million, if Srinath is to be believed. A
million? And the old man hastened to add a brushful of
colour to the drab picture presented by memory. ‘Even in
those far-off days I could see two shadow forms about him,
clear as life—Saraswati at his left, Lakshmi at his right.
And I knew even then that the twin goddesses of knowledge
and wealth, though hating the sight of each other, had for
once united, stayed together, drawn by their common love.’
He lifted joined palms to his forehead, offering salutation—
perhaps to those goddesses.

Satyajit was determined to enjoy himself. He felt a
twinge of regret that he had not thought of coming to
Shantipur and basking in the people’s homage when it was
truly his due. Now he was an impostor. He impersonated
the man he had been a few weeks before. He made an
angry jerk of his hand about his face, waving off a sand-
fly—and the regret. Let him be happy for the day even with
a false echo, let him be wrapped a while in the lingering
twilight splendour of departed glory. Tommorow he would
be in the full fury of a stream, tugged under water, fighting
for life. Today he would have his last breath of peace,
freedom, content.

Through the rest of the day he went round the village,
meeting the elders, sipping the proffered milk of green

Reprint 2025-26



Glory at Twilight 93

coconuts. He visited his house occupied by a tenant. His
house—and he touched the walls possessively. This small
house gave him a feeling of security which had not come to
him even from his huge city mansion. He spent an hour by
the fish pond. His pond—and he sprinkled a palmful of its
water on his head. A good-sized carp landed at the end of
his hook. When he came home with the catch, Uncle Srinath
gazed at it raptly—one would have thought he had never
before seen such fish. ‘What gills!’ he breathed in apparent
ecstasy. He patted the head of the fish with an affectionate
hand. ‘Bride and groom shall eat curried portions of this
auspicious one when they break their marriage fast at
midnight. That will bring them all the blessings that life
can give’. It was near twilight when the groom’s party arrived
in ox carts and palanquins. Conches blew welcome. Young
women gathered at the dooryard and gave the shrill
traditional greeting expressive of great joy; Ulu-ulu-ulu-
ulu-ulu! When the bridal party was well settled, chewing
betel leaf and waiting for the marriage hour as prescribed
by the almanac, Satyajit felt for his purse. Time now to
part with Rs 101. Srinath, reading his thoughts, took him
to the secluded darkness under a fig-tree in the backyard
‘My begging bowl is ready,’ he announced happily.

‘Yes, yes,’ Satyajit nodded.
‘The cash dowry stands fixed. Only Rs 2001.’
‘What!’ Satyajit felt a hard blow in the pit of his

stomach.
‘That is all.’
‘Rs 2001?’
Srinath smiled. ‘Everything else is provided for, even

the cost of the marriage feast. Only this last item awaits
your benediction.’

Benediction—Srinath’s favourite word. Nothing
abstract in its meaning. It could be interpreted only in
terms of money. Satyajit felt a burning inside him. He had
stretched his leg right into the snare of benediction,
unthinkingly. How could he be so very stupid?

Srinath broke the silence with a half laugh. ‘This drop
in the ocean of your fortune. It shames me to mention the
petty figure.’

Reprint 2025-26



94 Woven Words

‘Why didn’t you write and tell me?’ The voice was harsh.
The half laugh repeated itself. ‘Have I no sense? I

am not such a big ass as I look. What! Mention money
to a millionaire! And such a pittance. A drop in the
ocean.’

‘A drop,’ echoed Satyajit, his mouth dry. This was the
moment for confession. He was even worse off than Srinath.
Hard struggle lay ahead of him for bare survival. Srinath
would understand.

‘Millionaire!’ Rhapsody in the voice. Plain worship on
the face. A devotee, prayerful before his god. ‘ We bask in
your benediction. Our life-spark itself is held in your fist;
you can destroy it just by closing your fingers tight. Words
cannot say what I feel —’

Yes, the god had been a millionaire, truly. That was
yesterday. Today... Confession stuck in his throat, clutched
by the millionaire’s dead hand. Better give an excuse. He
had come rushing in the midst of heavy work and had not
thought of equipping himself with adequate cash. That
would sound plausible. Later—it wouldn’t matter if Srinath
discovered the terrible truth later, as he must.

Something stronger than he spoke with his tongue. ‘I
had to catch the morning train—there was no time to go to
the bank. Maybe someone in the village—’ The words ‘cash
a cheque’ were almost on his lips. ‘Someone in the village
will advance a loan—’

Uncle Srinath rushed out of the house, panic on his
face. He had been under the impression that a millionaire
always had his pockets stuffed with money. Satyajit returned
to the assembled guests. Instantly the groom, on his foot-
high satin-draped platform, fat round cushions on three
sides of him, was forgotten. Silence. All eyes took their fill
of the rich man. A god on the pedestal of fortune. He too
sat quiet, the tiredness within him heavier than even before.
The peace he had attained erstwhile was gone. He longed
to see the face of his new-born son. The rich man’s son
who would never ride in a perambulator.

Srinath returned in half an hour. His face looked angry.
Satyajit saw his beckoning hand, rose heavily to his feet,
and stepped outside, away from the people.

Reprint 2025-26



Glory at Twilight 95

‘Only one person in Shantipur can produce so much
cash at this late hour,’ said Srinath, ‘Harish, the money-
lender. That shark refuses to make an advance though.’

The swift flood of relief! ‘Harish does not trust me?’
Moneylenders did have a sixth sense. There was no knowing
when Harish would have got his money back—perhaps never.

‘Preposterous! Not to trust the word and signature of a
millionaire! Harish is off his senses; or, is it malice?’ The
voice collected anger. ‘I could drag him to you and make
him grovel at your feet and rub his fat nose on the ground.’

Satyajit could be generous. ‘No need, no need. Trust is
out of date in these cynical times.’ The wonder of it—his
leg was off the snare of benediction!

‘Where will our India be if such things are tolerated?
What is Nehru doing about it? Is there no one to tell him
how things stand in the country?’

Satyajit patted the excited man on the shoulder,
soothingly. Srinath controlled himself with visible effort.
His face saddened. ‘What is to be done?’ he moaned. ‘The
groom’s father is a man of stone. He will break off the
marriage unless cash is paid to him before the ceremony
starts. Who will ever marry Beena after such dishonour?’

Satyajit wagged his head in befitting sympathy. ‘If only
you had written to me. Just two words or three. Anyway,
do not be worried. You will find another suitable match, a
better one maybe. Who can foresee the ways of destiny?’
He felt for his purse the second time. He ought to restore
the fifty rupees he had cut. Let it be Rs 151. Even if there
would be no perambulator for his son—

Srinath cleared his throat twice. ‘It shames me to tell
you the full story.’

‘Yes?’
‘Harish is willing to pay.’
‘What! you have just said—’
‘He will pay against security. He wants security, that

evil-eyed shark. Your house and fish-pond. The madness!
To think that house and pond have more weight than a
millionaire’s signature!’

Satyajit trembled within him. ‘House and pond,’ he
murmurmed to himself. The only possessions that had not

Reprint 2025-26



96 Woven Words

toppled into the deluge. They were all he could give to his
wife—

‘All the old values destroyed, where will our India be?
Has Nehru no sense to understand this? What! A pond
weighs more than a millionaire’s word, a house is better
security than the signature of his hand! Yet, what else is
to be done?’ Palms folded together made supplication. ‘What
else is to be done in the daughter crisis?’

Satyajit had a queer drugged look. And the dead voice
of the millionaire came from his throat. ‘Let the money-
lender pay on those terms.’

‘The insult, what about the insult?’ Srinath’s wrathful
hand cleaved the air. ‘When the thing is done, I will make
the shark rub his fat nose on the ground at your feet; I will
do that, be sure. You will also see the whole village spit at
the shark, thoo!’

The deed was signed, the house was gay with marriage
music. Satyajit walked off to the deep dark under the fig
tree, all by himself.

‘What now,’ he said under his breath, and a dim smile
pinched the corners of his lips as he stuck between them
the cork tip of a cigarette, the last one in the tin, and lifted
a lit match with slow tremulous deliberation.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Bhabani Bhattacharya (1906–1988), one of the foremost
Indian writers of fiction in English, won acclaim for his
novel, So Many Hungers (1947), which presents a vivid
picture of the Bengal famine during World War II. He won
the Sahitya Akademi Award for Shadow from Ladakh (1966).
He also wrote a number of short stories.
‘Glory at Twilight’ is taken from the collection, Steel Hawk
and Other Stories.

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. Give reasons for the following

a. Satyajit attending the village wedding.

Reprint 2025-26



Glory at Twilight 97

b. Satyajit’s recollection of the forgerer when he was on the
train.

c. Srinath and his family members’ eager expectation of
Satyajit’s arrival.

d. Srinath’s disappointment with Satyajit.

e. Satyajit’s feeling that he was an impostor.

f. Satyajit not disclosing his present financial status to his
uncle.

2. Describe the cycle of events in Satyajit’s life that brought him
back to where he began.

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss in pairs

1. It is difficult to adjust to a fall from glory.

2. ‘Failure had a tempo faster than success.’

3. Satyajit should have revealed his predicament to his uncle.

4. The author’s comment on crime and punishment.

APPRECIATION

1. How is Satyajit’s financial crash introduced to the reader?

2. Comment on the way in which the story is narrated from
Satyajit’s perspective.

3. How has the author used the episode of the bank theft to
comment on Satyajit’s success in his career?

4. How do these lines capture the essence of the story:

       ‘Glory was all overlaid with dark shame. Glory was dead.’

‘… let him be wrapped a while in the lingering twilight splendour
of departed glory’.

LANGUAGE WORK

1. Notice this description

Tall, thin, near forty, he had sharp features, the hair receding
on his temple in wide shiny patches. His eyes hated glare and
he wore smart eye-glasses to shield them. His mouth, thinlipped,
would tighten in response to a line that suggested strength of
will but might have only been pride.

Reprint 2025-26



98 Woven Words

Look at the padding of adjectives. Notice how physical features
are related to mental qualities.

a. Pick out other such descriptions of people from the story.
b. Try writing out a description of a person you have observed

closely.

2. Notice these expressions

‘We bask in your benediction. Our life-spark itself is held in
your fist.’

‘This is her day. Let Beena alone wash and wipe the reverent
feet. All her life she will remember this honour befalling her
on her auspicious day of her marriage.’

♦ How do they capture the Indian idiom?
♦ Underline other such expressions.

3. Notice these fragments in para three of the lesson

a. The banking establishment of which he had attained control.
b. The amazing tempo of it all.

These are not complete sentences but serve to capture the
character’s train of thought. Such devices are often used in
creative writing.

SUGGESTED READING

1. An Astrologer’s Day and other Stories by R.K. Narayan.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



##8##
The Luncheon 99

8
The Luncheon

William Somerset Maugham

F Look for these expressions in the story and guess the meaning
from the context

devastating passion caviare

complacency vindictive

mortifying ingratiating

I caught sight of her at the play and, in answer to her
beckoning, I went over during the interval and sat down
beside her. It was long since I had last seen her and if
someone had not mentioned her name I hardly think I would
have recognised her. She addressed me brightly.

‘Well, it’s many years since we first met. How time
does fly! We’re none of us getting any younger. Do you
remember the first time I saw you? You asked me to
luncheon.’

Did I remember?
It was twenty years ago and I was living in Paris. I had

a tiny apartment in the Latin quarter overlooking a
cemetery and I was earning barely enough money to keep
the body and soul together. She had read a book of mine
and had written to me about it. I answered, thanking her,
and presently I received from her another letter saying
that she was passing through Paris and would like to have
a chat with me; but her time was limited and the only free
moment she had was on the following Thursday; she was
spending the morning at the Luxembourg and would I give
her a little luncheon at Foyot’s afterwards? Foyot’s is a
restaurant at which the French senators eat and it was so
far beyond my means that I had never even thought of
going there. But I was flattered and I was too young to have

Reprint 2025-26



100 Woven Words

learned to say no to a woman. Few men, I may add, learn
this until they are too old to make it of any consequence to
a woman what they say. I had eighty francs (gold francs) to
last me the rest of the month, and a modest luncheon
should not cost more than fifteen. If I cut out coffee for the
next two weeks I could manage well enough.

I answered that I would meet my friend—by
correspondence—at Foyot’s on Thursday at half-past twelve.
She was not so young as I expected and in appearance
imposing rather than attractive. She was, in fact, a woman
of forty (a charming age, but not one that excites a sudden
and devastating passion at first sight), and she gave me
the impression of having more teeth, white and large and
even, than were necessary for any practical purpose. She
was talkative but since she seemed inclined to talk about
me I was prepared to be an attentive listener.

I was startled when the bill of fare was brought for the
prices were a great deal higher than I had anticipated. But
she reassured me.

‘I never eat anything for luncheon.’ She said.
‘Oh, don’t say that!’ I answered generously.
‘I never eat more than one thing. I think people eat far

too much nowadays. A little fish, perhaps. I wonder if they
have any salmon.’

Well, it was early in the year for salmon and it was not
on the bill of fare, but I asked the waiter if there was any.
Yes, a beautiful salmon had just come in, it was the first
they had had. I ordered it for my guest. The waiter asked
her if she would have something while it was being cooked.

‘No,’ she answered, ‘I never eat more than one thing.
Unless you have a little caviare. I never mind caviare.’

My heart sank a little. I knew I could not afford caviare
but I could not very well tell her that. I told the waiter by
all means to bring caviare. For myself I chose the cheapest
dish on the menu and that was a mutton chop.

‘I think you are unwise to eat meat,’ she said. ‘I don’t
know how you can expect to work after eating heavy things
like chops. I don’t believe in overloading my stomach.’

Then came the question of drink.
‘I never drink anything for luncheon,’ she said.

Reprint 2025-26



The Luncheon 101

‘Neither do I,’ I answered promptly.
‘Except white wine,’ she proceeded as though I had not

spoken.
‘These French white wines are so light. They’re

wonderful for the digestion.’
‘What would you like?’ I asked, hospitable still, but not

exactly effusive.
She gave me a bright and amicable flash of her white

teeth.
‘My doctor won’t let me drink anything but Champagne.’
I fancy I turned a trifle pale. I ordered half a bottle. I

mentioned casually that my doctor had absolutely forbidden
me to drink Champagne.

‘What are you going to drink, then?’
‘Water.’ She ate the caviare and she ate the salmon.

She talked gaily of art and literature and music. But I
wondered what the bill would come to. When my mutton
chop arrived she took me quite seriously to task.

‘I see that you’re in the habit of eating a heavy luncheon.
I’m sure it’s a mistake. Why don’t you follow my example
and just eat one thing? I’m sure you’d feel ever so much
better for it.’

‘I am only going to eat one thing,’ I said, as the waiter
came again with the bill of fare.

She waved him aside with an airy gesture.
‘No, no, I never eat anything for luncheon. Just a bite,

I never want more than that, and I eat that more as an
excuse for conversation than anything else. I couldn’t
possibly eat anything more—unless they had some of those
giant asparagus. I should be sorry to leave Paris without
having some of them.’

My heart sank. I had seen them in the shops and I
knew that they were horribly expensive. My mouth had
often watered at the sight of them.

‘Madame wants to know if you have any of those giant
asparagus,’ I asked the waiter.

I tried with all my might to will him to say no. A happy
smile spread over his broad, priest-like face and he assured
me that they had some so large, so splendid, so tender,
that it was a marvel.

Reprint 2025-26



102 Woven Words

‘I’m not in the least hungry,’ my guest sighed, ‘but if
you insist I don’t mind having some asparagus.’

I ordered them.
‘Aren’t you going to have any?’
‘No, I never eat asparagus.’
‘I know there are people who don’t like them. The fact

is, you ruin your palate by all the meat you eat.’
We waited for the asparagus to be cooked. Panic seized

me: it was not a question now how much money I should
have left over for the rest of the month but whether I had
enough to pay the bill. It would be mortifying to find myself
ten francs short and be obliged to borrow from my guest. I
could not bring myself to do that. I knew exactly how much
I had and if the bill came to me I made up my mind that I
would put my hand in my pocket and with a dramatic cry
start up and say it had been picked. Of course, it would be
awkward if she had not money enough either to pay the
bill; then the only thing would be to leave my watch and
say I would come back and pay later.

The asparagus appeared. They were enormous,
succulent, and appetizing. The smell of the melted butter
tickled my nostrils as the nostrils of Johovah were tickled
by the burned offerings of the virtuous Semites. I watched
the abandoned woman thrust them down her throat in
large voluptuous mouthfuls, and, in my polite way, I
discoursed on the condition of the drama in the Balkans.
At last she finished.

‘Coffee,’ I said...
‘Yes, just an ice-cream and coffee,’ she answered.
I was past caring now, so I ordered coffee for myself

and ice-cream and coffee for her.
‘You know, there’s one thing I thoroughly believe in,’

she said, as she ate the ice-cream. ‘One should always get
up from a meal feeling one could eat a little more.’

‘Are you still hungry?’ I asked faintly.
‘Oh, no, I’m not hungry; you see, I don’t eat luncheon. I

have a cup of coffee in the morning and then dinner, but I
never eat more than one thing for luncheon. I was speaking
for you.’

‘Oh, I see!’

Reprint 2025-26



The Luncheon 103

Then a terrible thing happened. While we were waiting
for the coffee, the headwaiter, with an ingratiating smile
on his false face, came up to us bearing a large basket full
of huge peaches. They had the blush of an innocent girl;
they had the rich tone of an Italian landscape. But surely
peaches were not in season then? Lord knew what they
cost. I knew too—a little later, for my guest, going on with
her conversation, absentmindedly took one.

‘You see, you’ve filled your stomach with a lot of meat’
—my one miserable little chop— ‘and you can’t eat any
more. But I’ve just had a snack and I shall enjoy a peach.’

The bill came and when I paid it I found that I had only
enough for a quite inadequate tip. Her eyes rested for an
instant on the three francs I left for the waiter and I knew
that she thought me mean. But when I walked out of the
restaurant I had the whole month before me and not a
penny in my pocket.

‘Follow my example,’ she said as we shook hands, ‘and
never eat more than one thing for luncheon.’

‘I’ll do better than that,’ I retorted. ‘I’ll eat nothing for
dinner tonight.’

‘Humorist’, she cried gaily, jumping into a cab. ‘You’re
quite a humorist!’

But I have had my revenge at last. I do not believe that
I am a vindictive man, but when the immortal gods take a
hand in the matter it is pardonable to observe the result
with complacency. Today she weighs twenty-one stone.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

William Somerset Maugham (1874–1965) is a
distinguished British author. He was born in
Paris and his childhood was spent in a French-
speaking society. After the death of his father,
he returned to England at the age of 10. He
studied at Heidelberg and at St. Thomas’s Hospital, London,
and qualified as a doctor. But he preferred writing to
practising medicine.

Reprint 2025-26



104 Woven Words

During his long career as a writer, Maugham produced
a large number of novels, plays and short stories. Some of
his best novels include Of Human Bondage, The Moon and
Sixpence and Cakes and Ale.

Maugham has an amazing skill for revealing, with a few
touches, a situation and the essentials of a character, and
his stories are told with a lucidity and an economy of words
which are the marks of a supreme craftsman.

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. Although the author was not a vindictive man he was very happy
to see the twenty one stone lady who had impoverished him
twenty years ago, and says he had finally had his revenge. What
makes him says this?

2. There are quite a few places where the author uses the
expressions ‘my heart sank’, ‘panic seized’ etc. What was the
reason for this?

3. Locate instances of irony in the story.

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss in pairs or in small groups

1. People with foibles are often not conscious of them.

2. The author’s attempts at keeping up his pretence of friendliness
while he was mentally preoccupied with the expense of the
luncheon.

APPRECIATION

1. The author is a humorist

a. How does the story reflect his sense of humour?

b. What makes his lady friend remark—‘you are quite a
humorist’?

c. Give instances of the author’s ability to laugh at himself.

2. How does the first person narrative help in heightening the
literary effects of the story?

Reprint 2025-26



The Luncheon 105

LANGUAGE WORK 

♦ Pick out the words and phrases in the text that indicate
that the author was not financially well off.

SUGGESTED READING

1. ‘The Phantom Luncheon’ by Saki

2. ‘The Ant and the Grasshopper’ by W. Somerset Maugham.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



106 Woven Words

POETRY

INTRODUCTION

The word ‘poetry’ originates from a Greek word meaning
‘to make’. A poet is thus a maker and the poem
something that is  made or created. No single definition
of poetry is possible but some characteristic features
of poetry may be mentioned. Poetry has a musical
quality with rhythm, pitch, metre; and it may use
figures of speech such as simile and metaphor.

While quite a few poems in this selection are in
traditional forms, the unit also includes modern poems
that are free from formal restrictions.

Examples of ‘haiku’ and ‘limerick’ have been included
to introduce learners to these forms and to make
students look to poetry for fun. Students need not be
set questions or tested on this.

Reprint 2025-26



1
##9##
The Peacock 107

1
The Peacock

Sujata Bhatt

His loud sharp call
seems to come from nowhere.

Then, a flash of turquoise
in the pipal tree

The slender neck arched away from you
as he descends,

and as he darts away, a glimpse
of the very end of his tail.

I was told
that you have to sit in the veranda

And read a book,
preferably one of your favourites

with great concentration..
The moment you begin to live

inside the book
A blue shadow will fall over you.
The wind will change direction,

The steady hum of bees
In the bushes nearby

will stop.
The cat will awaken and stretch.

Something has broken your attention;
And if you look up in time

You might see the peacock turning away as he gathers
his tail

To shut those dark glowing eyes,
Violet fringed with golden amber.

It is the tail that has to blink
For eyes that are always open.

Reprint 2025-26



108 Woven Words

ABOUT THE POET 

Sujata Bhatt (born 1956)) was educated in the
USA and now lives in Germany. She won the
Commonwealth Poetry Prize for the Asia section
for her collection of poems, Brunizem (1988),
from which ‘The Peacock’ is taken. Two other
books of poems by her are Monkey Shadows (1991) and
The Stinking Rose (1994). She has also translated Gujarati
poetry into English.

F Notice these words in the poem and guess their meaning from the
context

turquoise darts

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. Comment on the lines that make you visualise the colourful
image of the peacock.

2. What are the cues that signal the presence of the peacock in
the vicinity?

3. How does the connection drawn between the tail and the eyes
add to the descriptive detail of the poem?

4. How does the poem capture the elusive nature of the peacock?

5. The peacock is a colourful bird. How does the poem capture the
various colours that its plumage displays?

TRY THIS OUT

1. In English the peacock is associated with pride. ‘As proud as a
peacock’ is a commonly used simile. With what qualities is the
peacock associated in the literature of your language?

2. The peacock is the national bird of India. Why do you think the
peacock has been chosen?

SUGGESTED READING 

1. ‘The Bangle Sellers’ by Sarojini Naidu.

Reprint 2025-26



##10##
Let Me Not to the Marriage of True Minds 109

2
Let Me Not to the

Marriage of True Minds
William Shakespeare

Let me not to the marriage of true minds
Admit impediments. Love is not love

Which alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove.

O no, it is an ever-fixed mark
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;

It is the star to every wandering bark,
Whose worth’s unknown, although his height be taken.

Love’s not Time’s fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
Within his bending sickle’s compass come;

Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.

If this be error, and upon me proved,
I never writ, nor no man ever loved.

ABOUT THE POET 

William Shakespeare (1564–1616) was one of the
greatest poets and dramatists of the English
language. Born at Stratford-on-Avon, England,
he went to London where his reputation as a
dramatist and poet was established. His Sonnets,
154 in number, probably written between 1593 and 1598,
were  published in 1602. The above sonnet is sonnet number
116 in which we have a depiction of true love. His voluminous
work includes 37 plays and two narrative poems.

Reprint 2025-26



110 Woven Words

F The following two common words are used in a different sense in
the poem. Guess what they mean

bark compass

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. ‘Constancy’ is the theme of the poem. Indicate the words,
phrases and images that suggest the theme.

2. Why do you think the poet has used so many ‘negatives’ to make
his statement?

3. What does the line ‘I never writ, nor no man ever loved’ imply?

4. Love is presented as the subject or doer of actions in the poem.
Why do you think the poet has used this form rather than
involving human agents?

5. Explain the phrases

a. his bending sickle’s compass

b. Time’s fool

TRY THIS OUT 

This poem is a Shakespearean sonnet.

1. What do you understand by a sonnet?

2. Look at some other sonnets and notice the variations in the
structure of the sonnet that are possible.

SUGGESTED READING 

1. “Shall I Compare Thee’ by William Shakespeare.

Reprint 2025-26



##11##
Coming 111

3 Coming
Philip Larkin

On longer evenings,

Light, chill and yellow,

Bathes the serene

Foreheads of houses.

A thrush sings,

Laurel-surrounded

In the deep bare garden,

Its fresh-peeled voice

Astonishing the brickwork.

It will be spring soon,

It will be spring soon—

And I, whose childhood

Is a forgotten boredom,

Feel like a child

Who comes on a scene

Of adult reconciling,

And can understand nothing

But the unusual laughter,

And starts to be happy.

Reprint 2025-26



112 Woven Words

ABOUT THE POET 

Philip Larkin (1922–1985) was born in Coventry,
England. He is well-known as a leader of
‘Movement’ in English Poetry in the fifties. The
principal works of Philip Larkin are The North
Ship, The Less Deceived, The Whitsun Weddings
and High Windows. His themes—love, change,
disenchantment, the mystery, the inexplicableness of the
poet’s survival and death’s inevitability—are universally
liked by the readers. The above poem has been taken from
the volume, The Less Deceived, which establishes a kinship
with the environment.

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. What does the bird in the poem announce? How is this related
to the title, ‘Coming’?

2. Why is the speaker’s childhood described as ‘a forgotten
boredom’?

3. What causes the element of surprise when the child comes on
the scene of ‘adult reconciling’?

4. What two things are compared in the poem?

5. How do you respond to these lines?

Light, chill and yellow,
Bathes the serene
Foreheads of houses

6. Comment on the use of the phrase ‘fresh-peeled voice’.

TRY THIS OUT

1. The song of a bird is often the first sign of spring. Do you know
the bird that signals the advent of vasant or spring in our
country?

2. Do you know of other spring poems? How is this poem different
from them?

SUGGESTED READING 

1. ‘Ambulances’ by Philip Larkin.

Reprint 2025-26



Coming 113

Haiku

Haiku is a Japanese three-line poem, usually having 17
syllables, and expresses a single thought. English imitations of
the haiku are also very popular.

COBRA

His jewelled crown
and hypnotic sway enthral;
beware the lethal fangs.

NIGHT

Clouds appear
and bring to men a chance to rest
looking at the moon.

ALONE

Won’t you come and see
loneliness? Just one leaf
from the Kiri tree.

Reprint 2025-26



114 Woven Words

4
##12##
Telephone Conversation

Wole Soyinka

The price seemed reasonable, location
Indifferent. The landlady swore she lived
Off premises. Nothing remained
But self-confession. ‘Madam,’ I warned,
‘I hate a wasted journey—I am African.’
Silence. Silenced transmission of
Pressurised good-breeding. Voice, when it came,
Lipstick coated, long gold-rolled
Cigarette-holder pipped. Caught I was, foully.
‘HOW DARK ?’... I had not misheard... ‘ARE YOU LIGHT
OR VERY DARK ?’ Button B. Button A. Stench
Of rancid breath of public hide-and-speak.
Red booth. Red pillar-box. Red double-tiered
Omnibus squelching tar. It was real! Shamed
By ill-mannered silence, surrender
Pushed dumbfounded to beg simplification.
Considerate she was, varying the emphasis—
‘ARE YOU DARK? OR VERY LIGHT?’ Revelation came.
‘You mean—like plain or milk chocolate?’
Her assent was clinical, crushing in its light
Impersonality. Rapidly, wave-length adjusted,
I chose. ‘West African sepia’—and as afterthought,
“down in my passport.” Silence for spectroscopic
Flight  of fancy, till truthfulness changed her accent
Hard on the mouthpiece. ‘WHAT’S THAT?’ conceding
‘DON’T KNOW WHAT THAT IS.’ ‘Like brunette.’
‘THAT’S DARK, ISN’T IT?’ ‘Not altogether.
Facially, I am brunette, but madam, you should see
The rest of me. Palm of my hand, soles of my feet
Are a peroxide blonde. Friction, caused—
Foolishly madam—by sitting down, has turned



Telephone Conversation 115

My bottom raven black—One moment madam!’—sensing
Her receiver rearing on the thunderclap
About my ears—‘Madam,’ I pleaded, ‘wouldn’t you rather
See for yourself ?’

ABOUT THE POET 

Wole Soyinka (born 1934), is a famous Nigerian
poet and playwright. He was educated at the
Government College in Ibadan, Nigeria and, later,
at Leeds University, England, where he took a
degree in English. He taught in the London schools and
also worked in the Royal Court Theatre. He returned to
Nigeria when he was about twenty-five.

He has been one of the leading figures in Nigerian
theatre, writing a number of successful plays and also
leading a theatrical company.

He is the first African to receive the Nobel Prize for
literature (1986). His writings are known for their humour
and satire.

F Notice these expressions in the poem and guess their meaning
from the context

rancid breath squelching tar

spectroscopic flight of fancy

rearing on the thunderclap brunette

peroxide blonde clinical assent

raven black

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. State the central issue in the poem.

2. There are intervals of silence in the interaction between the landlady
and the prospective tenant. What are the reasons for this?

3. How is colour highlighted in the poem and why? List all the
words in the poem that suggest colour.

4. Which are the lines in the poem that impressed you the most
and why?



116 Woven Words

5. You know what ‘hide-and-seek’ is. What would ‘hide-and-speak’
mean?

6. Certain words in the poem are in capital letters—why?

7. Why do you think that the poet has chosen the title ‘Telephone
Conversation’? If you were to suggest another title for the poem,
what would it be?

8. The power of poetry lies in suggestion and understatement.
Discuss this with reference to the poem.

TRY THIS OUT

1. Enact the conversation bits with your partner.

2. Attempt a description of

a. the place from which the call was made

b. the lady at the other end

c. the speaker in the poem.

3. The poem evokes a mental picture of the scene. Draw a rough
sketch to illustrate the episode.

4. The poem ends with ‘Wouldn’t you rather see for yourself?’.
Imagine a personal encounter between the two people in the
poem and write down the dialogue they might have had.

SUGGESTED READING 

1. Idanre and other Poems (1967) by Wole Soyinka

2. Poems from Prison (1969) by Wole Soyinka.



##13##
The World is too Much With Us 117

5
The World is too

Much With Us
William Wordsworth

The World is too much with us; late and soon,
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers:
Little we see in Nature that is ours;
We have given our hearts away, a sordid boon!

The Sea that bares her bosom to the moon;
The Winds that will be howling at all hours,
And are up-gathered now like sleeping flowers,
For this, for everything, we are out of tune;

It moves us not.—Great God! I’d rather be
A Pagan suckled in a creed outworn;
So might I, standing on this pleasant lea,

Have glimpses that would make me less forlorn;
Have sight of Proteus rising from the sea;
Or hear old Triton blow his wreathèd horn.

Pagan: a person whose religious beliefs do not belong to any of the main religions
of the world.

`
Proteus: a character in Greek mythology who had the gift of prophecy but who,
when questioned, would assume different shapes to elude their grasp.

Triton: a sea-deity in Greek mythology, who is generally represented as blowing
a shell, his body above the waist being that of a man, below it of a dolphin.

Reprint 2025-26



118 Woven Words

ABOUT THE POET 

William Wordsworth (1770-1850) spent most
of his life in the Lake district of northern
England, and the many hours that he spent
wandering about the hills and woods led to the
production of some of the finest poetry on
nature. His work Lyrical Ballads, co-authored with
Coleridge in 1798, is regarded as the beginning of the
English Romantic Movement.
He selected subjects from nature and rustic life. He held

the view that the language of poetry should be simple and
natural.

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. Why does the poet prefer to be a primitive Pagan rather than a
member of civilised society?

2. What, according to the poet, are human beings out of tune with?

TRY THIS OUT

♦ Compare the organisation of this sonnet with that of the sonnet
by William Shakespeare.

SUGGESTED READING 

1. ‘To the Cuckoo’ by William Wordsworth

2. ‘The Solitary Reaper’ by William Wordsworth.

Reprint 2025-26



##14##
6 Mother Tongue

Padma Sachdev

I approached a stem
Swinging on a reed

And asked him
To give me a quill.
Irritated, he said

I gave you one only the other day
A new one, what have you done with it?

Are you some sort of an accountant
With some Shah

Writing account books
Where you need a new pen
Every other day he asked.
No, I don’t work for a Shah

I said, but for a Shahni, very kind,
Very well off

And I am not the only one
Working for her

She has many servants
Ever ready to do her bidding

That Shahni is my mother tongue
Dogri

Give me, a quill, quickly
She must be looking for me

The reed cut off its hand
Gave it to me and said

Take it
I too am her servant.

Reprint 2025-26



120 Woven Words

ABOUT THE POET

Padma Sachdev (born 1940) writes in her mother
tongue Dogri and in Hindi. She has received
many awards for her poetry, including the
Sahitya Academi Award she received at the age
of thirty for her first collection of Dogri poems.
The above poem, translated from the original Dogri, bemoans
the deprivation of Dogri of its native script Sharade, that
evolved from the original Brahmi around the time Dogri
developed. Once widely used by the people of all religions in
the valley, Sharade, for various reasons, came to be replaced
by the Persian script. Presently both Persian and Devanagri
(Hindi and Urdu) scripts are used for Dogri, a language listed
in Schedule VIII of the Constitution of India.

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. The quill is the central element in the poem—what does it symbolise?
2. You notice a sense of urgency in the poet’s request—what is the

reason for this?
3. How has the poet brought out her emotional attachment to her

mother tongue?
4. Personification is a figure of speech that attributes human

qualities to inanimate things and abstract ideas. How has it
been used in this poem?

TRY THIS OUT

1. Talk to five people from different spheres of society around you
and ask them the number of languages they know and use for
various purposes. Try to gather information about their attitude
to the different languages they know and use.

2. Dogri is a language spoken in parts of Jammu and Kashmir,
Himachal Pradesh and Punjab. Its earliest mention is in Amir
Khusro’s list of Indian languages. It does not have a script of its
own. It is written in either the Devnagari or the Persian script.
Find out about other Indian languages that are spoken but do
not have a script of their own.

SUGGESTED READING 

1. ‘Hindi’ by Raghuvir Sahay.

Reprint 2025-26



##15##
Hawk Roosting 121

7 Hawk Roosting
Ted Hughes

I sit in the top of the wood, my eyes
closed.
Inaction, no falsifying dream
Between my hooked head and hooked
feet:
Or in sleep rehearse perfect kills and eat.

The convenience of the high trees!
The air’s buoyancy and the sub’s ray
Are of advantage to me;
And the earth’s face upward for my inspection.

My feet are locked upon the rough bark.
It took the whole of Creation
To produce my foot, my each feather:
Now I hold Creation in my foot.

Or fly up, and revolve it all slowly—
I kill where I please because it is all mine.
There is no sophistry in my body:
My manners are tearing off heads.

The allotment of death.
For the one path of my flight is direct
Through the bones of the living.
No arguments assert my right.

The sun is behind me.
Nothing has changed since I began,
My eye has permitted no change.
I am going to keep things like this.

Reprint 2025-26



122 Woven Words

ABOUT THE POET 

Ted Hughes (1930–1998) completed his
education at Pembroke College, Cambridge. In
1956, he married the poet Sylvia Plath. He tried
to make a living in America by teaching and
writing. Finally, he returned to England.
The most remarkable quality of Hughes’ poems is an intense
and obsessive fascination with the world of birds and
animals; and though essentially about birds, animals and
fishes, his poems shock us with unusual phrases and
violent images.

The above poem is in the form of a monologue.

F Notice the use of the following phrases in the poem and guess
what they mean in the context

air’s buoyancy               sophistry in my body

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. Comment on the physical features of the hawk highlighted in
the poem and their significance.

2. How does the poem emphasise the physical prowess of the hawk?

3. ‘There is no sophistry in my body’—this statement expresses
the brutal frankness of the hawk. Does the poet suggest
something through this statement?

4. ‘Now I hold Creation in my foot’—explain the centrality of this
assertion in the poem. What makes the hawk’s assertion of its
invincibility so categorical?

5. Why is the poem entitled ‘Hawk Roosting’?

6. Bring out the parallel suggested between the predatory instincts
of the bird and human behaviour.

TRY THIS OUT

1. Consult a dictionary or an encyclopedia to differentiate between
the following birds

eagle hawk kite vulture

Reprint 2025-26



Hawk Roosting 123

2. To what aspects of human behaviour do the following adjectives
apply

eagle-eyed hawkish

SUGGESTED READING 

1. ‘The Lake’ by Ted Hughes

2. ‘Poem in October’ by Dylan Thomas.

Reprint 2025-26



124 Woven Words

8
##16##
For Elkana

Nissim Ezekiel

The warm April evening
tempts us to the breezes

sauntering across the lawn.
We drag our chairs down

the stone steps and plant them there.

Unevenly, to sit or rather sprawl
in silence till the words begin to come.

My wife, as is her way,
surveys the scene, comments

on a broken window-pane.

Suggests a thing or two
that every husband in the neighbourhood

knows exactly how to do
except of course the man she loves

who happened to be me.
Unwilling to dispute

the obvious fact

Reprint 2025-26



For Elkana 125

that she is always right,
I turn towards the more

attractive view that opens up
behind my eyes and shuts her out.

Her voice crawls up and down the lawn,
our son, who is seven,

hears it—and it reminds him of something.
He stands before us,

his small legs well apart,
crescent-moon-like chin uplifted

eyes hard and cold
to speak his truth

in masterly determination:
Mummy, I want my dinner, now.

Wife and husband in unusual rapport
state one unspoken thought:

Children Must be Disciplined.
She looks at me. I look away.

The son is waiting. In another second
he will repeat himself.

Wife wags a finger.
Firmly delivers verdict: Wait.

In five minutes I’ll serve you dinner.

No, says the little one,
not in five minutes, now.

I am hungry.
It occurs to me the boy is like his father.

I love him as I love myself.
Wait, darling, wait,

Mummy says, wait for five minutes
But, I am hungry now,

declaims the little bastard, in five minutes
I won’t be hungry any more.

This argument appeals to me.
Such a logician deserves his dinner straightaway.

Reprint 2025-26



126 Woven Words

My wife’s delightful laughter
holds the three of us together.
We rise and go into the house.

ABOUT THE POET 

Nissim Ezekiel (1924–2004) was born in Mumbai.
He is today perhaps the best known Indian poet
to have written in English. He had his education
at Wilson College, Bombay and later at Birbeck
College, London. A professor of American Literature at
Bombay University, Ezekiel has written several poems and
some plays. A proficient critic, Ezekiel lectured at a number
of universities in the U.S.A. and the U.K.

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. Comment on the subtlety with which the poet captures the
general pattern of communication within a family.

2. Poetic effect is achieved in the poem through understatement
and asides. Discuss this with examples.

3. How is the idyllic juxtaposed with the pedestrian in the poem?

4. Explain the undertones in the statement:

‘Wife and husband in unusual rapport

State one unspoken thought’:

5. Comment on the capitalisation of all the words in the line:
‘Children Must be Disciplined’.

6. What makes the urgency of the child’s demand seem logical?

TRY THIS OUT

1. Paraphrase the poem and notice the change in effect. Comment
on the deft touch with which the poet transforms ordinary events
into evocative poetry.

SUGGESTED READING 

The Night of the Scorpion and Other Poems by Nissim Ezekiel.

Reprint 2025-26



For Elkana 127

The Limerick

The limerick is a small five line poem, expressing a single
thought. It is usually funny with a punch or joke in the
last line. In fact, the limerick is to poetry what slapstick is
to comedy.

The rhyme scheme is ‘a a b b a’ : the first and second
lines rhyme with the fifth, while the third and fourth lines
rhyme with each other.

One reason why the limerick is popular is that almost
anyone can try his/her hand at it. May be you could too!

***

A novice was driving a car
When, down the road, his son said “Papa,
If you drive at this rate
We are bound to be late—
Drive faster!” He did, and they are.

***

Reprint 2025-26



128 Woven Words

Earth’s plan had a hopeful beginning
but man spoiled its chances by sinning.
We hope that the story,
Will end in Earth’s glory
But at present the other side’s winning!

***
There was once a man from Peru
Who dreamed he was eating his shoe
He woke up with a fright
In the middle of the night
And found that it was perfectly true!

***

There was a teacher named Ms Brass
Who was blessed with an unruly class
They slept and snored
And completely ignored
Theorems like Pythagoras.

Reprint 2025-26



##17##
Refugee Blues 129

9 Refugee Blues
Wystan Hugh Auden

Say this city has ten million souls,
Some are  living in mansions, some are living in holes:
Yet there’s no place for us, my dear, yet there’s no
place for us.

Once we had a country and we thought it fair,
Look in the atlas and you’ll find it there:
We cannot go there now, my dear, we cannot go there
now.

In the village churchyard there grows an old yew,
Every spring it blossoms anew:
Old passports can’t do that, my dear, old passports
can’t do that.

The consul banged the table and said:
‘If you’ve got no passport you’re officially dead’;
But we are still alive, my dear, but we are still alive.

Went to a committee; they offered me a chair;
Asked me politely to return next year;
But where shall we go today, my dear, but where shall
we go today?

Came to a public meeting; the speaker got up and said:
‘If we let them in, they will steal our daily bread’;
He was talking of you and me, my dear, he was talking
of you and me.

Thought I heard the thunder rumbling in the sky;
It was Hitler over Europe, saying: ‘they must die’;
We were in his mind, my dear, we were in his mind.

Reprint 2025-26



130 Woven Words

Saw a poodle in a jacket fastened with a pin;
Saw a door opened and a cat let in:
But they weren’t German Jews, my dear, but they
weren’t German Jews.

Went down the harbour and stood upon the quay,
Saw the fish swimming as if they were free:
Only ten feet away, my dear, only ten feet away.

Walked through a wood, saw the birds in the trees;
They had no politicians and sang at their ease:
They weren’t the human race, my dear, they weren’t
the human race.

Dreamed I saw a building with a thousand floors,
A thousand windows and a thousand doors;
Not one of them was ours, my dear, not one of them
was ours.

Went down to the station to catch the express,
Asked for two tickets to Happiness;
But every coach was full, my dear, every coach was
full.

Stood on a great plain in the falling snow;
Ten thousand soldiers marched to and fro:
Looking for you and me, my dear, looking for you and
me.

ABOUT THE POET

Wystan Hugh Auden (1907–1973) was a
student and later a Professor of Poetry at
Oxford University. One of the most important
poets of the century, he has published several
collections of poems noted for their irony,
compassion and wit.

Although a modern poem, ‘Refugee Blues’ uses the ballad
form of narration.

Reprint 2025-26



Refugee Blues 131

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. The title, ‘Refugee Blues’ encapsulates the theme of the poem.
Comment.

2. What is the poetic technique used by the poet to convey the
plaintive theme of the poem?

3. What do the references to the birds and animals made in the
poem suggest?

4. How does the poet juxtapose the human condition with the
behaviour of the political class?

5. How is the essence of the poem captured in the lines ‘two tickets
to Happiness’?

TRY THIS OUT

1. Here is a list of devices used in poetry. Elaborate on their use in
this poem

Refrain:
Pathos:
Irony:
Sarcasm:

2. What does the colour ‘blue’ suggest in the poem? Make a list of
other colours and the emotions and moods they carry.

SUGGESTED READING 

1. ‘Taller Today we Remember’ by W.H. Auden

2. ‘Our Hunting Fathers’ by W.H. Auden.

Reprint 2025-26



132 Woven Words

10
Felling of the
Banyan Tree

Dilip Chitre

My father told the tenants to leave
Who lived on the houses surrounding our house on the hill
One by one the structures were demolished
Only our own house remained and the trees
Trees are sacred my grandmother used to say
Felling them is a crime but he massacred them all
The sheoga, the oudumber, the neem were all cut down
But the huge banyan tree stood like a problem
Whose roots lay deeper than all our lives
My father ordered it to be removed

The banyan tree was three times as tall as our house
Its trunk had a circumference of fifty feet
Its scraggy aerial roots fell to the ground
From thirty feet or more so first they cut the branches
Sawing them off for seven days and the heap was huge
Insects and birds began to leave the tree

And then they came to its massive trunk
Fifty men with axes chopped and chopped
The great tree revealed its rings of two hundred years
We watched in terror and fascination this slaughter
As a raw mythology revealed to us its age
Soon afterwards we left Baroda for Bombay
Where there are no trees except the one

Reprint 2025-26



Felling of the Banyan Tree 133

Which grows and seethes in one’s dreams, its aerial roots
Looking for the ground to strike.

ABOUT THE POET 

Dilip Chitre (1938–2009) was born in Baroda.
He writes poetry both in Marathi and English.
Travelling in a Cage, from which the poem
selected here has been taken, was published
in 1980. Apart from poetry, Chitre has also
written short stories and critical essays. An
Anthology of Marathi Poetry 1945–1965 is one of his most
important works of translation. He sees poetry as an
expression of the spirit. He lives and works in Mumbai.

F Guess the meaning of the word ‘scraggy’ from the context.

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. Identify the lines that reveal the critical tone of the poet towards
the felling of the tree.

2. Identify the words that help you understand the nature of the
poet’s father.

3. ‘Trees are sacred my grandmother used to say’— what does
the poet imply by this line?

4. ‘No trees except the one which grows and seethes in one’s
dreams’— why is the phrase ‘grows and seethes’ used?

5. How does the banyan tree stand out as different from other
trees? What details of the tree does the poet highlight in the
poem?

6. What does the reference to raw mythology imply?

7. ‘Whose roots lay deeper than our lives’— what aspect of human
behaviour does this line reflect?

8. Comment on the contemporary concern that the poem echoes.

Reprint 2025-26



134 Woven Words

TRY THIS OUT

1. Most of us have had this experience of seeing trees in our
neighbourhood being mercilessly cut down in order to build a
house or a public building or to widen a road. Describe any
such experience you have had of the felling of a tree you were
attached to, with reasons for your special attachment to the
tree.

2. Find out the equivalents for sheoga, oudumber and neem in your
language and English and the equivalent of banyan in your
language.

3. The adjective ‘scraggy’ is used to describe ‘roots’ in the poem.
Find out two other items which could be described as ‘scraggy’:
scraggy…………….

4. Use the following adjectives to describe suitable items

raw aerial sacred

SUGGESTED READING 

1. ‘Death of Grandmother’ by Dilip Chitre.

Reprint 2025-26



##18##
Ode to a Nightingale 135

11
Ode to a Nightingale

John Keats

My heart aches, and a drowsy numbness
pains
My sense, as though of hemlock I had
drunk,
Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains
One minute past, and Lethe-wards had Lethe: in ancient

sunk: Greek mythology, an
imaginary river

’Tis not through envy of thy happy lot, whose water, when

But being too happy in thine happiness, drunk, was thought
to make the dead

That thou, light-winged Dryad of the trees, forget their life on

In some melodious plot Earth.

Of beechen green, and shadows Dryad: in stories, a
numberless, female spirit that lives

in a tree.
Singest of summer in full-throated ease.

Reprint 2025-26



136 Woven words

***

O, for a draught of vintage! that hath been
Cool’d a long age in the deep-delved earth,
Tasting of Flora and the country green,
Dance, and Provencal song, and sunburnt Provencal:

mirth! ( p r o n o u n c e d
Provensaal) of the

O, for a beaker full of the warm South, district of  Provence
Full of the true, the blushful Hippocrene, in France, known for

its bards and its
With beaded bubbles winking at the brim, grapevines.
And purple-stained mouth;

Hippocrene:  a
That I might drink, and leave the world fountain in Mount
unseen, Helicon associated

And with thee fade away into the forest with poetry; in the
poem it refers to the

dim. wine that inspires
poetic ability.

***

Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forget
What thou among the leaves hast never
known
The weariness, the fever, and the fret
Here, where men sit and hear each other
groan;
Where palsy shakes a few, sad, last gray
hairs,
Where youth grows pale, and spectre-thin,
and dies;
Where but to think is to be full of sorrow
And leaden-eyed despairs,
Where Beauty cannot keep her lustrous
eyes,
Or new Love pine at them beyond to-
morrow.

***

Reprint 2025-26



Ode to a Nightingale 137

Thou wast not born for death, immortal
Bird!
No hungry generations tread thee down;
The voice I hear this passing night was
heard
In ancient days by emperor and clown:
Perhaps the self-same song that found a
path
Through the sad heart of Ruth, when, sick Ruth: a woman in the

for home, Bible who left her
own people to live

She stood in tears amid the alien corn; with her mother-in-
The same that oft-times hath law, Naomi. After the

death of her
Charm’d magic casements, opening on the husband, marries
foam Boaz and is the

Of perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn. ancestor of King
David.

***

Forlorn! the very word is like a bell
To toll me back from thee to my sole self!
Adieu! the fancy cannot cheat so well
As she is fam’d to do, deceiving elf.
Adieu! adieu! thy plaintive anthem fades
Past the near meadows, over the still
stream,
Up the hill-side; and now ’tis buried deep
In the next valley-glades:
Was it a vision, or a waking dream?
Fled is that music:—Do I wake or sleep?

ABOUT THE POET 

John Keats (1795–1821) was one of the
greatest of the younger generation of
‘English Romantic’ poets. He started his
career as an apprentice to a surgeon but

Reprint 2025-26



138 Woven words

soon gave it up for poetry. His poetic career lasted for only
four years but, during this short span, he evolved from an
ordinary poet to an exceptionally mature poetic force. His
poetry celebrates beauty, which he considered the ultimate
truth. It is portrayed in extremely sensuous images that
have been created through beautiful verbal pictures. The
image of the nightingale’s bower in the poem is an apt
illustration of the poet’s craft in this respect.

F Look for these words and guess their meanings from the context

hemlock deep-delved

earth forlorn

beechen green deceiving elf

plaintive anthem

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. How does the nightingale’s song plunge the poet into a state of
ecstasy?

2. What are the unpleasant aspects of the human condition that
the poet wants to escape from?

3. What quality of ‘beauty’ and ‘love’ does the poem highlight?

4. How does the poet bring out the immortality of the bird?

5. How is the poet tossed back from ecstasy into despair?

6. How does the poem bring out the elusive nature of happiness in
human existence?

TRY THIS OUT

1. The poet has juxtaposed sets of opposites like  numbness  pains,
waking dream. How does this contribute to the poetic effect?
What is this figure of speech called? List other such pairs from
poems that you have read.

2. The poet has evoked the image of wine—why has this image
been chosen?

3. The senses of sound, sight and taste are evoked in the poem.
Locate instances of these.

Reprint 2025-26



Ode to a Nightingale 139

4. The poet addresses the nightingale and talks to the bird
throughout the poem. What is this kind of poem called?

5. Make a list of all the adjectives in the poem along with the nouns
they describe. List the phrases that impressed you most in the
poem.

6. Find out the other odes written by Keats and read them.

7. Find out the odes written by Shelley and read them.

SUGGESTED READING 

1. The complete version of ‘Ode to a Nightingale’ by John Keats

2. ‘Ode to the West Wind’ by P.B. Shelley.

Reprint 2025-26



140 Woven Words

##19##
12 Ajamil and the Tigers
Arun Kolatkar

The tiger people went to their king
and said, ‘We’re starving.
We’ve had nothing  to eat,
not a bite,
for 15 days and 16 nights.
Ajamil has got
a new sheep dog.
He cramps our style
and won’t let us get within a mile
of meat.’

‘That’s shocking,’
said the tiger king.
‘Why didn’t you come to see me before?
Make preparations for a banquet.
I’m gonna teach that sheep dog a lesson he’ll never
forget.’
‘Hear hear,’ said the tigers.
‘Careful,’ said the queen.
But he was already gone.
Alone
into the darkness before the dawn.

In an hour he was back,
the good king.
A black patch on his eye.
His tail in a sling.
And said, ‘I’ve got it all planned
now that I know the lie of the land.
All of us will have to try.
We’ll outnumber the son of a bitch.

Reprint 2025-26



Ajamil and the Tigers 141

And this time there will be no hitch.
Because this time I shall be leading the attack.’

Quick as lightning
the sheep dog was.
He took them all in as prisoners of war,
the 50 tigers and the tiger king,
before they could get their paws
on a single sheep.
They never had a chance.
The dog was in 51 places all at once.
He strung them all out in a daisy chain
and flung them in front of his boss in one big heap.

‘Nice dog you got there, Ajamil,’
said the tiger king.
Looking a little ill
and spiting out a tooth.
‘But there’s been a bit of a misunderstanding.
We could’ve wiped out your herd in one clean sweep.
But we were not trying to creep up on your sheep.
We feel that means are more important than ends.
We were coming to see you as friends.
And that’s the truth.’

The sheep dog was the type
who had never told a lie in his life
He was built along simpler lines
and he was simply disgusted.
He kept on making frantic signs.
But Ajamil, the good shepherd
refused to meet his eyes
and pretended to believe every single word
of what the tiger king said.
And seemed to be taken in by all the lies.

Ajamil cut them loose
and asked them all to stay for dinner.
It was an offer the tigers couldn’t refuse.
And after the lamb chops and the roast,

Reprint 2025-26



142 Woven Words

when Ajamil proposed
they sign a long term friendship treaty,
all the tigers roared.
‘We couldn’t agree with you more.’
And swore they would be good friends all their lives
as they put down the forks and the knives.

Ajamil signed a pact
with the tiger people and sent them back.
Laden with gifts of sheep, leather jackets and balls of
wool.
Ajamil wasn’t a fool.
Like all good shepherds he knew
that even tigers have got to eat some time.
A good shepherd sees to it they do.
He is free to play a flute all day
as well fed tigers and fat sheep drink from the same
pond
with a full stomach for a common bond.

ABOUT THE POET 

Arun Kolatkar (1932–2004) is a contemporary Indian poet.
He was educated in Pune and earned a diploma in painting
from the J.J. School of arts, Mumbai. He writes both in
English and Marathi and has authored two books. The
present poem is an excerpt from Jejuri— a long poem in
thirty-one sections. A German translation of Jejuri by
Gievanen Bandin was published in 1984.

UNDERSTANDING THE POEM

1. The poem has a literal level and a figurative level. Why has the
poet chosen ‘tigers’ and ‘sheep’ to convey his message?

2. What facet of political life does the behaviour of Ajamil illustrate?

3. Why have the words, ‘pretended’ and ‘seemed’ been used in the
lines:

...pretended to believe every single word
of what the tiger king said.

Reprint 2025-26



Ajamil and the Tigers 143

And seemed to be taken in by all the lies.

How does the sense of these lines connect with the line ‘Ajamil
wasn’t a fool’?

4. Why did Ajamil refuse to meet the sheepdog’s eyes?

5. ‘He is free to play a flute all day as well fed tigers and fat sheep
drink from the same pond with a full stomach for a common
bond.’

What do the phrases ‘play the flute all day’ and ‘a common bond’
refer to?

6. The poem is a satire against the present political class. How
effectively does it convey the anger and anguish of the common
man trapped in the system?

TRY THIS OUT

Find out the difference between these literary forms
(a) fable  (b) allegory (c) satire.

SUGGESTED READING 

1. Jejuri by Arun Kolatkar.

Reprint 2025-26



144 Woven Words

ESSAYS

INTRODUCTION

An essay is a short composition in prose that undertakes
to discuss a matter, express a point of view, or persuade
us to accept an idea on any subject. It is addressed to a
general rather than a specialised audience; as a
consequence, the essay discusses its subject in a non-
technical fashion and often with a liberal use of anecdote,
illustration and humour.
A useful distinction is that between the formal and informal
essay. The formal essay is relatively impersonal, logically
organised and filled with serious purpose. The informal
essay is personal, written in a relaxed, often whimsical
fashion, and tends to deal with everyday things.
Essays have been written since ancient times. The French
writer, Montaigne, wrote short literary pieces which he
called Essaies, meaning ‘attempts’. Francis Bacon
inaugurated the English use of the term in his own essays.
The founding of literary periodicals and magazines gave
great impetus to the writing of essays (earlier essays were
published in books).
The essays in this unit provide a wide thematic range. My
Watch is a humorous re-look at an instrument that most of
us take for granted. My Three Passions focuses on the
eternal concepts of love and pity. Tribal Verse makes one
sensitively aware of the rich oral literatures of India.
Bridges, an autobiographical excerpt, gives us a glimpse
into the life of a kathak dancer and choreographer while
Patterns of Creativity throws light on the creativity of poetry
and creativity of science.

Reprint 2025-26



##20##
My Watch 145

1
My Watch

Mark Twain

F Look for these expressions and words in the text and guess the
meaning from the context

bodings human cabbage

vicious happiness prised

brained him

I

My beautiful new watch had run eighteen months without
losing or gaining, and without breaking any part of its
machinery or stopping. I had come to believe it infallible in
its judgments about the time of day, and to consider its
constitution and its anatomy imperishable. But, at last,
one night, I let it run down. I grieved about it as if it were a
recognised messenger and forerunner of calamity. But by
and by I cheered up, set the watch by guess, and commanded
my bodings and superstitions to depart.

Next day I stepped into the chief jeweller’s to set it by
the exact time, and the head of the establishment took it
out of my hand and proceeded
to set it for me. Then he said,
‘she is four minutes slow—
regulator wants pushing up’. I
tried to stop him—tried to make
him understand that the watch
kept perfect time. But no; all
this human cabbage could see
was that the watch was four
minutes slow and the regulator
must be pushed up a little; and
so, while I danced around him

Reprint 2025-26



146 Woven Words

in anguish, and implored him to let the watch alone, he
calmly and cruelly did the shameful deed. My watch began
to gain. It gained faster and faster day by day. Within a
week it sickened to a raging fever and its pulse went up to
a hundred and fifty in the shade. At the end of two months
it had left all the timepieces of the town far in the rear and
was a fraction over thirteen days ahead of the almanac. It
was away into November enjoying the snow, while the
October leaves were still turning. It hurried up house rent,
bills payable and such things in such a ruinous way that I
could not abide it. I took it to the watchmaker to be
regulated. He asked me if I had ever had it repaired. I said
no, it had never needed any repairing. He looked a look of
vicious happiness and eagerly pried the watch open, and
then put a small dice-box into his eye and peered into its
machinery. He said it wanted cleaning and oiling, besides
regulating, and asked me to come in a week. After being
cleaned and oiled, and regulated, my watch slowed down
to that degree that it ticked all appointments I go to, missing
my dinner, I gradually drifted back into yesterday, then
the day before, then into last week and by and by the
comprehension came upon me that, all solitary and alone,
I was lingering alone in week before last and the world was
out of sight. I seemed to detect in myself a sort of sneaking
fellow-feeling for the mummy in the museum, and a desire
to swap news with him. I went to a watchmaker again. He
took the watch all to pieces while I waited and then said
the barrel was ‘swelled’. He said he could reduce it in three
days. After this the watch averaged well, but nothing more.
For a half day it would go like the very mischief, and keep
up such a barking and wheezing and whooping and sneezing
and snorting that I could not hear myself think for the
disturbance: and as it held out there was not a watch in
the land that stood any chance against it. But the rest of
the day it would keep on slowing down and fooling along
until all the clocks it had left behind caught up again. It
would show a fair and square average, and no man could
say it had done more or less than its duty.

Reprint 2025-26



My Watch 147

II

But a correct average is only a mild virtue in a watch
and I took this instrument to another watchmaker. He said
the king-bolt was broken. I said I was glad it was nothing
more serious. To tell the plain truth, I had no idea what
the king-bolt was, but I did not choose to appear ignorant
to a stranger. He repaired the king-bolt but what the watch
gained in one way it lost in another. It would run a while
and then stop a while, and then run a while again, and so
on, using its own discretion about the intervals. And every
time it went off it kicked back like a musket. I padded my
breast  for a few days but, finally, took the watch to another
watchmaker. He picked it all to pieces and turned the ruin
over and over under his glass; and then he said there
appeared to be fresh start. It did well now, except that
always at ten minutes to ten the hands would shut together
like a pair of scissors and from that time forth they would
travel together. The oldest man in the world could not make
head or tail of the time of day by such a watch, and so I
went again to have the thing repaired. This person said
that the crystal had got bent and the mainspring was not
straight. He made these things all right and then my
timepiece performed unexceptionably, save that now and
then, after working along quietly for nearly eight hours,
everything inside would let go all of a sudden and begin to
buzz like a bee, and the hands would straightway begin to
spin round and round so fast that their individuality was
lost completely, and they simply seemed a delicate spider’s
web over the face of the watch. She would reel off the next
twenty-four hours in six or seven minutes, and then stop
with a bang. I went with a heavy heart to one more
watchmaker, and looked on while he took her to pieces.
Then I prepared to cross-question him rigidly, for this thing
was getting serious. The watch had cost two hundred dollars
originally, and I seemed to have paid out two or three
thousand for repairs. While I waited and looked on, I
presently recognised in this watchmaker an old
acquaintance—a steam-boat engineer of other days and
not a good engineer, either. He examined all the parts

Reprint 2025-26



148 Woven Words

carefully, just as the other watchmakers had done, and
then delivered his verdict with the same confidence of
manner.

He said:
‘She makes too much steam— you want to hang the

monkey-wrench on the safety-valve!’ I brained him on the
spot and had him buried at my own expense. My uncle
William (now deceased, alas!) used to say that a good horse
was a good horse until it had run away once, and that a
good watch was a good watch until the repairers got a chance
at it. And he used to wonder what became of all the
unsuccessful tinkers, and gunsmiths, and shoe-makers, and
engineers, and  blacksmiths; but nobody could ever tell him.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Samuel L. Clemens (1835–1910), who used the
pseudonym Mark Twain, was an American
humorist, short story writer and novelist.

Brought up in the small town of Hannibal,
Missouri, Mark Twain had less than 10 years of
schooling. He worked as a printer’s apprentice, a steamboat
pilot, a prospector and a journalist. All this gave him varied
experiences and a wide knowledge of humanity.

In the Adventures of Tom Sawyer, he drew on his own
childhood; The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, which was
planned merely as a sequel, went on to become a
masterpiece, the story being narrated through an
uneducated boy.

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. What was the importance of the watch to the author?

2. What were the attempts made by the author to get his watch
repaired?

3. Why did the author finally give up on his watch?

4. What was Uncle Williams’ comment on the ‘tinkerers’ of the
world?

Reprint 2025-26



My Watch 149

5. Explain these lines

a. ‘I seemd to detect in myself a sort of sneaking fellow-feeling
for the mummy in the museum, and a desire to swap news
with him.’

b. ‘Within a week it sickened to a raging fever and its pulse
went up to a hundred and fifty in the shade.’

c. ‘She makes too much steam—you want to hang the monkey
wrench on the safety valve!’

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss in pairs or groups of four

1. Replacing old machines with new is better than getting them
repaired.

2. It is difficult to part with personal items like a watch which
have a sentimental value attached to them.

APPRECIATION

1. How is humour employed to comment on the pains that the
author took to get his watch set right?

2. ‘The author’s treatment of the subject matter makes the readers
identify themselves with the experience.’ Comment on this
statement.

3. Identify some of the improbable images the author has used to
effect greater humour.

LANGUAGE WORK

Make a list of the expressions that imbue the watch with human
attributes.

SUGGESTED READING

1. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain

2. The Mysterious Stranger and Other Stories by Mark Twain.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



150 Woven Words

##21##
2 My Three Passions
Bertrand Russell

F From the context of the passage, guess the meaning of the words
and phrases in the box

wayward course ocean of anguish verge of despair

mystic miniature unfathomable abyss

apprehend reverberate

Three passions, simple but overwhelmingly strong, have
governed my life: the longing for love, the search for
knowledge, and unbearable pity for the suffering of mankind.
These passions, like great winds, have blown me hither
and thither, in a wayward course, over a deep ocean of
anguish, reaching to the very verge of despair.

I have sought love, first, because it brings ecstasy—
ecstasy so great that I would often have sacrificed all the
rest of life for a few hours of this joy. I have sought it, next,
because it relieves loneliness—that terrible loneliness in
which one shivering consciousness looks over the rim of
the world into the cold unfathomable lifeless abyss. I have
sought it, finally, because in the union of love, I have seen,
in a mystic miniature, the prefiguring vision of the heaven
that saints and poets have imagined. This is what I sought
and, though it might seem too good for human life, this is
what at least I have found.

With equal passion, I have sought knowledge. I have
wished to understand the hearts of men. I have wished to
know why the stars shine. And I have tried to apprehend
the Pythagorean power by which number holds sway over
the flux. A little of this, but not much, I have achieved.

Love and knowledge, so far as they were possible, led
upward toward the heavens. But always pity brought me
back to earth. Echoes of cries of pain reverberate in my

Reprint 2025-26



My Three Passions 151

heart. Children in famine, victims tortured by oppressors,
helpless old people a hated burden to their sons, and the
whole world of loneliness, poverty and pain make a mockery
of what human life should be. I long to alleviate the evil,
but I cannot, and I too suffer.

This has been my life. I have found it worth living, and
would gladly live it again if the chance were offered to me.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Bertrand Russell (1872–1969), the British
philosopher and mathematician, has written
numerous popular works on philosophy, politics
and education. He took a major part in the
twentieth century revival of logic and made
continued effort to identify the methods of philosophy with
those of the sciences. He received the Nobel Prize for
literature in 1950. The above passage is an extract from
Bertrand Russell’s Autobiography.

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. Why does Russell call the three passions ‘simple’?

2. Why has he compared the three passions to great winds?

3. What, according to Russell, is the importance of love in life?

4. How does Russell’s definition of knowledge differ from what is
commonly understood by the term?

5. Why is the quality of pity earth-bound while the other two
passions are elevating?

6. How have the three passions contributed to the quality of
Russell’s life?

F Read the summary of Martin Luther’s King’s distinction between
three kinds of love given below.

King’s sixth point was central to the method of non-violent resistance.
He believed that the importance of non-violence rested in the fact that
it prevented physical violence and the ‘internal violence of spirit’.
Bitterness and hate were absent from the resister’s mind, and replaced

...cont.

Reprint 2025-26



152 Woven Words

with love. However, the kind of love King was talking about was not the
affectionate type but, instead, the type that meant ‘understanding,
redeeming good will for all people’. He further explained that in the
Greek New Testament, there were three words for love and each had a
different meaning. Eros was romantic love and philla was a reciprocal
love. Neither of these two types of love were the kind that King advanced.
Agape, which was not a passive love, was the kind of redemptive love he
referred to. According to King, “It is an overflowing love which is purely
spontaneous, unmotivated, groundless and creative. It is not set in
motion by any quality or function of its object. It is the love of God
operating in the human heart.”
Additionally, it was a love that was disinterested. The act of loving
was not for one’s own good but for the good of another. It did not
distinguish between worthy and unworthy people or friends and
enemies. Furthermore, it was love that fulfilled the need of another
person. A person was in greatest need of love when a sinner.
King also believed that agape sought to preserve and create community.
As a result, no distance was too far to travel in the attempt to restore
community. Agape was,

...a willingness to forgive, not seven times, but seventy times to
restore community. The cross is the eternal expression of the
length to which God will go in order to restore broken community.
The resurrection is a symbol of God’s triumph over all the forces
that seek to block community. The Holy Spirit is the continuing
community creating reality that moves through history. He who
works against community is working against the whole of creation.

Thus, hateful responses promote a broken community and instead one
must respond to hate with love in order to avoid becoming depersonalised
and to fix a broken community.
Lastly, agape means that every aspect of life is interrelated. All human
beings are related to one another and by harming another they harm
themselves.
Martin Luther King was a man who believed that the power of love
could be the most effective weapon against the social ills of society. He
promoted resistance that was nonviolent and, in the end, it proved to
be the most successful method against an unjust system of segregation.

• How does Russell’s concept of love and pity tie up with King’s
concepts of agape?

SUGGESTED READING

1. ‘Ideas that have Helped Mankind’ by Bertrand Russell

2. ‘Ideas that have Harmed Mankind’ by Bertrand Russell.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



##22##
Patterns of Creativity 153

3 Patterns of Creativity
S. Chandrasekhar

F Look for these expressions and guess the meaning from the context

cold philosophy             mutually sustaining endeavours

picaresque tale      cenotaph atrophy

looked askance prophetic discernment

apposite            hierophants of an unapprehended inspiration

interlunations of life

...But I must return to the question: why is there a
difference in the patterns of creativity among the
practitioners in the arts and the practitioners in the
sciences? 1 shall not attempt to answer this question
directly; but I shall make an assortment of remarks which
may bear on the answer.

First, I should like to consider how scientists and poets
view one another. When one thinks of the attitude of poets
to science, one almost always thinks of Wordsworth and
Keats and their off-quoted lines

A fingering slave,
One that would peep and botanises
Upon his mother’s grave?

A reasoning self-suffering thing.
An intellectual AlI-in-AIl!

Sweet is the lore which Nature brings:
Our meddling intellect
Misshapes the beauteous forms of things:
We murder to dissect.

(Wordsworth)

Reprint 2025-26



154 Woven Words

Do not all charms fly
At the mere touch of cold philosophy?
There was an awful rainbow once in heaven:
We know her woof, her texture; she is given
In the dull catalogue of common things.
Philosophy will clip an Angel’s wings.

(Keats)
These lines, perhaps, find an echo in a statement of

Lowes Dickinson, “When Science arrives, it expels Literature”.
It is to be expected that one should find scientists

countering these views. Thus, Peter Medawar counters
Lowes Dickinson by

The case I shall find evidence for is that when literature
arrives, it expels science… The way things are at present,
it is simply no good pretending that science and literature
represent complementary and mutually sustaining
endeavours to reach a common goal. On the contrary,
where they might be expected to cooperate they compete.
It would not seem to me that one can go very far in

these matters by pointing accusing fingers at one another.
So, let me only say that the attitudes of Wordsworth and
Keats are by no means typical. A scientist should rather
consider the attitude of Shelley. Shelley is a scientist’s
poet. It is not an accident that the most discriminating
literary criticism of Shelley’s thought and work is by a
distinguished scientist, Desmond King-Hele. As King-Hele
has pointed out, “Shelley’s attitude to science emphasises
the surprising modern climate of thoughts in which he
chose to live and Shelley describes the mechanisms of
nature with a precision and a wealth of detail unparalleled
in English poetry”. And here is A.N. Whitehead’s testimony

Shelley’s attitude to Science was at the opposite pole to
that of Wordsworth. He loved it, and is never tired of
expressing in poetry the thoughts which it suggests. It
symbolises to him joy, and peace, and illumination…
I should like to read two examples from Shelley’s poetry

which support what has been said about him. The first
example is from his Cloud which ‘fuses together a creative
myth, a scientific monograph, and a gay picaresque tale of
cloud adventure’

Reprint 2025-26



Patterns of Creativity 155

I am the daughter of Earth and Water,
And the nursling of the Sky:
I pass through the pores of the ocean and the shores:
I change, but I cannot die.
For after the rain when never a stain
The pavilion of Heaven is bare,
And the winds and sunbeams with their convex gleams
Build up the blue dome of air,
I silently laugh at my own cenotaph,
And out of the caverns of rain,
Like a child from the womb, like a ghost from the tomb,
I arise and unbuild it again.
The second example is from Prometheus Unbound, which

has been described by Herbert Read as “the greatest
expression ever given to humanity’s desire for intellectual
light and spiritual liberty”

The lightning is his slave, heaven’s utmost deep
Gives up her stars, and like a flock of sheep
They pass before his eye, are numbered, and roll on!
The tempest is his steed, he strides the air;
And the abyss shouts from her depth laid bare,
Heaven, hast thou secrets? Man unveils me: I have none.
Let me turn to a slightly different aspect of the matter.

What are we to make of the following confession of Charles
Darwin?

Up to the age of thirty, or beyond it, poetry of many kinds, such
as the works of Milton, Gray, Byron, Wordsworth, Coleridge and
Shelley gave me great pleasure; and even as a school boy I took
intense delight in Shakespeare, especially historical plays... I
have also said that formerly pictures gave me considerable,
and music very great, delight. But now, for many years, I cannot
endure to read a line of poetry; I have tried lately to read
Shakespeare and found it so intolerably dull that it nauseated
me. I have almost lost my taste for pictures or music... My mind
seems to have become a kind of machine for grinding general
laws out of large collections of facts but why this should have
caused the atrophy of that part of the brain alone on which the
higher tastes depend, I cannot conceive.

Or consider this: Faraday discovered the laws of
electromagnetic induction and his discoveries led him to

Reprint 2025-26



156 Woven Words

formulate concepts such as ‘lines of force’ and ‘fields of
force’ which were foreign to the then prevailing modes of
thought. They were, in fact, looked askance by many of his
contemporaries. But of Faraday’s ideas, Maxwell wrote with
prophetic discernment

The way in which Faraday made use of his idea of the
lines of force in coordinating the phenomenon of electro-
magnetic induction shows him to have been, in reality, a
mathematician of a very high order—one from whom the
mathematicians of the future may derive valuable and
fertile methods. We are probably ignorant even of the name
of the science which will be developed out of the materials
we are now collecting, when the great philosopher next
after Faraday makes his appearance.
And yet when Gladstone, then  the Chancellor of the

Exchequer, interrupted Faraday in his description of his
work on electricity by the impatient inquiry, “But after all,
what use is it?” Faraday’s response was, “Why, Sir, there
is every probability that you will soon be able to tax it”.
And Faraday’s response has always been quoted most
approvingly.

It seems to me that to Darwin’s confession and to
Faraday’s response, what Shelley has said about the
cultivation of the sciences in his Defence of Poetry is apposite

The cultivation of those sciences which have enlarged the
limits of the empire of man over the external world, has,
for want of the poetical faculty, proportionally circumscribed
those of the internal world; and man, having enslaved the
elements, remains himself a slave.
Lest you think that Shelley is not sensitive to the role

of technology in moden society, let me quote what he has
said in that connection

Undoubtedly the promoters of utility, in this limited sense,
have their appointed office in society. They follow the
footstep of poets, and copy the sketches of their creations
into the book of common life. They make space and give
time.
Shelley’s A Defence of Poetry, from which I have just

quoted, is one of the most moving documents in all of
English literature. W.B. Yeats called it “the profoundest

Reprint 2025-26



Patterns of Creativity 157

essay on the foundation of poetry in the English language”.
The essay should be read in its entirety; but allow me to
read a selection

Poetry is the record of the best and happiest moments of
the happiest and the best minds. Poetry, thus, makes
immortal all that is best and most beautiful in the world; it
arrests the vanishing apparitions which haunt the
interlunations of life,..
Poetry is indeed something divine. It is at once the centre
and circumference of knowledge; it is that which
comprehends all science, and that to which all science
must be referred. It is, at the same time, the root and
blossom of all other systems of thought.
Poets are the hierophants of an unapprehended inspiration;
the mirrors or the gigantic shadows which futurity casts
upon the present; the words which express what they
understand not; the trumpets which sing to battle, and
feel not what they inspire; the influence which is moved
not, but moves. Poets are the unacknowledged legislators
of the world.
On reading Shelley’s A Defence of Poetry, the question

insistently occurs why there is no similar A Defence of
Science written by a scientist of equal endowment. Perhaps
in raising the question I have, in part, suggested an answer
to the one I have repeatedly asked during the lecture.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

S. Chandrasekhar (1910-1995) was a
distinguished astrophysicist and Nobel
Laureate. He was a Professor Emeritus in the
Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics
at the University of Chicago. He received
many awards and wrote several books. Truth
and Beauty from which ‘Patterns of Creativity’
has been taken is a collection of seven
lectures addressing aesthetics and motivation in the
pursuit of science and contemplates patterns of scientific

Reprint 2025-26



158 Woven Words

creativity. The extract is from The Nora and Edward
Byerson Lecture titled ‘Shakespeare, Newton and
Beethoven, or Patterns of Creativity’.

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. How does Shelley’s attitude to science differ from that of
Wordsworth and Keats?

2. ‘It is not an accident that the most discriminating literary
criticism of Shelley’s thought and work is by a distinguished
scientist, Desmond King-Hele.’ How does this statement bring
out the meeting point of poetry and science?

3. What do you infer from Darwin’s comment on his indifference
to literature as he advanced in years?

4. How do the patterns of creativity displayed by scientists differ
from those displayed by poets?

5. What is the central argument of the speaker?

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss in small groups

1. ‘Poets are the unacknowledged legislators of the world’.

2. Poetry and science are incompatible.

3. ‘On reading Shelley’s A Defence of Poetry, the question insistently
occurs why there is no similar A Defence of  Science written by a
scientist of equal endowment.’

APPRECIATION

1. How does the ‘assortment of remarks’ compiled by the author
give us an understanding of the ways of science and poetry?

2. Considering that this is an excerpt from a lecture, how does the
commentary provided by the speaker string the arguments
together?

3. The Cloud ‘fuses together a creative myth, a scientific
monograph, and a gay picaresque tale of cloud adventure’—
explain.

Reprint 2025-26



Patterns of Creativity 159

LANGUAGE WORK

1. How do the words in bold, in the lines below, illustrate the poet’s
ability to convey criticism cryptically?

Our meddling intellect
        Misshapes the beauteous forms of things:
        We murder to dissect.

2. Explain the  contradiction in the similies, ‘Like a child from the
womb, like a ghost from the tomb’.

3. Explain the metaphor in the line: ‘Poets are ... the mirrors of
gigantic shadows that futurity casts on the present’.

SUGGESTED READING

‘Literature and Science’ by Matthew Arnold.

F Read and enjoy the excerpts from an interview given by
S.Chandrasekhar to Deccan Herald (23 January, 1994 issue).

QUESTION: You came to America in 1936. Do you think you
would have achieved what you did had you stayed back
in India?

CHANDRASEKHAR: In a narrow sense, the answer is NO. There
were better facilities for work here. I was also disconcerted
with science politics in India. I was very sensitive and I desired
the mental peace to do science the way I wanted.

Secondly, how can one evaluate scientific achievement?
It is not a personal accomplishment. I had many students
and collaborators. Science has to be an integrated effort.
Otherwise, it would be too narrow.

Q: Who was your earliest mentor? And who influenced you
most in your career?

A: I had no mentor. And nobody influenced me. I wrote my
thesis on my own. I have always been alone. This is not
criticism. It is the character of my work.

Q: Do you recall your mother and her attitudes which may
have shaped yours?

A: Yes, I recall a particular incident which revealed my
mother’s extraordinary awareness. I was hardly ten years
old, when she woke me up one morning and said, “Do you
know Ramanujam is dead? It has come in the newspaper.”

The very fact that she realised that Ramanujam’s death
was an important event showed her enlightenment in
these matters. Her attitudes did influence me a great deal.

..cont.

Reprint 2025-26



160 Woven Words

Q: Has your wife been a great support to you in your scientific
career?

A: I have mentioned Lalitha in my book, Truth and Beauty.
My biographer, Kameswar Wali, has also written a whole
chapter on my wife. [Suddenly, with a smile] Do you know
the American press called that the best chapter?

Q: Have you, at any point of time, regretted your decision to
leave the country of your birth?

A: There is no point in regretting or being happy over
decisions you have made. I think it’s irrational to regret
the past anyway. You must reconcile yourself to the life
you have chosen and lived.

Q: Do you enjoy teaching?

A: I always integrated teaching with research. They support
each other.

Q: What is it that makes Indians achieve more in this country
(America) than in India? Do you think it could be the
academic climate?

A: I wouldn’t judge achievement by awards. The quality of
science in India is good too. But I remember in the 1930s
the great scientists of that country were in the universities.
But today it is not so. And, that is a loss.

Q: Has your personal life been complete and happy?

A: That you should ask Lalitha—may be I could have given
more. [Pause] I don’t believe that a scientist—a true
scientist—can ever have a complete personal life. [Pause
again] I sometimes wonder whether all that I did and
accomplished in my lifetime—was it really worth it?

. . .

Kameswar Wali later interpreted this comment as: “When
Chandra asks—Was it worth it? — he is not being negative.
It is just an awareness, another dimension of realisation
which dawns as one get older.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



##23##
Tribal Verse 161

4
Tribal Verse

G.N. Devy

F Look for these expressions in the text and guess the meaning from
the context

marginalisation of communities    accelerated pace

canonized written texts                  rich repository of folk songs

tribal vision of life                   cohesive and organically unified

itinerant street singers

INTRODUCTION

The roots of India’s literary traditions can be traced to the
rich oral literatures of the tribes/adivasis. Usually in the
form of songs or chanting, these verses are expressions of
the close contact between the world of nature and the world
of tribal existence. They have been orally transmitted from
generation to generation and have survived for several ages.
However, a large number of these are already lost due to
the very fact of their orality. The forces of urbanisation,
print culture and commerce have resulted in not just the
marginalisation of these communities but also of their
languages and literary cultures. Though some attempts
have been made for the collection and conservation of tribal
languages and their literatures, without more concerted
efforts at an acelerated pace, we are in danger of losing an
invaluable part of our history and rich literary heritage.

This section is a small attempt to familiarise students
with some aspects of the enormous wealth of oral tribal
literature. It begins with an extract from an essay by G.N.
Devy in which he discusses the need to create a space for
the study of tribal literature within the framework of
canonized written texts. What he argues for is the need for a

Reprint 2025-26



162 Woven Words

new method to identify and read literature in which orality
is not dismissed as casual utterances in different dialects.

This is followed by two songs—one sung on the occasion
of childbirth by the Munda tribals and the other on the
occasion of death by the Kondh tribals. The third verse is a
chanting in the ritualistic religious language of the Adi
tribe, not the same as their language of conversation. Even
though this is merely a small representation of a treasure
of tribal/adivasi songs, it indicates the immense diversity
that exists amongst tribal groups. Inevitably influenced by
their very specific historical, cultural and geographical
locations, tribal societies continue to retain and reproduce
their distinctive traditions which usually find expression
through their different languages. However, it is equally
true that though possessing their very specific languages,
most tribal societies such as Munda, Kondh, Adi and Bondo
are bilingual. Moreover, while tribal groups like the Santhal
become important subjects in dominant literary streams
such as Bangla literature, there is a fairly well developed
Santhali literature too. Besides this, tribes like Santhal
and Munda have also played a prominent role in the socio-
political movements of their regions. [Birsa Munda
(1874–1901) spent his whole life fighting against
colonialism and the exploitation of labourers]. The Santhals
have emerged as a prominent group at the regional and
state levels through their participation in the Jharkhand
Movement.

The three selected songs give us a small glimpse into
the rich repository of folk songs that is an expression of
the tribal vision of life. Their close connection with nature
is evident from their belief in the interdependence between
human beings and nature. Nature for them is living and
responsive to human existence and human actions,
demanding respect essential for any kind of coexistence.

The songs exist originally in the native languages of
the tribals and are sung or chanted. The effort to bring
them to students in English naturally involves some loss
of the original flavour and spirit but that is a problem of all
translation and constant attempts need to be made to
minimise this loss. But for some conscious effort being

Reprint 2025-26



Tribal Verse 163

made to first preserve these songs, these pieces of literature
would have been lost to us completely. However limitedly,
it is only through translation that we are able to even access
these works.

‘INTRODUCTION’ TO PAINTED WORDS

...Most tribal communities in India are culturally
similar to tribal communities elsewhere in the world. They
live in groups that are cohesive and organically unified.
They show very little interest in accumulating wealth or in
using labour as a device to gather interest and capital.
They accept a world-view in which nature, human beings
and God are intimately linked and they believe in the human
ability to spell and interpret truth. They live more by intution
than reason, they consider the space around them more
sacred than secular, and their sense of time is personal
rather than objective. The world of the tribal imagination,
therefore, is radically different from that of modern Indian
society.

Once a society accepts a secular mode of creativity
within which the creator replaces God, imaginative
transactions assume a self-conscious form. The tribal
imagination, on the other hand, is still, to a large extent,

Reprint 2025-26



164 Woven Words

dreamlike and hallucinatory. It admits fusion between
various planes of existence and levels of time in a natural
way. In tribal stories, oceans fly in the sky as birds, mountains
swim in the water as fish, animals speak as humans and
stars grow like plants. Spatial order and temporal sequence
do not restrict the narrative. This is not to say that tribal
creations have no conventions or rules but simply that they
admit the principle of association between emotion and the
narrative motif. Thus stars, seas, mountains, trees, men and
animals, can be angry, sad or happy.

It might be said that tribal artists work more on the
basis of their racial and sensory memory than on the basis
of a cultivated imagination. In order to understand this
distinction, we must understand the difference between
imagination and memory. In the animate world,
consciousness meets two immediate material realities:
space and time. We put meaning into space by perceiving
it in terms of images. The image making faculty is a genetic
gift to the human mind—this power of imagination helps
us understand the space that envelops us. In the case of
time, we make connections with the help of memory; one
remembers being the same person as one was yesterday.

The tribal mind has a more acute sense of time than
sense of space. Somewhere along the history of human
civilization, tribal communities seem to have realised that
domination over territorial space was not their lot. Thus,
they seem to have turned almost obsessively to gaining
domination over time. This urge is substantiated in their
ritual of conversing with their dead ancestors: year after
year, tribals in many parts of India worship terracotta, or
carved-wood objects, representing their ancestors, aspiring
to enter a trance in which they can converse with the dead.
Over the centuries, an amazingly sharp memory has helped
tribals classify material and natural objects into a highly
complex system of knowledge. The importance of memory
in tribal systems of knowledge has not yet been sufficiently
recognised but the aesthetic proportions of the houses that
tribals build, the objects they make and the rituals they
perform fascinate the curious onlooker. It can be hard to
understand how, without any institutional training or

Reprint 2025-26



Tribal Verse 165

tutoring, tribals are able to dance, sing, craft, build and
speak so well ...

A vast number of Indian languages have yet remained
only spoken, with the result that literary compositions in
these languages are not considered ‘literature’. They are a
feast for the folklorist, anthropologist and linguist but, to a
literary critic, they generally mean nothing. Similarly,
several nomadic Indian communities are broken up and
spread over long distances but survive as communities
because they are bound by their oral epics. The wealth and
variety of these works is so enormous that one discovers
their neglect with a sense of pure shame. Some of the songs
and stories I heard from itinerant street singers in my
childhood are no longer available anywhere. For some years
now I have been collecting songs and stories that circulate
in India’s tribal languages, and I am continually
overwhelmed by their number and their profound influence
on the tribal communities.

The result is that I, for one, can no longer think of
literature as something written. Of course I do not dispute
the claim of written compositions and texts to the status of
literature; but surely it is time we realise that unless we
modify the established notion of literature as something
written, we will silently witness the decline of various
Indian oral traditions. That literature is a lot more than
writing is a reminder necessary for our times.

One of the main characteristics of tribal arts is their
distinct manner of constructing space and imagery, which
might be described as ‘hallucinatory’. In both oral and visual
forms of representation, tribal artists seem to interpret
verbal or pictorial space as demarcated by an extremely
flexible ‘frame’. The boundaries between art and non-art
become almost invisible. A tribal epic can begin its narration
from a trivial everyday event; tribal paintings merge with
living space as if the two were one and the same. And
within the narrative itself, or within the painted imagery,
there is no deliberate attempt to follow a sequence. The
episodes retold and the images created take on the
apparently chaotic shapes of dreams. In a tribal Ramayan,
an episode from the Mahabharat makes a sudden and

Reprint 2025-26



166 Woven Words

surprising appearance; tribal paintings contain a curious
mixture of traditional and modern imagery. In a way, the
syntax of language and the grammar of painting are the
same, as if literature were painted words and painting were
a song of images.

Yet it is not safe to assume that the tribal arts do not
employ any ordering principles. On the contrary, the
ordering principles are very strict. The most important
among these is convention. Though the casual spectator
may not notice, every tribal performance and creation has,
at its back, another such performance or creation belonging
to a previous occasion. The creativity of the tribal artist
lies in adhering to the past while, at the same time, slightly
subverting it. The subversions are more playful than ironic.

Indeed, playfulness is the soul of tribal arts. Though
oral and pictorial tribal art creations are intimately related
to rituals—the sacred can never be left out—the tribal arts
rarely assume a serious or pretentious tone. The artist
rarely plays the role of the Creator. Listening to tribal epics
can be great fun as even the heroes are not spared the
occasional shock of the artist’s humour. One reason for
this unique mixture of the sacred and the ordinary may be
that tribal works of art are not created specifically for sale.
Artists do expect a certain amount of patronage from the
community, like artists in any other context; but, since
those performing rituals are very often artists themselves,
there is no element of competition in the patron-artist
relationship. The tribal arts are, therefore, relaxed, never
tense... One question invariably asked about the tribal arts
is whether they are static—frozen in tradition— or dynamic.
A general misconception is that the orally transmitted arts
are entirely tradition-bound, with little scope for individual
experimentation beyond the small freedom to distort the
previously created text. This misconception arises from the
habit of seeing art only with reference to the text but the tribal
arts involve not just text but performance and audience
reception. Experimentation in the tribal arts can be understood
only when they are approached as performing arts.

Non-tribals usually fail to notice that all of India’s tribal
communities are basically bilingual. All bilingual

Reprint 2025-26



Tribal Verse 167

communities have an innate capacity to assimilate outside
influences and, in this case, a highly evolved mechanism
for responding to the non-tribal world. The tribal oral stories
and songs employ bilingualism in such a complex manner
that a linguist who is not alert to this complexity is in
danger of dismissing the tribal languages altogether as
dialects of India’s major tongues...

The language into which the works have been
translated, English, carries massive colonial baggage. When
the works of contemporary Indian writers—who inherit a
multilingual tradition several thousand years old—were
classified as ‘new literature’, Western academics had no
idea how comical this classification looked to the literary
community in India. Hence it is neccessary to assert that
the literature of the adivasis is not a new ‘movement’ or a
fresh ‘trend’ in the field of literature; most people have
simply been unaware of its existence and that is not the
fault of the tribals themselves. What might be new is the
present attempt to see imaginative expression in tribal
language not as ‘folklore’ but as literature and to hear tribal
speech not as a dialect but as a language. This attitude
may be somewhat unconventional but only until we recall
that scripts themselves are relatively new, and that the
printing of literary text goes no further back than a few
centuries—in comparison with creative experiments with
the human ability to produce speech in such a way that it

Reprint 2025-26



168 Woven Words

transcends time. In fact, every written piece of literature
contains substantial layers of orality. This is particularly
true for poetry and drama but, even in prose fiction, the
elements of orality need to be significant if the work is to
be effective.

1.    A MUNDA SONG: SONG OF BIRTH AND DEATH

My mother, the sun rose
A son was born.
My mother, the moon rose
A daughter was born.
A son was born
The cowshed was depleted;
A daughter was born
The cowshed filled up.
(Translated from the original Mundari)

Note on the Munda Tribe

The Munda tribals live in parts of Jharkhand, West
Bengal, Assam, Tripura, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa. They
are also known as Horohon or Mura, meaning headman of a
village. One of the most studied tribal communities of India,
they also have an encyclopaedia on them, Encyclopaedia
Mundarica (16 Volumes) by Reverend John Baptist Hoffman
(1857–1928) and other Jesuit scholars.

The Munda are probably the first of the adivasis to
resist colonialism and they revolted repeatedly over agrarian
issues. The Tamar insurrection of 1819–20 protested
against the break-up of their agrarian system. In their quest
to establish Munda Raj and reform their society to enable
it to cope with the challenges of time, they organised the
famous millennial movement under Birsa Munda (1874–
1901) where their leaders used ‘both Hindu and Christian
idioms to create a Munda ideology and worldview’. However,
the uprising was quelled by the British.

Note on the Munda Song

Many ceremonies and rituals of the Munda are
associated with birth, death and marriage. Living in close

Reprint 2025-26



Tribal Verse 169

harmony with nature, their lives are synchronised
with the changing rhythms of nature, the
seasons, the rising and setting of the sun and so
on, and not by clock time. The selected Munda
song is sung to rhythmic folk tunes at the birth
of a son or daughter and invariably communicates
their close association with nature. Cattle set off
to the pastures in the morning and return to
their sheds at sundown. The birth of a daughter
is associated with a cowshed full of cows and
that of the son with its depletion. Clearly the
daughter is considered to be a more precious asset
than the son. This is probably because, in Munda
society, the women have a dominant role to play
in the various economic, social and ritual
activities.

2.    A KONDH SONG

This we offer to you.
We can,
Because we are still alive;
If not,
How could we offer at all,
And what ?
We give a small baby fowl.
Take this and go away
Whichever way you came.
Go back, return.
Don’t inflict pain on us
After your departure.
(Translated from the original Kondh)

A note on the Kondh Tribe

The term ‘Kondh’ is most probably derived
from the Dravidian word, konda, meaning hill.
Divided into several segments and distributed
over the districts of Andhra Pradesh, Chattisgarh,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Orissa, these
hill people speak the Kondh language though

Reprint 2025-26



170 Woven Words

most of them are bilingual and so conversant
with the major language of the state to which
they belong.

The Kondh religion is a mixture of the
traditional faith of the adivasis and Hinduism.
They do not have any dowry system but they do
fix a bride price that the groom pays to the bride
either in cash or in kind.

A Note on the Kondh Song

The Kondhs observe a number of rituals in
connection with birth, puberty, marriage and
death, with specific folk dances and songs for
each occasion. They believe in the existence of
gods and spirits, both benevolent and malevolent.

The song here is sung at the death of a person
beseeching the spirit of the dead to stop troubling
the living. It is based on the Kondh belief that
people love their homes so much that their souls
are reluctant to leave the hearth even after death.
These spirits, though generally kind, can become
harmful at times since they are now unable to
participate in earthly life. It is, therefore,
customary to make generous offerings to the
spirit. The song begins by saying that the dead
spirit will be able to receive offerings only if the
others in the family continue to live and prosper.
They reveal their willingness to do anything to
make the spirit happy but, in return, the spirit
must also promise not to trouble them with its
visits.

3.    ADI SONG FOR THE RECOVERY OF LOST HEALTH

Oh my beloved one
If you lost your health due to ill luck
I come forward here to save you
With this Emul
To call back your lost health.
Listen to the sound of this sweet ornament

Reprint 2025-26



Tribal Verse 171

And follow me to your sweet home.
I tie this Ridin creeper
To fasten your soul to your body.
Follow the footprint of this cock
Come, come with me to your home.
(Translated from the original Miri Agom)

A Note on the Adi Tribe

Adi is a generic term denoting hill people and it includes
a number of groups. It may be applied to all the hill tribes
around the Brahmaputra valley. The Adi are, however,
concentrated in the East and West Siang district of
Arunachal Pradesh. They belive that every object in the
universe, be it human beings, animals, trees or birds, have
a spirit that needs to be nourished and propitiated.
Dependent on nature for many of their needs, they believe
that equilibrium in nature must always be maintained.
Even though hunting is considered not just a means of
procuring food but also an expression of courage and skill,
they still believe that human beings must hunt for survival
and not for greed.

The Adi have two major languages that they use for
two different purposes. The language for routine
conversation is called Adi Agom. The second major language
still in use is Miri Agom, a highly rhythmic language used
for chanting during their rituals. The headman of the village
is generally the best hunter as well as an expert in Miri
Agom. Both languages are living languages and rituals and
ceremonies provide the occasion for the teaching of Miri
Agom to the younger generation.

A Note on the Adi Song

The song selected here is actually a mantra that is
chanted in Miri Agom to lure the spirit of good health back
to the body of a sick person. The Adi believe that a person
falls ill when the spirit of good health abandons the body
due to some shock it may suffer. The above lines are chanted
in a ritual performed by the maternal uncle of the sick
person.

Reprint 2025-26



172 Woven Words

Notes

Beloved one: the loved nephew or niece who is ill.
I come forward here to save you: the maternal uncle of the

sick person comes forward to perform the ritual for the return of the
spirit of good health.

Emul: amulet, here a healing ornament.
Listen to the sound of this ornament: this line and the ones

that follow are addressed to the spirit of good health to request it to
return to the ill body.

Your sweet home: the ill body which is the real home of the
spirit of good health.

Ridin: a creeper that is supposed to have special medicinal
qualities.

Fasten your soul to your body: the Ridin creeper will tie the
spirit of good health to the body to ensure its continued presence.

Follow the footprints of this cock: usually an offering like a
cock or a hen is made to propitiate the spirit of good health and
presuade it to return to the ill body.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

G.N. Devy, (born 1950) formerly professor of English at
Maharaja Sayaji Rao University of Baroda, is the Founder
Director of the Tribal Academy at Tejgarh, Gujarat. He is
the Director of Sahitya Akademi’s Project on Literature in
Tribal Languages and Oral Traditions. He received the
Sahitya Akademi Award for his book After Amnesia and the
SAARC Writer’s Foundation Award for his work on the
‘denotified tribes’.

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. Identify the common characteristics shared by tribal
communities all over the world.

2. What distinguishes the tribal imagination from the secular
imagination?

3. How does G.N. Devy bring out the importance of the oral literary
tradition?

4. List the distinctive features of the tribal arts.
5. ‘New literature’ is a misnomer for the wealth of the Indian literary

tradition. How does G.N. Devy explain this?

Reprint 2025-26



Tribal Verse 173

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss the following in pairs or in groups of four

1. ‘It is time to realise that unless we modify the established notion
of literature as something written, we will silently witness the
decline of various Indian oral traditions.’

2. ‘Tribal arts are not specificlly meant for sale.’ Does this help or
hamper their growth and preservation?

3. Because India’s tribal communities are basically bilingual there
is a danger of dismissing their languages as dialects of India’s
major tongues.

4. While tribal communities may not seem to possess the scientific
temper, there are many ideas from tribal conventions that could
enrich modern societies.

APPRECIATION

1. How does ‘A Munda Song’ show that the perspective of the tribal
mind towards the girl child is different from that of (other)
mainstream communities?

2. How does ‘A Kondh Song’ substantiate the tribal urge to gain
domination over time by conversing with their dead ancestors?

3. ‘Adi Song for the Recovery of Lost Health’ is in Miri Agom while
Adi Agom is the Adi community’s language for routine
conversation. How does this reflect upon the high level of
language sensitivity of the Adi? Can you think of other  parallels
in modern languages between the literary variety and the
colloquial variety?

LANGUAGE WORK

1. Comment on the symbols used in ‘A Munda Song’. What aspect
of the tribal worldview do they reflect?

2. Explain the significance of the lines

‘I tie this Ridin creeper
To fasten your soul to your body.’

3. What is the central argument of the speaker?

SUGGESTED READING

1. Cultural Diversity, Linguistic Plurality and Literary Traditions in
India, ed. Sukinta Paul Kumar, for University of Delhi.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



174 Woven Words

5
#24##
What is a Good Book?

John Ruskin

F Look for these expressions and guess their meaning from the context

canaille peerage

fain national noblesse of words

The good book of the hour, then—I do not speak of the bad
ones—is simply the useful or pleasant talk of some person
whom you cannot otherwise converse with, printed for you.
Very useful often, telling you what you need to know; very
pleasant often, as a sensible friend’s present talk would
be. These bright accounts of travels; good-humoured and
witty discussions of question; lively or pathetic story-telling
in the form of novel; firm fact-telling by the real agents
concerned in the events of passing history—all these books
of the hour, multiplying among us as education becomes
more general, are a peculiar characteristic and possession
of the present age: we ought to be entirely thankful for
them, and entirely ashamed of ourselves if we make no
good use of them. But we make the worst possible use if we
allow them to usurp the place of true books: for, strictly
speaking, they are not books at all but merely letters or
newspapers in good print. Our friend’s letter may be
delightful, or necessary, today: whether worth keeping or
not, is to be considered. The newspaper may be entirely
proper at breakfast time but, assuredly, it is not reading
for all day. So, though bound up in a volume, the long
letter which gives you so pleasant an account of the inns,
and roads, and weather last year at such a place, or which
tells you that amusing story or gives you the real
circumstances of such and such events, however valuable
for occasional reference, may not be, in the real sense of

Reprint 2025-26



What is a Good Book? 175

the word, a ‘book’ at all, nor, in the real sense, to be ‘read’.
A book is essentially not a talked thing but a written thing;
and written, not with the view of more communication, but
of permanence. The book of talk is printed only because its
author cannot speak to thousands of people at once; if he
could, he would—the volume is mere ‘multiplication’ of his
voice. You cannot talk to your friend in India; if you could,
you would; you would write instead: that is mere
‘conveyance’ of voice. But a book is written, not to multiply
the voice merely, not to carry it merely, but to preserve it.
The author has something to say which he perceives to be
true and useful, or helpfully beautiful. So far as he knows
no one has yet said it; so far as he knows, no one else can
say it. He is bound to say it, clearly and melodiously if he
may; clearly, at all events. In the sum of his life he finds
this to be the thing or group of things, manifest to him—
this is the piece of true knowledge, or sight, which his
share of sunshine and earth has permitted him to seize.
He would fain set it down forever, engrave it on a rock, if
he could, saying, ‘This is the best of me; for the rest, I ate,
and drank, and slept, loved, and hated, like another; my
life was as the vapour, and is not; but this I saw and knew;
this, if anything, of mine, is worth your memory.’ That his
‘writing’, it is, in his small human way, and with whatever
degree of true inspiration is in him, his inscription, or
scripture.That is a ‘Book’.

Perhaps you think no books were ever so written?
But, again, I ask you; do you at all believe in honesty

or, at all, in kindness? Or do you think there is never any
honesty or benevolence in wise people? None of us, I hope,
are so unhappy as to think that. Well, whatever bit of a
wise man’s work is honestly and benevolently done, that
bit is his book, or his piece of art. It is mixed always with
evil fragments—ill-done, redundant, affected work. But if
you read rightly, you will easily discover the true bits, and
those are the book.

Now books of this kind have been written in all ages by
their greatest men—by great leaders, great statesmen and
great thinkers. These are all at your choice; and life is
short. You have heard as much before; yet have you

Reprint 2025-26



176 Woven Words

measured and mapped out this short life and its
possibilities? Do you know, if you read this, that you cannot
read that—that what you lose today you cannot gain
tomorrow? Will you go and gossip with your housemaid, or
your stable-boy, when you may talk with queens and kings;
or flatter yourselves that it is with any worthy
consciousness of your own claims to respect that you jostle
with the common crowd for entrée here, an audience there,
when all the while this eternal court is open to you, with
its society wide as the world, multitudinous as its days,
the chosen and the mighty, of every place and time? Into
that you may enter always; in that you may take fellowship
and rank according to your wish; from that, once entered
into it, you can never be outcast but by your own fault; by
your aristocracy of companionship there, your own inherent
aristocracy will be assuredly tested and the motives with
which you strive to take high place in the society of the
living, measured, as to all the truth and sincerity that are
in them, by the place you desire to take in this company of
the Dead.

‘The place you desire’, and the place you ‘fit yourself
for’, I must also say; because, observe, this court of the
past differs from all living aristocracy in this—it is open to
labour and to merit but to nothing else. No wealth will
bribe, no name will overawe, no artifice will deceive the
guardian of those Elysian gates. In the deep sense, no vile
or vulgar person ever enters there. At the portieres of that
silent Faubourg St. Germain, there is but brief question,
‘Do you deserve to enter? Pass. Do you ask to be the
companion of nobles? Do you long for the conversation of
the wise? Learn to understand it, and you shall hear it.
But on other terms? No. If you will not rise to us, we cannot
stoop to you. The living lord may assume courtesy, the
living philosopher explain his thought to you with
considerable pain; but here we neither feign nor interpret;
you must rise to the level of our thoughts if you would be
gladdened by them, and share our feelings, if you would
recognise our presence.’

This, then, is what you have to do and I admit that it
is much. You must, in a word, love these people if you are

Reprint 2025-26



What is a Good Book? 177

to be among them. No ambition is of any use. They scorn
your ambition. You must love them and show your love by
a true desire to be taught by them, and to enter their
thoughts. To enter into theirs, observe; not to find your
own expressed by them. If the person who wrote the book
is not wiser than you, you need not read it; if he be, he will
think differently from you in many respects.

Very ready we are to say of a book, ‘How good this is—
that’s exactly what I think!’ But the right feeling is, ‘How
strange that is! I never thought of that before and yet I see
it is true; or if I do not now, I hope I shall, some day.’ But
whether thus submissively or not, at least be sure that
you go to the author to get at his meaning, not to find
yours. Judge it afterwards, if you think yourself qualified
to do so; but ascertain it first. And be sure also, if the
author is worth anything, that you will get at his meaning
all at once; nay, that at his whole meaning you will not for
a long time arrive in any wise. Not that he does not say
what he means, and in strong words too; but he cannot
say it all; and what is more strange, will not, but in a
hidden way and in parables, in order that he may be sure
you want it. I cannot quite see the reason of this, nor analyse
that cruel reticence in the breasts of wise men which makes
them always hide their deeper thoughts. They do not give
it to you by way of help, but of reward, and will make
themselves sure that you deserve it before they allow you
to reach it. But it is the same with the physical type of
wisdom, gold. There seems, to you and me, no reason why
the electric forces of the earth should not carry whatever
there is of gold within it at once to the mountain tops, so
that kings and people might know that all the gold they
could get was there; and without any trouble of digging, or
anxiety, or chance, or waste of time, cut it away, and coin
as much as they needed. But nature does not manage it
so. She puts it in little fissures in the earth, nobody knows
where: you may dig long and find none; you must dig
painfully to find any.

And it is just the same with men’s best wisdom. When
you come to a good book, you must ask yourself, ‘Am I
inclined to work as an Australian miner would? Are my

Reprint 2025-26



178 Woven Words

pickaxes and shovels in good order and am I in good trim
myself, my sleeves well up to the elbow, and my breath
good, and my temper?’ And, keeping the figure a little longer,
even at the cost of tiresomeness, for it is a thoroughly
useful one, the metal you are in search of being the author’s
mind or meaning, his words are as the rock which you
have to crush and smelt in order to get at it. And your
pickaxes are your own care, wit and learning; your smelting
furnace is your own thoughtful soul. Do not hope to get at
any good author’s meaning without these tools and that
fire; often you will need sharpest, finest chiselling, and
patientest fusing, before you can gather one grain of metal.

And, therefore, first of all, I tell you, earnestly and
authoritatively (I know I am right in this), you must get
into the habit of looking intensely at words and assuring
yourself of their meaning, syllable by syllable—nay, letter
by letter. For, though it is only by reason of the opposition
of letters in the function of signs, to sounds in the function
of signs, that the study of books is called ‘literature’, and
that a man versed in it is called, by the consent of nations,
a man of letters instead of a man of books, or of words, you
may yet connect with that accidental nomenclature this
real principle: that you might read all the books in the
British Museum (if you could live long enough), and remain
an utterly ‘illiterate’, uneducated person; but that if you
read ten pages of a good book, letter by letter—that is to
say, with real accuracy—you are forever more in some
measure with an educated person. The entire difference
between education and non-education (as regards the
merely intellectual part of it), consists in this accuracy. A
well-educated gentleman may not know many languages—
may not be able to speak any but his own—may have read
very few books. But whatever language he knows, he knows
precisely; whatever word he pronounces, he pronounces
rightly; above all, he is learned in the peerage of words;
knows the words of true descent and ancient blood, at a
glance, from words of modern canaille; remembers all their
ancestry—their inter-marriages, distantest relationships,
and the extent to which they were admitted, and offices
they held, among the national noblesse of words at any

Reprint 2025-26



What is a Good Book? 179

time, and in any country. But an uneducated person may
know by memory any number of languages and talk them
all, and yet truly not know a word of any—not a word even
of his own. An ordinarily clever and sensible seaman will
be able to make his way ashore at most ports; yet he has
only to speak a sentence of any language to be known for
an illiterate person: so also the accent, or turn of expression
of a single sentence will at once mark a scholar. And this
so strongly felt, so conclusively admitted, by educated
persons, that a false accent or a mistaken syllable is
enough, in the parliament of any civilized nation, to assign
a man a certain degree of inferior standing forever. And
this is right; but it is a pity that the accuracy insisted on
is not greater, and required to a serious purpose. It is right
that a false Latin quantity should excite a smile in the
House of Commons; but it is wrong that a false English
meaning should not excite a frown there. Let the accent of
words be watched, by all means, but let the meaning be
watched more closely still, and fewer will do the work. A
few words, well chosen and well distinguished, will do work
that a thousand cannot, when everyone is acting,
equivocally, in the function of another. Yes; and words, if
they are not watched, will do deadly work sometimes.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

John Ruskin (1819–1900) was a powerful and
influential critic of the nineteenth century. He
wrote on a variety of subjects: nature, art,
architecture, politics, history. All his work is
characterised by a clarity of vision.
His first volume, Modern Painters, appeared in 1843—it
defended modernism in the arts among the works of social
criticism are Unto this Last (1862), and Sesame and Lilies
(1871) from which this extract has been taken.
His ideas on architecture are presented in The Seven Lamps
of Architecture (1849) and The Stones of Venice (1853).

Reprint 2025-26



180 Woven Words

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. What, according to Ruskin, are the limitations of the good book
of the hour?

2. What are the criteria that Ruskin feels that readers should fulfil
to make themselves fit for the company of the Dead.

3. Why does Ruskin feel that reading the work of a good author is
a painstaking task?

4. What is the emphasis placed by Ruskin on accuracy?

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss in pairs

1. Ruskin’s insistence on looking intensely at words, and assuring
oneself of meaning, syllable by syllable—nay, letter by letter.

2. Choice of diction is very crucial to the communication of
meaning.

APPRECIATION

1. The text is an excerpt from Sesame and Lilies which consists of
two essays, primarily, written for delivery as public lectures in
1864. Identify the features that fit the speech mode. Notice the
sentence patterns.

2. The lecture was delivered in 1864. What are the shifts in style
and diction that make the language different from the way it is
used today?

LANGUAGE WORK

1. Many sentences and paragraphs in the excerpt begin with the
word ‘And’.  To what extent does this contribute to the rhetorical
style of the lecture?

2. Study each of the following sentences and notice the balance
between its parts. Pick out other sentences in the text that reflect
this kind of balance

a. It is right that a false Latin quantity should excite a smile
in the House of Commons; but it is wrong that a false English
meaning should not excite a frown there.

b. Let the accent of words be watched, by all means, but let
the meaning be watched more closely still, and fewer will do
the work.

Reprint 2025-26



What is a Good Book? 181

SUGGESTED READING

1. Sesame and Lilies by John Ruskin

2. Seven Lamps of Architecture by John Ruskin

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



182 Woven Words

##25##
6 The Story
E.M. Forster

F Look for these expressions and guess their meaning from the context

atavistic shock-heads ingenious

We shall all agree that the fundamental aspect of the novel
is its story-telling aspect, but we shall voice our assent in
different tones, and it is on the precise tone of voice we
employ now that our subsequent conclusions will depend.

Let us listen to three voices. If you ask one type of
man, ‘What does a novel do?’ he will reply placidly, ‘Well—
I don’t know—it seems a funny sort of question to ask—a
novel’s a novel—well, I don’t know—I suppose it kind of
tells a story, so to speak’. He is quite good tempered and
vague, and probably driving a motor-bus at the same time
and paying no more attention to literature than it merits.
Another man, whom I visualise as on a golf-course, will be
aggressive and brisk. He will reply, ‘What does a novel do?
Why, tell a story of course and I’ve no use for it if it didn’t.
I like a story. Very bad taste, on my part, no doubt, but I
like a story. You can take your art, you can take your
literature, you can take your music, but give me a good
story. And I like a  story to be a story, mind, and my wife’s
the same.’ And a third man, he says in a sort of drooping
regretful voice, ‘Yes—oh dear yes—the novel tells a story.’ I
respect and admire the first speaker. I detest and fear the
second. And the third is myself. Yes—oh dear yes—the novel
tells a story. That is the fundamental aspect without which
it could not exist. That is the highest factor common to all
novels, and I wish that it was not so, that it could be
something different—melody, or perception of truth, not
this low atavistic form.

Reprint 2025-26



The Story 183

For, the more we look at the story (the story that is a
story, mind) the more we disentangle it from the finer
growths that it supports, the less shall we find to admire.
It runs like a backbone—or may I say a tape-worm—for its
beginning and end are arbitrary. It is immensely old—goes
back to Neolithic times, perhaps to Palaeolithic.
Neanderthal man listened to stories, if one may judge by
the shape of his skull. The primitive audience was an
audience of shock-heads, gaping round the campfire,
fatigued with contending against the mammoth or the woolly
rhinoceros, and only kept awake by suspense. What would
happen next? The novelist droned on and, as soon as the
audience guessed what happened next, they either fell
asleep or killed him. We can estimate the dangers incurred
when we think of the career of Scheherazade in somewhat
later times. Scheherazade avoided her fate because she
knew how to wield the weapon of suspense—the only
literary tool that has any effect on tyrants and savages.
Great novelist though she was—exquisite in her
descriptions, tolerant in her judgements, ingenious in her
incidents, advanced in her morality, vivid in her delineations
of character, expert in her knowledge of three Oriental
capitals—it was yet on none of these gifts that she relied
when trying to save her life from her intolerable husband.
They were but incidental. She only survived because she
managed to keep the king wondering what would happen
next. Each time she saw the sun rising she stopped in the
middle of a sentence, and left him gaping. ‘At this moment
Scheherazade saw the morning appearing and, discreet,
was silent.’ This uninteresting little phrase is the backbone
of the One Thousand and One Nights, the tape-worm by
which they are tied together and by which the life of a
most accomplished princess was preserved.

We are like Scheherazade’s husband in that we want
to know what happens next. That is universal and that is
why the backbone of a novel has to be a story. Some of us
want to know nothing else—there is nothing in us but
primeval curiosity and, consequently, our other literary
judgements are ludicrous. And now the story can be defined.
It is a narrative of events arranged in their time sequence—

Reprint 2025-26



184 Woven Words

dinner coming after breakfast, Tuesday coming after
Monday, decay after death, and so on. Qua story, it can
only have one merit; that of making the audience want to
know what happens next. And, conversely, it can have only
one fault: that of making the audience not want to know
what happens next. These are the only two criticisms that
can be made on the story. It is the lowest and simplest of
literary organisms. Yet it is the highest factor common to
all the very complicated organisms known as novels.

When we isolate the story like this from the nobler
aspects through which it moves, and hold it out on forceps—
wriggling and interminable, the naked worm of time—it
presents an appearance that is both unlovely and dull.
But we have much to learn from it. Let us begin by
considering it in connection with daily life.

Daily life is also full of the time sense. We think one
event occurs after or before another, the thought is often
in our minds, and much of our talk and action proceeds
from that assumption. Much of our talk and action, but
not all; there seems something else in life besides time,
something which may conveniently be called ‘value’,
something which is measured not by minutes or hours,
but by intensity, so that when we look at our past it does
not stretch back evenly but piles up into a few pinnacles
and when we look at the future it seems sometimes a wall,
sometimes a cloud, sometimes a sun, but never a
chronological chart. Neither memory nor anticipation is
much interested in Father Time, and all dreamers, artists
and lovers are partially delivered from his tyranny; he can
kill them but he cannot secure their attention and, at the
very moment of doom when the clock collected in the tower
its strength and struck, they may be looking the other way.
So daily life, whatever it may be really, is practically
composed of two lives—the life in time and the life by
values—and our conduct reveals a double allegiance. ‘I only
saw her for five minutes, but it was worth it.’ There you
have both allegiances in a single sentence. And what the
story does is to narrate the life in time. And what the entire
novel does—if it is a good novel—is to include the life by
values as well; using devices hereafter to be examined. It,

Reprint 2025-26



The Story 185

also, pays a double allegiance. But in it, the novel, the
allegiance to time is imperative: no novel could be written
without it. Whereas, in daily life, the allegiance may not be
necessary; we do not know, and the experience of certain
mystics suggests, indeed, that it is not necessary, and that
we are quite mistaken in supposing that Monday is followed
by Tuesday, or death by decay. It is always possible for you
or me in daily life to deny that time exists and act
accordingly even if we become unintelligible and are sent
by our fellow citizens to what they choose to call a lunatic
asylum. But it is never possible for a novelist to deny time
inside the fabric of his novel: he must cling, however lightly,
to the thread of his story, he must touch the interminable
tape-worm otherwise he becomes unintelligible, which, in
his case, is a blunder.

I am trying not to be philosophic about time for it is
(experts assure us) a most dangerous hobby for an outsider,
far more fatal than place; and quite eminent metaphysicians
have been dethroned through referring to it improperly. I
am only trying to explain that as I lecture now I hear the
clock ticking, I retain or lose the time sense; whereas, in a
novel, there is always a clock. The author may dislike the
clock. Emily Bronte in Wuthering Heights tried to hide hers.
Sterne, in Tristram Shandy, turned it upside down. Marcel
Proust, still more ingenious, kept altering the hands so
that his hero was at the same time entertaining a mistress
to supper and playing ball with his nurse in the park. All
these devices are legitimate but none of them contravene
our thesis: the basis of a novel is a story and a story is a
narrative of events in time sequence.

From Aspects of the Novel : A Note

These are some lectures (the Clark Lectures) which were
delivered under the auspices of Trinity College, Cambridge,
in the spring of 1927. They were informal, indeed talkative,
in their tone and it seemed safer when presenting them in
book form not to mitigate the talk, in case nothing should
be left at all. Words such as ‘I’, ‘you’ ‘one’, ‘we’, ‘curiously
enough’, ‘so to speak’, ‘only imagine’ and ‘of course’ will
consequently occur on every page and will rightly distress

Reprint 2025-26



186 Woven Words

the sensitive reader; but he is asked to remember that if
these words were removed, others, perhaps more
distinguished, might escape through the orifices they left
and that since the novel is itself often colloquial it may
possibly withhold some of its secrets from the graver and
grander streams of criticism and may reveal them to
backwaters and shallows.

The 1001 Arabian Nights

The 1001 Arabian Nights is a collection of stories loosely
linked together, narrated by a young girl Scheherazade.
She was the daughter of the vizier, or minister, who had to
serve a peculiar king. The king married on a daily basis:
his wife was always beheaded after the wedding night.

Scheherazade tells her father that she wished to marry
the king. He reluctantly agrees. She tells the king an
interesting story on their wedding night, and makes sure
to stop at an interesting point at the crack of dawn. The
king is unwilling to execute her because he wants to hear
the end of the story. This scheme was extremely risky, but
Scheherazade is successful in continually linking stories
over many nights until, finally, the king accepts her as his
queen and stops the horrible practice of executing his wife.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

E.M. Forster (1879–1970), a noted English
author and critic, wrote a number of short
stories, novels and essays. His first novel,
Where Angels Fear to Tread, was published
in 1905. This was followed by Howard’s End
and A Passage to India and other well-known works. The
Hill of Devi, a portrait of India with a commentary, appeared
in 1953. The essay presented here is an excerpt from
chapter two of Aspects of the Novel.

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. What do you understand of the three voices in response to the
question ‘What does a novel do’?

Reprint 2025-26



The Story 187

2. What would you say are ‘the finer growths’ that the story
supports in a novel?

3. How does Forster trace the human interest in the story to
primitive times?

4. Discuss the importance of time in the narration of a story.

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss in pairs or in small groups

1. What does a novel do?

2. ‘Our daily life reflects a double allegiance to ‘the life in time’
and  ‘the life by values’.

3.     The description of  novels as organisms.

APPRECIATION

1. How does Forster use the analogy of Scheherazade to establish
his point?

2. Taking off from Forster’s references to Emily Bronte, Sterne and
Proust, discuss the treatment of time in some of the novels you
have read.

LANGUAGE WORK

1.    ‘Qua story’: what does the word mean? Find other expressions
using the word qua.

2. Study the Note to Aspects of the Novel  given at the end. Discuss
the features that mark the piece as a talk as distinguished
from a critical essay.

3. Try rewriting the lecture as a formal essay and examine Forster’s
statement: ‘…since the novel is itself often colloquial, it may
possibly withhold some of its secrets from the graver and
grander streams of criticism’.

SUGGESTED READING

1. The Craft of Fiction by Percy Lubbock

2. The Sense of an Ending by Frank Kermode.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



188 Woven Words

##26##
7 Bridges
Kumudini Lakhia

F Look for these words and expressions in the text and guess their
meaning from the context

infraction demeanour

dubious assertion synergy

If my younger self could see me now she would be
incredulous. That I would work in the field of dance or
decipher and translate dance for my own comprehension,
call it choreography if you wish, would have been
unbelievable. In this respect, I am particularly envious of
dancers who claim that they were ‘born to dance’, implying
that it was clearly laid out for them from the beginning. I
must say, I find this assertion dubious; it is rarely that
easy. To dance means to struggle—I believe it is the same
in any discipline because discipline itself is a struggle. I
believe I was not simply born to dance; I was born to live.
And now, as the patchwork of my life comes into clearer
focus, I can see clear bridges between my life experiences
and my work in dance.

In all truth, as a child, I never did want to dance; it
was forced upon me by a doting mother and a silent father.
My father probably kept his peace to avoid argument. From
the beginning my lessons took place under trying
conditions, though I believe that the conditions were more
trying for my mother than for me. She travelled in local,
over-crowded trains to dance class with an unwilling child,
tired from a whole day at school. She waited a whole hour
in the not-so-clean ante-room of my guru’s house and then
endured the same journey back. This was in Bombay, and
my first dance lessons were with Guru Sunder Prasad who

Reprint 2025-26



Bridges 189

lived in Chowpatty while we lived in Khar. We took the
train, then a bus and then walked, and the whole trip took
roughly 45 minutes each way.

Interestingly, it was the film industry that spurred my
mother to enrol me in dance classes. When I was seven, we
went to see a movie starring Mumtaz Ali, father of the
comedian, Mehmood. Ali did a dance number in the film
with which I became fascinated. When we arrived home, I
began prancing around the house imitating the film actor
and my mother, who was quietly watching, was the one
who said, ‘Kumudini, you are born to dance.’ Ironically, I
have no recollection of this story; it was my mother who
saw this innate ability in me. Her belief was so strong that
she went through the gruelling exercise of taking me to
dance class four days a week without complaint.

However, my childhood education was composed of
much more than just dance and academics. I did not live
in a vacuum. I was surrounded by life and learnt many of
my lessons there, lessons that I still carry with me. I grew
up during a volatile era, a time of war, India’s independence
movement compounded by World War II in which India played
a role in military operations. My father, being an engineer,
was called upon to build the cantonment areas first in
Delhi, then in Naini and Allahabad. In Delhi we were allotted
a sprawling house on Hardinge Avenue (now Tilak Marg)
with Liaquat Ali (later, Prime Minister of Pakistan), as our
neighbour. Once his gardener caught me and my brother,
Suresh, picking guavas from his tree. He grabbed us by
the ear and presented us before the master for punishment.
Liaquat Ali not only let us keep the guavas but extended
an open invitation to pick the fruits whenever we wished!
However, this generous offer was accompanied by the mali’s
face which was so horrifying and revengeful that we never
went near that garden again. It was one of my first lessons
in the games that politicians play.

Father would now have to move to wherever army
construction was required. Therefore, when I was nine years
old, the decision was made to send me to boarding school.
After a lot of arguments, advice, consideration and research
on the part of my parents, I was packed off to Queen Mary’s

Reprint 2025-26



190 Woven Words

College (school) in Lahore (at that time in India). I had not
known a day away from home, but the idea of living with a
lot of girls of my age and studying in a fancy school was
both exciting and worrisome, as curiosity was mixed with
sadness. No more shuffling to and from class, no more
over-bearing Guruji.

No such luck. Mother sent a dance teacher, Radhelal
Misra, Sunder Prasad’s nephew, along with me! She hired
a small apartment for him in Lahore and arranged a
schedule for my lessons. Despite her belief that I was ‘born’
to dance, I didn’t enjoy dance classes. Quite frankly, they
were no fun. I felt as if nothing progressed, that I was just
doing what my guru ordered. I was always a curious child
and I wanted to know and understand what I was doing.
Why was I gyrating in this way? But my teacher could not,
or would not, explain it to me. I was envious of other girls
who were playing tennis and basketball while I was doing
this thing called Kathak. My mother convinced the
principal, a Britisher, that to dance was a form of prayer
and that she could not curb religious freedom! Having spent
several years in a school where most of our teachers were
British, I have come to like their form of discipline. Discipline
in one’s daily routine does bring discipline in thinking. You
begin to place your thoughts in neat little piles the way
you do your uniforms and shoes.

It was three weeks before the final school
examinations—matriculation at that time—when my life
changed dramatically. I was called to the Principal’s office.
What had I done? The only reason one was called to Miss
Cox’s office was because of some infraction. While she was
a kind and diplomatic person, she was also strict and firm
and later, when I myself became a teacher, I was influenced
by her demeanour. As I approached the office, I wondered—
did I forget to put away the tennis racquets after morning
play? Did I forget to lock the door of the dormitory?

‘May I come in, madam?’ I asked quietly.
‘Yes do come in child,’ she answered with a voice full

of such kindness that it made me suspicious, ‘You have to
go home.’

‘But why? I have to study for my exams!’

Reprint 2025-26



Bridges 191

‘Your father called to say that your mother is sick and
he would like you to visit her.’

During the walk back from Miss Cox’s office to my
classroom I was overwhelmed with feelings of confusion, a
state of mind I have never completely got over. Even today,
when I want to create a new piece, the first theme that
comes to my mind vibrates with confusion.

Mother was already dead when I arrived, 36 hours and
three train-rides later. When I saw her, motionless and
colourless, I finally understood why I had been summoned
home. I was 14 years old. The air was still and nobody
looked at me. I did not know where to turn or what to do
with my hands, which hung loose from my body. Then
suddenly they clutched my stomach. Hunger pangs? I hadn’t
eaten for three days and there was an emptiness I wanted
to fill. I was afraid of appearing greedy, so I underplayed
my emotions, though all kinds of yearning gnawed my
insides.

Even today I mistake the different kinds of hunger inside
me, and this is something that shows up in my work. The
dangling arms find expression in my choreography. In
Duvidha or Conflict, I examined the plight of a middle-class
woman who is chained to the traditions of Indian life. She
is restricted to domestic circles, is forbidden from wearing
sleeveless blouses, must wear her hair in a bun and must
cater to her husband. Yet, from a small window she sees
the newspaperman waving images of a woman with a bold
streak of white in her short hair, who wears sleeveless
blouses, is surrounded by men who listen to her intently,
is widowed but wears colourful saris. Moreover, she
commands a country with millions of people. Yet, while the
woman looking out of the window is intrigued by this image,
she experiences conflicting emotions. The character in
Duvidha is torn between two lives—she feels an emptiness
within her but is not sure what she is hungry for, what
kind of life she wants. This is something I have felt often,
yet now that I have so much behind me, I am more certain
of where to place my hands.

My exams yielded surprisingly good results. So, now
what? Where do I go from here? This question has cropped

Reprint 2025-26



192 Woven Words

up throughout my life, and many years later took shape in
my composition, Atah Kim. It’s funny how we store our
experiences in our brains as if we are pre-recorded cassettes.
The right cassette seems to fall into place when you least
expect it to. Upon finishing school, I was at a crossroads
and the path ahead was not clear to me. I had lots of ideas
about what I wanted to do with my life, and dance was not
always a priority. I was always driven, and that partly
stems from the fact that I had a relatively subdued
childhood. I was enveloped by a great mist of protection
and I wanted to emerge from that mist and discover myself.
In particular, I wanted to feel powerful; to control a large
group of people. In Atah Kim I address this desire for power
and, yet, once you possess it, what do you do with it? Once
you reach your goal, where do you go from there? It’s a
question without an answer but I believe the question must
be asked.

At the age of 15, I had many options. It would have
been easy enough to join college for a bachelor’s or master’s
degree in psychology or English literature. But everyone
does that. ‘You have to do something that is off-beat, different
from the done thing,’ my father said to me. So it was that I
decided to attend an agriculture college in Naini, Allahabad.
There were twenty-nine boys and I, in a class of thirty.
Having spent my school years in a girls’ school, I knew
little about the behaviour of boys. My brother was seven
years younger so his friends were no help. However, at the
agriculture college, I got a taste of relations between boys
and girls. We had to travel for miles in the fields on bicycles.
The boys deflated the tires of my bicycle so that they could
walk back with me, resulting in miles and miles of worthless
conversation about the latest film songs and actors, none
of which interested me.

Also, I was fascinated by the professors, mostly
American, who wore shorts because we worked in fields
with clay, crops, manure and insecticides. One day, I also
turned up in shorts and had 58 eyes peering at my legs!
My grandmother had always said that girls must never
push their chests out or uncover their legs. I now realised
what she meant but couldn’t accept it as valid. ‘What about

Reprint 2025-26



Bridges 193

the short blouses you wear, with your midriff showing?’ I
asked her.

‘Don’t argue,’ was her reply.
When will we understand the dignity of the female

body? A dancer has to move with dignity, a quality much
desired amongst dancers but sadly missing in most,
especially women, as they are taught to underplay their
bodies most of their lives. My grandmother, of course, was
not completely to blame for this attitude. It is a problem
that goes deep into the texture of our society. We must
embrace our senses and use them to the fullest, rather
than try to inhibit them.

Another argument I often had with my grandmother
was about religion and visiting temples. ‘Go to the temple
before your exams, God will give you strength to do well,’
she would say. I took issue with the idea that an outside
force must be bargained with in order to obtain desirable
results. Doesn’t this strength come from within? I had a
hard time believing that it was God alone who endowed me
with this ability. Visiting temples activates your senses,
though we often take this for granted. You see the grandeur
of the architecture and can feel the curve of the stones.
The scent of incense, flowers and sandalwood mingle
together. You hear the ringing of the bells and taste the
panchamrut. With your palms and the soles of your feet you
touch the different surfaces. What an experience! Why do I
have to bargain with God as if he is some kind of agent for
a trading company? Yet these arguments with my
grandmother were useful in that they made me differentiate
between sensitivity and sentimentality. Later, I created a
piece called Panch Paras, the five senses, to explore this
realm.

After graduating with a degree in agriculture at the
age of 18, I was left with few job prospects and was again
at a crossroads. Luckily, good fortune came to me without
much beckoning. It happened in Bombay. I had gone to the
train station to see off Suresh who was studying at
Sherwood College in Nainital. While I was waving to the
train that had now disappeared, there was a tap on my
shoulder. I turned around and the woman who stood there

Reprint 2025-26



194 Woven Words

changed the course of my life. All those tedious hours of
dance lessons fused into a new synergy. She was Komlata
Dutt, a friend of my father’s and, more importantly, the
person who introduced Uday Shankar to the dance legend,
Anna Pavlova, in Paris. And here she was, telling me to
join the Ram Gopal Dance Company based in London!

It took some learning to adjust to working with a group
of professional dancers and musicians, on the move all the
time, and the opportunity exposed me to a very different
aspect of dance education—there was a lot of dance to be
learnt as well—kummi of Kerala, ghumar of Rajasthan,
dandia of Gujarat—all were part of the troupe’s repertoire.
What I enjoyed most was learning the classical
Bharatanatyam from Ram Gopal himself who was a strict
disciplinarian and had a fetish for perfection of line.
However, in the end he would say, ‘You’ve perfected the
technique, now throw it overboard and dance’. This is a
lesson I have tried to teach my own students—before you
begin experimenting, you need to perfect the technique with
which you experiment.

Touring with Ram Gopal not only taught me more about
dance, I discovered new things about my own personality.
Encountering people from different countries gives you a
chance to look at yourself in a new light. More often than
not, I found that my weaknesses were brought glaringly
into focus. I came to realise the importance of context—
how things change when you change their placement. One
of the most striking moments of that tour was my time in
post-war Germany. It was an unbelievably sad place.
Hungry children begging for food is a common sight in India,
yet, in Germany the same sight created a different sensation.
It amazed me how the same situation in a different
environment evokes quite different reactions, and the same
is true in dance. One changes the placement of a
choreographic piece on stage and it looks quite different. I
myself was a changed person when placed in different
surroundings.

Still, a long tour of many countries in Europe and
America is exhausting. I was constantly travelling between
India and various parts of the globe. In all, I was abroad for

Reprint 2025-26



Bridges 195

three years and by the end, I needed to go home. But where
was home? And how does one make a home for oneself?
Buy a house, get married, have children, make friends? I
had only the last item on the agenda. While in school in
Lahore, I had made a lot of friends, but they now lived in a
different country—Pakistan. I had to obtain a visa to visit
my closest friend over a weekend. I would like to say I am
apolitical but I’ve discovered that politics makes its presence
felt even when uninvited.

On my return, the last of many returns, what ultimately
awaited me were marriage, children and a flat in Bombay.
Finally I had a home, but it came with strings attached—I
now had to manage this new home. In a society like ours,
where a woman wanting to work outside the home must do
so in addition to her domestic responsibilities, it is easy to
feel overwhelmed. Still, I didn’t do too badly thanks to my
supportive husband, Rajanikant. In spite of his own
background in a family where men are treated as a special
breed, he was a good man, with the extraordinary quality
of believing everything. The word ‘suspicion’ was absent
from his vocabulary. This made him popular but
unsuccessful, both as a professional and a parent, but a
very accommodating husband. My biggest benefit from my
association with him was the love of music he instilled in
me. If he had chosen music as a profession he would have
done better in life, but his bar-at-law from Lincoln’s Inn in
London pushed him into the wrong line of work.

I must say, I am blessed with a wonderful family, two
normal and healthy children, my son Shriraj and daughter
Maitreyi, now married with their own children. Looking
back, I keep wondering what my contribution was as a
mother, but it must have been satisfactory to attain these
results. And yet, both are completely different in their
attitudes and philosophies—one has an extended sense of
ambition and the other allows things to transpire as they
are destined to. The only point on which they agree is that
they disagree with my profession! It is interesting to have
this kind of variety in a family. Living with a group of
different personalities beneath one roof is like performing
with other artistes on stage. The equation, the space factor,

Reprint 2025-26



196 Woven Words

vibrations and relationships must be taken into serious
consideration. You are no longer performing solo. You belong
to a larger image and must develop a new set of performing
skills.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Kumudini Lakhia (born 1930) is a renowned
Kathak dancer and choreographer who was
taught and influenced by the famous Ram
Gopal. She has performed in over 40 countries,
but chose to give up her career as a solo
performer to start the Kadamb Dance Centre in
Ahmedabad, where she trains students in the art of
classical Kathak dance. Her other achievements include
choreographing for two very successful Hindi films, Umrao
Jaan and Sur Sangam. Her awards include the All India
Sangeet Natya Kala Award (1977); Sangeet Natak Akademi
National Award (1982); Kala Ratna Award; Sangeet Kala
Sangam (1982); and the Padma Shri in 1987. On the
occasion of 50 years of Independence, the city of
Ahmedabad awarded her with the Nagar Bhushan.

UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT

1. How did the author feel about her mother’s passion to make
her a dancer?

2. What were the lessons of life learnt in her younger days that
Kumudini carried into her adult life?

3. How did Kumudini react to her mother’s death?

4. What were the concepts that Kumidini Lakhia represent through
Duvidha, Atah Kim and Panch Paras?

5. How does Kumudini Lakhia describe her guru Ramgopal’s
influence on her?

TALKING ABOUT THE TEXT

Discuss the following in pairs or in small groups

1. Exceptionally talented people are born so; talent cannot be
cultivated.

Reprint 2025-26



Bridges 197

2. Discipline and a questioning spirit can coexist in an individual.

3. “Before you begin experimenting, you need to perfect the
technique with which you experiment.”

4. Kumudini Lakhia’s life is an inspiring illustration of the
emancipation of women.

APPRECIATION

 1. The significance of reading an autobiograophy lies in drawing
lessons from another life. What is the significance of Kumudini’s
account for us as readers?

2. Pick out instances from the passage that reflect the sensitivity
of the author.

3. ‘I can see clear bridges between my life experiences and my
work in dance.’ How does Kumudini Lakhia weave episodes from
the two realms in her account?

LANGUAGE WORK

1. Distinguish between the following pairs of words

incredulous - incredible
        suspicious - susceptible

sensitivity - sentimentality
successive - successful

2. Interpret these phrases in the context of the essay

mist of protection at a crossroads

it came with strings attached

3. ‘Kummi’, ‘ghumar’ and ‘dandia’ are some dance forms mentioned
in the text. Make an inventory of folk dance forms in the different
regions of the country.

SUGGESTED READING

1. Women who Dared ed Ritu Menon, National Book Trust, 2000.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26



198 Woven Words

GLOSSARY

SELECTED LITERARY FORMS

Ballad : A form of verse, adapted for singing or recitation which
presents a dramatic or exciting episode in simple, narrative
form.

Dramatic Monologue : A poetic soliloquy in which the speaker reveals
his own character. Usually a listener is present who does not
speak but plays a part in the development of the poem.

Fable: A brief tale in either prose or verse, with a moral. Usually, but
not always, the characters are animals and birds.

Satire: Verse or prose blending a critical attitude with humour and
wit; the purpose being to ridicule frailties and follies in human
customs and institutions and by causing laughter, to inspire
their reform.

Lyric: A fairly short poem consisting of the utterance by a single
speaker, who expresses a state of mind or a process of perception,
thought and feeling.

Ode: A long lyric poem that is serious in subject and treatment,
elevated in style and elaborate in its stanzaic structure.

Sonnet: A lyric poem consisting of fourteen lines, linked by an
intricate hyme scheme.

Allegory: A story, play, poem, picture etc. in which meaning or
message is represented symbolically.

SELECTED LITERARY TERMS

Refrain: A group of words forming a phrase or sentence and repeated
at regular intervals in a poem, usually at the end of a stanza.
The refrain probably developed from the old ballad.

Pathos : In literature and drama, the portrayal of an incident in
such a way so as to arouse feelings of pity, tenderness or sadness
in the reader or spectator.

Irony : A form of speech in which the actual intent is expressed in
words that carry the opposite meaning.

Sarcasm : A sneering or cutting remark; an ironical taunt.

u u u

Reprint 2025-26