UNIT

I

GEOGRAPHY AS A DISCIPLINE

This unit deals with

• Geography as an integrating discipline; as a science of spatial
attributes

• Branches of geography; importance of physical geography

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R
##1##
GEOGRAPHY AS A DISCIPLINE

ou have studied geography as one of the of the earth’s surface. The understanding and

Ycomponents of your Social Science course the skills obtained  in modern scientific
upto the secondary stage. You are techniques such as GIS and computer

already aware of some of the  phenomena of cartography  equip you to meaningfully
geographical nature in the world and its contribute to the national endeavour for
different parts. Now, you will study ‘Geography’ development.
as an independent subject and learn about the Now the next question which you may like
physical environment of the earth, human to ask is — What is geography? You know that
activities and their interactive relationships. earth is our home. It is also the home of many
Therefore, a pertinent question you can ask at other creatures, big and small, which live on
this stage is — Why should we study the earth and sustain. The earth’s surface is
geography? We live on the surface of the earth. not uniform. It has variations in its physical
Our lives are affected by our surroundings in features.  There are mountains, hills, valleys,
many ways. We depend on the resources to plains, plateaus, oceans, lakes, deserts and
sustain ourselves in the surrounding areas. wilderness. There are variations in its social
Primitive societies subsisted on ‘natural means and cultural features too. There are villages,
of subsistence’, i.e.  edible plants and animals. cities, roads, railways, ports, markets and
With the passage of time, we developed many other elements created by human beings
technologies and started producing our food across the entire period of their  cultural
using natural resources such as land, soil and development.
water. We adjusted our food habits and This variation provides a clue to the
clothing according to the prevailing weather understanding of the relationship between the
conditions. There are variations in the natural physical environment and social/cultural
resource base, technological development, features. The physical environment has
adaptation with and modification of physical provided the stage, on which human societies
environment, social organisations and cultural enacted the drama of their creative skills with
development. As a student of geography, you the tools and techniques which they invented
should be curious to know about all  the and evolved in the process of their cultural
phenomena which vary over space. You learn development. Now, you should be able to
about the diverse lands and people. You attempt the answer of the question posed
should also be interested in understanding the earlier as to “What is geography”? In very
changes which have taken place over time. simple words, it can be said that geography
Geography equips you to appreciate diversity is the description of the earth. The term
and investigate into the causes responsible for geography was first coined by Eratosthenese,
creating such variations over time and space. a Greek scholar (276-194 BC.). The word has
You will develop skills to understand the globe been derived from two roots from Greek
converted into maps and have a visual sense language geo (earth) and graphos (description).

Reprint 2025-26



GEOGRAPHY AS A DISCIPLINE 3

Put together, they mean description of the earth. changing earth and untiring and ever-active
The earth has always been seen as the abode human beings. Primitive human societies were
of human beings and thus, scholars defined directly dependent on their immediate
geography as, “the  description  of the earth as environment. Geography, thus, is concerned
the abode of human beings”. You are aware of with the study of Nature and Human
the fact that reality is always multifaceted and interactions as an integrated whole. ‘Human’
the  ‘earth’ is also multi-dimensional, that is is an integral part of ‘nature’ and ‘nature’ has
why many disciplines from natural sciences the imprints of ‘human’. ‘Nature’ has influenced
such as geology, pedology, oceanography, different aspects of human life. Its imprints can
botany, zoology and meteorology and a be noticed on food, clothing, shelter and
number of sister disciplines in social sciences occupation. Human beings have come to terms
such as economics, history, sociology, political with nature through adaptation and
science, anthropology, etc. study different modification.  As you already know, the present
aspects of the earth’s  surface. Geography is society has passed the stage of primitive
different from other sciences in its subject societies, which were directly dependent on
matter and methodology but at the same time, their immediate physical environment for
it is closely related to other disciplines. sustenance. Present societies have modified
Geography derives its data base from all the their natural environment by inventing and
natural and social sciences and attempts their using technology and thus, have expanded the
synthesis. horizon of their operation by appropriating and

We have noted that there exist variations utilising the resources provided by nature. With
over the surface of the earth in its physical as the gradual development of technology, human
well as cultural environment. A number of beings were able to loosen the shackles of their
phenomena are similar and many are dissimilar. physical environment. Technology helped in
It was, therefore, logical to perceive geography reducing the harshness of labour, increased
as the study of areal differentiation. Thus, labour efficiency and provided leisure to
geography was perceived to study all those human beings to attend to the higher needs of
phenomena which vary over space. life. It also increased the scale of production
Geographers do not study only the variations and the mobility of labour.
in the phenomena over the earth’s surface The interaction between the physical
(space) but also study the associations with environment and human beings has been very
the other factors which cause these variations. succinctly described by a poet in the following
For example, cropping patterns differ from dialogue between ‘human’ and ‘nature’ (God).
region to region but  this variation in cropping You created the soil, I created the cup, you
pattern, as a phenomenon, is related to created night, I created the lamp. You created
variations in soils, climates, demands in the wilderness, hilly terrains and deserts; I
market,  capacity of the farmer to invest and created flower beds and gardens. Human
technological inputs available to her/him. beings have claimed their contribution using
Thus, the concern of geography is to find out natural resources. With the help of technology,
the causal relationship between any two human beings moved from the stage of
phenomena or between more than one necessity to a stage of freedom. They have put
phenomenon. their imprints everywhere and created new

A geographer explains the phenomena in possibilities in collaboration with nature. Thus,
a frame of cause and effect relationship, as it we now find humanised nature and
does not only help in interpretation but also naturalised human beings and geography
foresees the phenomena in future. studies this interactive relationship. The space

The geographical phenomena, both the got organised with the help of the means of
physical and human, are not static but highly transportation and communication network.
dynamic. They change over time as a result of The links (routes) and nodes (settlements of all
the interactive processes between ever types and hierarchies) integrated the space and

Reprint 2025-26



4 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

gradually, it got organised. As a social science The present world is being perceived as a global
discipline, geography studies the ‘spatial village. The distances have been reduced by
organisation’ and ‘spatial integration’. better means of transportation increasing

Geography as a discipline is concerned with accessibility. The audio-visual media and
three sets of questions: information technology have enriched the data

(i) Some questions are related to the base. Technology has provided better chances
identification of the patterns of natural of monitoring natural phenomena as well as
and cultural features as found over the the economic and social parameters.
surface of the earth.  These are the Geography as an integrating discipline has
questions about what? interface with numerous natural and social

(ii) Some questions are related to the sciences.  All the sciences, whether natural or
distribution of the natural and human/ social, have one basic objective, of
cultural features over the surface of the understanding the reality. Geography
earth. These are the questions about attempts to comprehend the associations of
where? phenomena as related in sections of reality.

Taken together, both these questions take Figure 1.1 shows the relationship of geography
care of distributional and locational aspects of with other sciences. Every discipline, concerned
the natural and cultural features. These with scientific knowledge is linked with
questions provided inventorised information of geography as many of their elements vary over
what features and where located. It was a very space. Geography helps in understanding the
popular approach during the colonial period. reality in totality in its spatial perspective.
These two questions did not make geography Geography, thus, not only takes note of the
a scientific discipline till the third question was differences in the phenomena from place to
added. place but integrates them holistically which

(iii) The third question is related to the may be different at other places.  A geographer
explanation or the causal relationships is required to have a broad understanding of
between features and the processes and all the related fields, to be able to logically
phenomena. This aspect of geography integrate them. This integration can be
is related to the question, why? understood with some examples. Geography

 Geography as a discipline is related to influences historical  events. Spatial distance
space and takes note of spatial characteristics itself has been a very potent factor to alter the
and attributes. It studies the patterns of course of history of the world. Spatial depth
distribution, location and concentration of provided defence to many countries,
phenomena over space and interprets them particularly in the last century. In  traditional
providing explanations for these patterns.  It warfare, countries with large size in area, gain
takes note of the associations and inter- time at the cost of space. The defence provided
relationships between the phenomena over by oceanic expanse around the countries of
space and interprets them providing the new world has protected  them from  wars
explanations for these patterns. It also takes being imposed on their soil. If we look at the
note of the associations and inter-relationships historical events world over, each one of them
between the phenomena resulting from the can be interpreted geographically.
dynamic interaction between  human beings In India, Himalayas have acted as great
and their physical environment. barriers and provided protection but the

passes provided routes to the migrants and
GEOGRAPHY AS AN INTEGRATING DISCIPLINE invaders from Central Asia. The sea coast has
Geography is a discipline of synthesis.  It encouraged contact with people from East and
attempts spatial synthesis, and history Southeast Asia, Europe and Africa. Navigation
attempts temporal synthesis. Its approach is technology helped European countries to
holistic in nature. It recognises the fact that colonise a number of countries of Asia and
the world is a system of interdependencies. Africa, including India as they got accessibility

Reprint 2025-26



GEOGRAPHY AS A DISCIPLINE 5

Reprint 2025-26

FIELD OF GEOGRAPHY

Figure 1.1 : Geography and its relation with other disciplines



6 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

through oceans. The geographical factors have forests, etc. will be identified, discussed and
modified the course of history in different parts delimited. In the regional approach, the world
of the world. is divided into regions at different hierarchical

Every geographical phenomenon undergoes levels and then all the geographical phenomena
change through time and can be explained in a particular region are studied. These
temporally. The changes in landforms, climate,

regions may be natural, political  or designated
vegetation, economic activities occupations and

region. The phenomena in a region are studied
cultural developments have followed a definite
historical course. Many geographical features in a holistic manner searching for unity in

result from the decision making process by diversity.
different institutions at a particular point of Dualism is one of the main characteristics
time. It is possible to convert time in terms of of geography which got introduced from the
space and space in terms of time. For example, very beginning. This dualism depended on the
it can  be said that place A is 1,500 km from aspect emphasised in the study. Earlier scholars
place B or alternately, it can also be said that laid emphasis on physical geography. But
place A is two hours away (if one travels by human beings are an integral part of the earth’s
plane) or seventeen hours away (if one travels surface. They are part and parcel of nature. They
by a fast moving train). It is for this reason,

also have contributed through their cultural
time is an integral part of geographical studies
as the fourth dimension. Please mention other development. Thus developed human

three dimensions? geography with emphasis on human activities.

Figure1.1 amply depicts the linkages of
geography with different natural and social BRANCHES OF GEOGRAPHY (BASED ON

sciences. This linkage can be put under two SYSTEMATIC APPROACH)
segments.

1. Physical Geography
BRANCHES OF GEOGRAPHY

(i) Geomorphology  is devoted to the study
Please study Figure 1.1 for recapitulation. It has of landforms, their evolution and related
very clearly brought out that geography is an processes.
interdisciplinary subject of study. The study of (ii) Climatology encompasses the study of
every subject is done according to some structure of atmosphere and elements
approach. The major approaches to study of weather and climates and climatic
geography have been (i) Systematic and types and regions.
(ii) Regional. The systematic geography approach (iii) Hydrology studies the realm of water
is the same as that of general geography. This over the surface of the earth including
approach was introduced by Alexander Von oceans, lakes, rivers and other water
Humboldt, a German geographer (1769-1859) bodies and its effect on different  life
while regional geography approach was forms  including human life and their
developed by another German geographer and a activities.
contemporary of Humboldt, Karl Ritter (iv) Soil Geography is devoted to study the

(1779-1859). processes of soil formation, soil types,

In systematic approach (Figure 1.2), a their fertility status, distribution and

phenomenon is studied world over as a whole, use.

and then the identification of typologies or
2. Human Geography

spatial patterns is done. For example, if one is
interested in studying natural vegetation, the (i) Social/Cultural Geography encom-
study will be done at the world level as  a first passes the study of society and its
step. The typologies such as equatorial rain spatial dynamics as well as the cultural
forests or softwood conical forests or monsoon elements contributed by the society.

Reprint 2025-26



GEOGRAPHY AS A DISCIPLINE 7

Figure 1.2 : Branches of geography based on systematic approach

(ii) Population and Settlement Geography agriculture, industry, tourism, trade,
(Rural and Urban). It studies population and transport, infrastructure and
growth,  distribution, density, sex ratio, services, etc.
migration and occupational structure (iv) Historical Geography studies the
etc. Settlement geography studies the historical processes through which the
characteristics of rural and urban space gets organised. Every region has
settlements. undergone some historical experiences

(iii) Economic Geography studies economic before attaining the present day status.
activities of the people including The geographical features also

Reprint 2025-26



8 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Figure 1.3 : Branches of geography based on regional approach

experience temporal changes and BRANCHES OF GEOGRAPHY BASED ON REGIONAL

these form the concerns of historical APPROACH (FIGURE1.3)
gography. 1. Regional Studies/Area Studies

(v) Political Geography looks at the space Comprising Macro, Meso and Micro
from the angle of political events and Regional Studies
studies boundaries, space relations 2. Regional Planning
between neighbouring political units, Comprising Country/Rural and Town/
delimitation of constituencies, election Urban Planning
scenario and develops theoretical 3. Regional Development
framework to understand the political 4. Regional Analysis
behaviour of the population. There are two aspects which are common

to every discipline, these are:
3. Biogeography (i) Philosophy

(a) Geographical Thought
The interface between physical geography (b) Land and Human Interaction/
and human geography has lead to the Human Ecology
development of Biogeography which (ii) Methods and Techniques
includes: (a) Cartography including Computer
(i) Plant Geography  which studies the

Cartography
spatial pattern of natural vegetation in

(b) Quantitative Techniques/Statistical
their habitats.

Techniques
(ii) Zoo Geography  which studies the spatial

(c) Field Survey Methods
patterns and geographic characteristics
of animals and their habitats. (d) Geo-informatics comprising

(iii) Ecology /Ecosystem deals with the techniques such as Remote

scientific study of the habitats Sensing, GIS, GPS, etc.

characteristic of species. The above classification gives a
(iv) Environmental Geography concerns comprehensive format of the branches of

world over leading to the realisation of geography. Generally geography curricula is
environmental problems such as land taught and learnt in this format but this
gradation, pollution and concerns for format is not static. Any discipline is bound
conservation has resulted in the to grow with new ideas, problems, methods
introduction of this new branch in and techniques. For example, what was once
geography. manual cartography has now been

Reprint 2025-26



GEOGRAPHY AS A DISCIPLINE 9

transformed into computer cartography. pattern, livestock  farming  and some
Technology has enabled scholars to handle industries, etc.  Human  beings have developed

large quantum of data. The internet provides technologies which modify climatic elements in

extensive information. Thus, the capacity to a restricted space  such as air conditioners  and

attempt analysis has increased tremendously. coolers. Temperature and precipitation ensure

GIS has further opened vistas of knowledge. the density of forests and quality of grassland.
In India, monsoonal rainfall sets the agriculture

GPS has become a handy tool to find out exact
rhythm in motion. Precipitation recharges the

locations. Technologies have enhanced the
ground water  aquifers which later provides

capacity of attempting synthesis with sound
water for agriculture and domestic use. We

theoretical understanding.
study oceans which are the store house of

You will learn some preliminary aspects of resources. Besides fish and other sea-food,
these techniques in your book, Practical work oceans are rich in mineral resources. India has
in Geography – Part I (NCERT, 2006). You will developed the technology for collecting
continue to improve upon your skills and   learn manganese nodules from oceanic bed. Soils are
about their application. renewable resources, which influence a number

of economic activities such as agriculture. The
PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY AND ITS IMPORTANCE fertility of the soil is both naturally determined

This chapter appears in the book entitled and culturally induced.  Soils  also provide the

Fundamentals of Physical Geography. The basis for the biosphere accommodating  plants,

contents of the book clearly reflect its scope.  It animals and micro organisms.

is therefore, appropriate to know the
importance of this branch of geography. What is Geography?
Physical geography includes the study of
lithosphere (landforms, drainage, relief and Geography is concerned with the description

and explanation of the areal differentiation of
physiography), atmosphere (its composition,

the earth’s surface.
structure, elements and controls of weather and Richard Hartshorne
climate; temperature, pressure, winds,
precipitation, climatic types, etc.), hydrosphere Geography studies the differences of

(oceans, seas,  lakes and associated features phenomena usually related in different parts
of the earth’s surface.

with water realm)  and biosphere ( life forms
Hettner

including human being and  macro-organism
and their sustaining mechanism, viz. food
chain, ecological parameters and ecological The study of physical geography is
balance). Soils are formed through the process emerging as a discipline of evaluating and
of pedogenesis and depend upon the parent managing natural resources. In order to
rocks, climate, biological activity and time. Time achieve this objective, it is essential to
provides maturity to soils and helps in the understand the  intricate  relationship between
development of soil profiles. Each element is physical environment and human beings.
important for human beings. Landforms Physical environment provides resources, and
provide the base on which human activities are human beings utilise these resources and
located. The plains are utilised for agriculture. ensure their economic and  cultural
Plateaus provide forests and minerals. development. Accelerated pace of resource
Mountains provide pastures, forests, tourist utilisation with the help  of modern  technology
spots and are sources of rivers providing water has  created ecological imbalance  in the  world.
to lowlands. Climate influences our house Hence, a  better understanding of physical
types, clothing and food habits. The climate has environment is absolutely essential for
a profound effect  on vegetation,  cropping sustainable development.

Reprint 2025-26



10 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

 (i) Which one of the following scholars coined the term ‘Geography’?

(a)  Herodotus (c)  Galileo

(b)  Erathosthenese (d)  Aristotle

(ii) Which one of the following features can be termed as ‘physical feature’?

(a)  Port (c)  Plain

(b)  Road (d)  Water park

(iii) Make correct pairs from the following two columns and mark the correct
option.

1. Meteorology A. Population Geography

2. Demography B. Soil Geography

3. Sociology C. Climatology

4. Pedology D. Social Geography

(a) 1B,2C,3A,4D (c) 1D,2B,3C,4A

(b) 1A,2D,3B,4C (d) 1C,2A,3D,4B

(iv) Which one of the following questions is related to cause-effect relationship?

(a)  Why (c)  What

(b)  Where (d)  When

(v) Which one of the following disciplines attempts temporal synthesis?

(a)  Sociology (c)  Anthropology

(b)  Geography (d)  History

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) What important cultural features do you observe while going to school?
Are they similar or dissimilar? Should they be included in the study of
geography or not? If yes, why?

(ii) You have seen a tennis ball, a cricket ball, an orange and a pumpkin.
Which one amongst these resembles the shape of the earth? Why have
you chosen this particular item to describe the shape of the earth?

(iii) Do you celebrate Van Mahotsava in your school? Why do we plant so many
trees? How do the trees maintain ecological balance?

(iv) You have seen elephants, deer, earthworms, trees and grasses. Where do
they live or grow? What is the name given to this sphere? Can you describe
some of the important features of this sphere?

(v) How much time do you take to reach your school from your house? Had
the school been located across the road from your house, how much time
would you have taken to reach school? What is the effect of the distance

Reprint 2025-26



GEOGRAPHY AS A DISCIPLINE 11

between your residence and the school on the time taken in commuting?
Can you convert time into space and vice versa?

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) You  observe every day in your surroundings that there is variation in
natural as  well as cultural phenomena. All the trees are not of the same
variety. All the birds and animals you see, are different. All these different
elements are found on the earth. Can you now argue that geography is
the study of “areal differentiation”?

(ii) You have already studied geography, history, civics and economics as
parts of social studies. Attempt an integration of these disciplines
highlighting their interface.

Project Work

Select forest as a natural resource.

(i) Prepare a map of India showing the distribution of different types of forests.

(ii) Write about the economic importance of forests for the country.

(iii) Prepare a historical account of conservation of forests in India with focus
on Chipko movements in Rajasthan and Uttaranchal.

Reprint 2025-26



12 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

UNIT

II

THE EARTH

This unit deals with

• Origin and evolution of the earth; Interior of the earth; Wegener’s
continental drift theory and plate tectonics; earthquakes and
volcanoes

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

THE ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION

OF THE EARTH

o you remember the nursery rhyme formed through the process of accretion.

D“…Twinkle, twinkle little star…”? However, scientists in later period took up
the problems of origin of universe rather than

Starry nights have always attracted us since that of just the earth or the planets.

the childhood. You may also have thought of
these stars and had numerous questions in MODERN THEORIES

your mind. Questions such as how many stars Origin of the Universe
are there in the sky? How did they come into The most popular argument regarding the origin
existence? Can one reach the end of the sky? of the universe is the Big Bang Theory. It is also
May be many more such questions are still called expanding universe hypothesis. Edwin
there in your mind. In this chapter, you will Hubble, in 1920, provided evidence that the
learn how these “twinkling little stars” were universe is expanding. As time passes, galaxies
formed. With that you will eventually also read move further and further apart. You can
the story of origin and evolution of the earth. experiment and find what does the expanding

universe mean. Take a balloon and mark some
EARLY THEORIES points on it to represent the galaxies. Now, if

you start inflating the balloon, the points marked
Origin of the Earth

on the balloon will appear to be moving away
A large number of hypotheses were put forth from each other as the balloon expands.
by different philosophers and scientists Similarly, the distance between the galaxies is
regarding the origin of the earth. One of the also found to be increasing and thereby, the
earlier and popular arguments was by German universe is considered to be expanding.
philosopher Immanuel Kant. Mathematician However, you will find that besides the increase
Laplace revised it in 1796. It is known as in the distances between the points on the
Nebular Hypothesis. The hypothesis considered balloon, the points themselves are expanding.
that the planets were formed out of a cloud of This is not in accordance with the fact. Scientists
material associated with a youthful sun, which believe that though the space between the
was slowly rotating. In 1950, Otto Schmidt in galaxies is increasing, observations do not
Russia and Carl Weizascar in Germany support the expansion of galaxies. So, the
somewhat revised the ‘nebular hypothesis’, balloon example is only partially correct.
though differing in details. They considered that The Big Bang Theory considers the
the sun was surrounded by solar nebula following stages in the development of the
containing mostly the hydrogen and helium universe.
along with what may be termed as dust. The (i) In the beginning, all matter forming the
friction and collision of particles led to formation universe existed in one place in the form
of a disk-shaped cloud and the planets were of a “tiny ball” (singular atom) with an

Reprint 2025-26



14 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

at any point of time. However, with
greater evidence becoming available
about the expanding universe,
scientific community at present favours
argument of expanding universe.

The Star Formation

The distribution of matter and energy
was not even in the early universe.
These initial density differences gave
rise to differences in gravitational
forces and it caused the matter to get
drawn together. These formed the
bases for development of galaxies. A
galaxy contains a large number of
stars. Galaxies spread over vast
distances that are measured in
thousands of light-years. The
diameters of individual galaxies range
from 80,000-150,000 light years. A
galaxy starts to form by accumulation

Singularity of hydrogen gas in the form of a very
Figure 2.1 : The Big Bang large cloud called nebula. Eventually,

growing nebula develops localised
clumps of gas. These clumps continue to grow

unimaginably small volume, infinite
into even denser gaseous bodies, giving rise to

temperature and infinite density.
formation of stars. The formation of stars is

(ii) At the Big Bang the “tiny ball”
believed to have taken place some 5-6 billion

exploded violently. This led to a huge years ago.
expansion. It is now generally accepted
that the event of big bang took place A light year is a measure of distance and
13.7 billion years before the present. not of time. Light travels at a speed of
The expansion continues even to the 300,000 km/second. Considering this,

present day. As it grew, some energy the distances the light will travel in one

was converted into matter. There was year is taken to be one light year. This
equals to 9.461×1012 km. The mean

particularly rapid expansion within
distance between the sun and the earth

fractions of a second after the bang. is 149,598,000 km. In terms of light
Thereafter, the expansion has slowed years, it is 8.311minutes.
down. Within first three minutes from
the Big Bang event, the first atom

Formation of Planets
began to form.

(iii) Within 300,000 years from the Big The following are considered to be the stages
Bang, temperature dropped to 4,500 K in the development of planets :
(Kelvin) and gave rise to atomic matter. (i) The stars are localised lumps of gas
The universe became transparent. within a nebula. The gravitational force

The expansion of universe means increase within the lumps leads to the formation
in space between the galaxies. An alternative of a core to the gas cloud and a huge
to this was Hoyle’s concept of steady state. It rotating disc of gas and dust develops
considered the universe to be roughly the same around the gas core.

Reprint 2025-26



##2##
THE ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION OF THE EARTH 15

(ii) In the next stage, the gas cloud starts iron) to sink towards the centre of the earth
getting condensed and the matter and the lighter ones to move towards the
around the core develops into small- surface. With passage of time it cooled further
rounded objects. These small-rounded and solidified and condensed into a smaller size.
objects by the process of cohesion develop This later led to the development of the outer
into what is called planetesimals. surface in the form of a crust. During the
Larger bodies start forming by collision, formation of the moon, due to the giant impact,
and gravitational attraction causes the the earth was further heated up. It is through
material to stick together. Planetesimals the process of differentiation that the earth
are a large number of smaller bodies. forming material got separated into different

(iii) In the final stage, these large number of layers. Starting from the surface to the central
small planetesimals accrete to form a parts, we have layers like the crust, mantle,
fewer large bodies in the form of planets. outer core and inner core. From the crust to the

core, the density of the material increases. We
EVOLUTION OF THE EARTH shall discuss in detail the properties of each of

Do you know that the planet earth initially was this layer in the next chapter.

a barren, rocky and hot object with a thin
atmosphere of hydrogen and helium. This is Evolution of Atmosphere and Hydrosphere

far from the present day picture of the earth.
The present composition of earth’s atmosphere

Hence, there must have been some events–
is chiefly contributed by nitrogen and oxygen.

processes, which may have caused this change
You will be dealing with the composition and

from rocky, barren and hot earth to a beautiful
planet with ample amount of water and structure of the earth’s atmosphere in Chapter 8.

conducive atmosphere favouring the existence There are three stages in the evolution of

of life. In the following section, you will find the present atmosphere. The first stage is

out how the period, between the 4,600 million marked by the loss of primordial atmosphere.

years and the present, led to the evolution of In the second stage, the hot interior of the earth

life on the surface of the planet. contributed to the evolution of the atmosphere.

The earth has a layered structure. From Finally, the composition of the atmosphere was

the outermost end of the atmosphere to the modified by the living world through the

centre of the earth, the material that exists is process of photosynthesis.

not uniform. The atmospheric matter has the The early atmosphere, with hydrogen and

least density. From the surface to deeper helium, is supposed to have been stripped off

depths, the earth’s interior has different zones as a result of the solar winds. This happened
and each of these contains materials with not only in case of the earth, but also in all the
different characteristics. terrestrial planets, which were supposed to

have lost their primordial atmosphere through
How was the layered structure of the the impact of solar winds.
earth developed? During the cooling of the earth, gases and

water vapour were released from the interior
solid earth. This started the evolution of the

Evolution of Lithosphere
present atmosphere. The early atmosphere

The earth was mostly in a volatile state during largely contained water vapour, nitrogen,
its primordial stage. Due to gradual increase carbon dioxide, methane, ammonia and very
in density the temperature inside has little of free oxygen. The process through which
increased. As a result the material inside the gases were outpoured from the interior is
started getting separated depending on their called degassing. Continuous volcanic
densities. This allowed heavier materials (like eruptions contributed water vapour and gases

Reprint 2025-26



16 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

to the atmosphere. As the earth cooled, 2,000 million years ago, oxygen began to flood
the water vapour released started getting the atmosphere.
condensed. The carbon dioxide in the

Origin of Life
atmosphere got dissolved in rainwater
and the temperature further decreased The last phase in the evolution of the earth relates
causing more condensation and more to the origin and evolution of life. It is undoubtedly
rains. The rainwater falling onto the clear that initially the earth or even the atmosphere
surface got collected in the depressions of the earth was not conducive for the development
to give rise to oceans. The earth’s oceans of life. Modern scientists refer to the origin of life
were formed within 500 million years from as a kind of chemical reaction, which first
the formation of the earth. This tells us generated complex organic molecules and
that the oceans are as old as 4,000 million assembled them. This assemblage was such that
years. Sometime around 3,800 million they could duplicate themselves converting
years ago, life began to evolve. However, inanimate matter into living substance. The record
around 2,500-3,000 million years before of life that existed on this planet in different periods
the present, the process of photosynthesis is found in rocks in the form of fossils. The
got evolved. Life was confined to the microscopic structures closely related to the
oceans for a long time. Oceans began to present form of blue algae have been found in
have the contribution of oxygen through geological formations much older than some
the process of photosynthesis. Eventually, 3,000 million years. It can be assumed that life
oceans were saturated with oxygen, and began to evolve sometime 3,800 million years ago.

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

  (i) Which one of the following figures represents the age of the earth?

(a) 4.6 million years (c) 4.6 billion years

(b) 13.7 billion years (d) 13.7 trillion years

(ii) Which one of the following is not related to the formation or modification
of the present atmosphere?

(a) Solar winds (c) Degassing

(b) Differentiation (d) Photosynthesis

(iii) Life on the earth appeared around how many years before the present?

(a) 13.7 billion (c) 4.6 billion

(b)  3.8 million (d) 3.8 billion

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) What is meant by the process of differentiation?

(ii) What was the nature of the earth surface initially?

(iii) What were the gases which initially formed the earth’s atmosphere?

Reprint 2025-26



THE ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION OF THE EARTH 17

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) Write an explanatory note on the ‘Big Bang Theory’.

(ii) List the stages in the evolution of the earth and explain each stage in
brief.

Project Work

Collect information about the project “Stardust” (website: www.sci.edu/public.html
and www.nasm.edu) along the following lines.

(i) Which is the agency that has launched this project?

(ii) Why are scientists interested in collecting Stardust?

(iii) Where from the Stardust is being collected?

Reprint 2025-26



18 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

C H A P T E R

##3##
INTERIOR OF THE EARTH

hat do you imagine about the nature SOURCES OF INFORMATION ABOUT THE INTERIOR

Wof the earth? Do you imagine it to be The earth’s radius is about 6,378 km. No one
a solid ball like cricket ball or a can reach the centre of the earth and make

hollow ball with a thick cover of rocks i.e. observations or collect samples of the material.
lithosphere? Have you ever seen photographs Under such conditions, you may wonder how
or images of a volcanic eruption on the scientists tell us about the earth’s interior and
television screen? Can you recollect the the type of materials that exist at such depths.
emergence of hot molten lava, dust, smoke, fire Most of our knowledge about the interior of
and magma flowing out of the volcanic crater? the earth is largely based on estimates and

The interior  of the earth can be understood only inferences. Yet, a part of the information is
obtained through direct observations and

by indirect evidences as neither any one has nor
analysis of materials.

any one can reach the interior of the earth.
The configuration of the surface of the earth Direct Sources

is largely a product of the processes operating The most easily available solid earth material
in the interior of the earth. Exogenic as well as is surface rock or the rocks we get from mining
endogenic processes are constantly shaping areas. Gold mines in South Africa are as deep

the landscape. A proper understanding of the as 3 - 4 km. Going beyond this depth is not

physiographic character of a region remains possible as it is very hot at this depth. Besides
mining, scientists have taken up a number of

incomplete if the effects of endogenic processes
projects to penetrate deeper depths to explore

are ignored. Human life is largely influenced
the conditions in the crustal portions. Scientists

by the physiography of the region. Therefore, world over are working on two major projects
it is necessary that one gets acquainted with such as “Deep Ocean Drilling Project” and
the forces that influence landscape “Integrated Ocean Drilling Project”. The
development. To understand why the earth deepest drill at Kola, in Arctic Ocean, has so
shakes or how a tsunami wave is generated, it far reached a depth of 12 km. This and many
is necessary that we know certain details of the deep drilling projects have provided large
interior of the earth. In the previous chapter, volume of information through the analysis of

you have noted that the earth-forming materials collected at different depths.

materials have been distributed in the form of Volcanic eruption forms another source of
obtaining direct information. As and when the

layers from the crust to the core. It is interesting
molten material (magma) is thrown onto the

to know how scientists have gathered
surface of the earth, during volcanic eruption

information about these layers and what are it becomes available for laboratory analysis.
the characteristics of each of these layers. This However, it is difficult to ascertain the depth of
is exactly what this chapter deals with. the source of such magma.

Reprint 2025-26



INTERIOR OF THE EARTH 19

Indirect Sources information about the interior of the earth.
Hence, we shall discuss it in some detail.

Analysis of properties of matter indirectly
provides information about the interior. We

Earthquake
know through the mining activity that
temperature and pressure increase with the The study of seismic waves provides a complete
increasing distance from the surface towards picture of the layered interior. An earthquake
the interior in deeper depths. Moreover, it is in simple words is shaking of the earth. It is a
also known that the density of the material also natural event. It is caused due to release of
increases with depth. It is possible to find the energy, which generates waves that travel in
rate of change of these characteristics. Knowing all directions.
the total thickness of the earth, scientists have
estimated the values of temperature, pressure Why does the earth shake?
and the density of materials at different depths. The release of energy occurs along a fault. A
The details of these characteristics with fault is a sharp break in the crustal rocks.
reference to each layer of the interior are Rocks along a fault tend to move in opposite
discussed later in this chapter. directions. As the overlying rock strata press

Another source of information are the them, the friction locks them together. However,
meteors that at times reach the earth. However, their tendency to move apart at some point of
it may be noted that the material that becomes time overcomes the friction. As a result, the
available for analysis from meteors, is not from blocks get deformed and eventually, they slide
the interior of the earth. The material and the past one another abruptly. This causes a
structure observed in the meteors are similar release of energy, and the energy waves travel
to that of the earth. They are solid bodies in all directions. The point where the energy is
developed out of materials same as, or similar released is called the focus of an earthquake,
to, our planet. Hence, this becomes yet another alternatively, it is called the hypocentre. The
source of information about the interior of the energy waves travelling in different directions
earth. reach the surface. The point on the surface,

The other indirect sources include nearest to the focus, is called epicentre. It is
gravitation, magnetic field, and seismic activity. the first one to experience the waves. It is a point
The gravitation force (g) is not the same at directly above the focus.
different latitudes on the surface. It is greater
near the poles and less at the equator. This is Earthquake Waves
because of the distance from the centre at the
equator being greater than that at the poles. All natural earthquakes take place in the
The gravity values also differ according to the lithosphere. You will learn about different
mass of material. The uneven distribution of layers of the earth later in this chapter. It is
mass of material within the earth influences sufficient to note here that the lithosphere refers
this value. The reading of the gravity at different to the portion of depth up to 200 km from the
places is influenced by many other factors. surface of the earth. An instrument called
These readings differ from the expected values. ‘seismograph’ records the waves reaching the
Such a difference is called gravity anomaly. surface. A curve of earthquake waves recorded
Gravity anomalies give us information about on the seismograph is given in Figure 3.1. Note
the distribution of mass of the material in the that the curve shows three distinct sections
crust of the earth. Magnetic surveys also each representing different types of wave
provide information about the distribution of patterns. Earthquake waves are basically of two
magnetic materials in the crustal portion, and types — body waves and surface waves. Body
thus, provide information about the waves are generated due to the release of energy
distribution of materials in this part. Seismic at the focus and move in all directions travelling
activity is one of the most important sources of through the body of the earth. Hence, the name

Reprint 2025-26



20 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

body waves. The body waves interact with the pressure on the material in the direction of the
surface rocks and generate new set of waves propagation. As a result, it creates density
called surface waves. These waves move along differences in the material leading to stretching
the surface. The velocity of waves changes as and squeezing of the material. Other three
they travel through materials with different waves vibrate perpendicular to the direction of
densities. The denser the material, the higher propagation. The direction of vibrations of
is the velocity. Their direction also changes as S-waves is perpendicular to the wave direction
they reflect or refract when coming across in the vertical plane. Hence, they create troughs
materials with different densities. and crests in the material through which they

pass. Surface waves are considered to be the
most damaging waves.

Emergence of Shadow Zone

Earthquake waves get recorded in seismo-
graphs located at far off locations. However,
there exist some specific areas where the waves
are not reported. Such a zone is called the
‘shadow zone’. The study of different events

Figure 3.1 : Earthquake Waves
reveals that for each earthquake, there exists

There are two types of body waves. They an altogether different shadow zone. Figure 3.2
are called P and S-waves. P-waves move faster (a) and (b) show the shadow zones of P and
and are the first to arrive at the surface. These S-waves. It was observed that seismographs
are also called ‘primary waves’. The P-waves located at any distance within 105° from the
are similar to sound waves. They travel epicentre, recorded the arrival of both P and
through gaseous, liquid and solid materials. S-waves.  However, the seismographs located
S-waves arrive at the surface with some time beyond 145° from epicentre, record the arrival
lag. These are called secondary waves. An of P-waves, but not that of S-waves. Thus, a
important fact about S-waves is that they can zone between 105° and 145° from epicentre was
travel only through solid materials. This identified as the shadow zone for both the types
characteristic of the S-waves is quite of waves. The entire zone beyond 105° does not
important. It has helped scientists to receive S-waves. The shadow zone of S-wave is
understand the structure of the interior of the much larger than that of the P-waves. The
earth. Reflection causes waves to rebound shadow zone of P-waves appears as a band
whereas refraction makes waves move in around the earth between 105° and 145° away
different directions. The variations in the from the epicentre. The shadow zone of S-waves
direction of waves are inferred with the help of is not only larger in extent but it is also a little
their record on seismograph. The surface over 40 per cent of the earth surface. You can
waves are the last to report on seismograph. draw the shadow zone for any earthquake
These waves are more destructive. They cause provided you know the location of the epicentre.
displacement of rocks, and hence, the collapse
of structures occurs. Types of Earthquakes

(i) The most common ones are the tectonic
Propagation of Earthquake Waves

earthquakes. These are generated due to
Different types of earthquake waves travel in sliding of rocks along a fault plane.
different manners. As they move or propagate, (ii) A special class of tectonic earthquake is
they cause vibration in the body of the rocks sometimes recognised as volcanic
through which they pass. P-waves vibrate earthquake. However, these are confined
parallel to the direction of the wave. This exerts to areas of active volcanoes.

Reprint 2025-26



INTERIOR OF THE EARTH 21

(v) The earthquakes that occur in the areas
of large reservoirs are referred to as
reservoir induced earthquakes.

Measuring Earthquakes

The earthquake events are scaled either
according to the magnitude or intensity of
the shock. The magnitude scale is known as
the Richter scale. The magnitude relates to
the energy released during the quake. The

105 105
magnitude is expressed in numbers, 0-10.
The intensity scale is named after Mercalli,
an Italian seismologist. The intensity scale
takes into account the visible damage caused

145 145 by  the event. The range of intensity scale is
from 1-12.

EFFECTS OF EARTHQUAKE

Earthquake is a natural hazard. The following
are the immediate hazardous effects of
earthquake:

(i) Ground Shaking
(ii) Differential ground settlement
(iii) Land and mud slides
(iv) Soil liquefaction
(v) Ground lurching

S
(vi) Avalanches
(vii) Ground displacement

105 105 (viii) Floods from dam and levee failures
(ix) Fires
(x) Structural collapse
(xi) Falling objects
(xii) Tsunami

The first six listed above have some bearings
upon landforms, while others may be
considered the effects causing immediate

Figure 3.2 (a) and (b) : Earthquake Shadow Zones
concern to the life and properties of people in
the region. The effect of tsunami would occur

(iii) In the areas of intense mining activity, only if the epicentre of the tremor is below
sometimes the roofs of underground oceanic waters and the magnitude is
mines collapse causing minor tremors. sufficiently high. Tsunamis are waves
These are called collapse earthquakes. generated by the tremors and not an

(iv) Ground shaking may also occur due to earthquake in itself. Though the actual quake
the explosion of chemical or nuclear activity lasts for a few seconds, its effects are
devices. Such tremors are called explosion devastating provided the magnitude of the
earthquakes. quake is more than 5 on the Richter scale.

Reprint 2025-26

10
5



22 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Frequency of Earthquake Occurrences once in 1-2 years whereas those of ‘tiny’ types
occur almost every minute.

The earthquake is a natural hazard. If a tremor
of high magnitude takes place, it can cause STRUCTURE OF THE EARTH
heavy damage to the life and property of
people. However, not all the parts of the globe The Crust
necessarily experience major shocks. We shall
be discussing the distribution of earthquakes It is the outermost solid part of the earth. It is
and volcanoes with some details in the next brittle in nature. The thickness of the crust

varies under the oceanic and continental areas.
Oceanic crust is thinner as compared to the
continental crust. The mean thickness of
oceanic crust is 5 km whereas that of the
continental is around 30 km. The continental
crust is thicker in the areas of major mountain
systems. It is as much as 70 km thick in the
Himalayan region.

The Mantle

The portion of the interior beyond the crust is
called the mantle. The mantle extends from

A view of the damaged Aman Setu at the LOC Moho’s discontinuity to a depth of 2,900 km.
in Uri, due to an earthquake The upper portion of the mantle is called

asthenosphere. The word astheno means weak.
chapter. Note that the quakes of high It is considered to be extending upto 400
magnitude, i.e. 8+ are quite rare; they occur km. It is the main source of magma that finds

Reprint 2025-26



INTERIOR OF THE EARTH 23

higher density than that of the crust. The
mantle contains a weaker zone called
asthenosphere. It is from this that the molten
rock materials find their way to the surface.
The material in the upper mantle portion is
called magma. Once it starts moving towards
the crust or it reaches the surface, it is referred
to as lava. The material that reaches the ground
includes lava flows, pyroclastic debris, volcanic
bombs, ash and dust and gases such as
nitrogen compounds, sulphur compounds
and minor amounts of chlorene, hydrogen
and argon.

Volcanoes

Volcanoes are classified on the basis of nature
of eruption and the form developed at the
surface. Major types of volcanoes are as follows:

Figure 3.3 : The interior of the earth Shield Volcanoes

Barring the basalt flows, the shield volcanoes

its way to the surface during volcanic are the largest of all the volcanoes on the earth.

eruptions. The crust and the uppermost part The Hawaiian volcanoes are the most famous

of the mantle are called lithosphere. Its
thickness ranges from 10-200 km. The lower
mantle extends beyond the asthenosphere. It
is in solid state.

The Core

As indicated earlier, the earthquake wave
velocities helped in understanding the
existence of the core of the earth. The core-
mantle boundary is located at the depth of
2,900 km. The outer core is in liquid state while
the inner core is in solid state. The core is made
up of very heavy material mostly constituted Shield Volcano

by nickel and iron. It is sometimes referred to
as the nife layer.

VOLCANOES AND VOLCANIC LANDFORMS

You may have seen photographs or pictures
of volcanoes on a number of occasions. A
volcano is a place where gases, ashes and/or
molten rock material – lava – escape to the
ground. A volcano is called an active volcano if
the materials mentioned are being released or
have been released out in the recent past. The
layer below the solid crust is mantle. It has Cinder Cone

Reprint 2025-26



24 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

examples. These volcanoes are mostly made more than 50 m. Individual flows may extend
up of basalt, a type of lava that is very fluid for hundreds of km. The Deccan Traps from
when erupted. For this reason, these volcanoes India, presently covering most of the
are not steep. They become explosive if Maharashtra plateau, are a much larger flood
somehow water gets into the vent; otherwise, basalt province. It is believed that initially the
they are characterised by low-explosivity. The trap formations covered a much larger area
upcoming lava moves in the form of a fountain than the present.
and throws out the cone at the top of the vent
and develops into cinder cone. Mid-Ocean Ridge Volcanoes

Composite Volcanoes These volcanoes occur in the oceanic areas.
There is a system of mid-ocean ridges more

These volcanoes are characterised by than 70,000 km long that stretches through
eruptions of cooler and more viscous lavas all the ocean basins. The central portion of this
than basalt. These volcanoes often result in ridge experiences frequent eruptions. We shall
explosive eruptions. Along with lava, large be discussing this in detail in the next chapter.
quantities of pyroclastic material and ashes
find their way to the ground. This material VOLCANIC LANDFORMS
accumulates in the vicinity of the vent openings
leading to formation of layers, and this makes Intrusive Forms
the mounts appear as composite volcanoes.

The lava that is released during volcanic
eruptions on cooling develops into igneous
rocks. The cooling may take place either on
reaching the surface or also while the lava is
still in the crustal portion. Depending on the
location of the cooling of the lava, igneous rocks
are classified as volcanic rocks (cooling at the
surface) and plutonic rocks (cooling in the
crust). The lava that cools within the crustal
portions assumes different forms. These forms
are called intrusive forms. Some of the forms

Composite Volcano are shown in Figure 3.4.
Caldera

These are the most explosive of the earth’s
volcanoes. They are usually so explosive that
when they erupt they tend to collapse on
themselves rather than building any tall
structure. The collapsed depressions are called
calderas. Their explosiveness indicates that
the magma chamber supplying the lava is not
only huge but is also in close vicinity.

Flood Basalt Provinces

These volcanoes outpour highly fluid lava that
flows for long distances. Some parts of the
world are covered by thousands of sq. km of
thick basalt lava flows. There can be a series of
flows with some flows attaining thickness of Figure 3.4 : Volcanic Landforms

Reprint 2025-26



INTERIOR OF THE EARTH 25

Batholiths case it develops into a saucer shape, concave
A large body of magmatic material that cools to the sky body, it is called lapolith. A wavy
in the deeper depth of the crust develops in the mass of intrusive rocks, at times, is found at
form of large domes. They appear on the surface the base of synclines or at the top of anticline
only after the denudational processes remove in folded igneous country. Such wavy
the overlying materials. They cover large areas, materials have a definite conduit to source
and at times, assume depth that may be several beneath in the form of magma chambers
km. These are granitic bodies. Batholiths are (subsequently developed as batholiths). These
the cooled portion of magma chambers. are called the phacoliths.

The near horizontal bodies of the
Lacoliths

intrusive igneous rocks are called sill or
These are large dome-shaped intrusive bodies sheet, depending on the thickness of the
with a level base and connected by a pipe-like material. The thinner ones are called sheets
conduit from below. It resembles the surface while the thick horizontal deposits are
volcanic domes of composite volcano, only called sills.
these are located at deeper depths. It can be
regarded as the localised source of lava that
finds its way to the surface. The Karnataka Dykes

plateau is spotted with domal hills of granite When the lava makes its way through cracks
rocks. Most of these, now exfoliated, are and the fissures developed in the land, it
examples of lacoliths or batholiths.

solidifies almost perpendicular to the ground.
It gets cooled in the same position to develop a

Lapolith, Phacolith and Sills
wall-like structure. Such structures are called

As and when the lava moves upwards, a dykes. These are the most commonly found
portion of the same may tend to move in a intrusive forms in the western Maharashtra area.
horizontal direction wherever it finds a weak These are considered the feeders for the eruptions
plane. It may get rested in different forms. In that led to the development of the Deccan traps.

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

(i) Which one of the following earthquake waves is more destructive?

(a) P-waves (c)  Surface waves

(b) S-waves (d)  None of the above

(ii) Which one of the following is a direct source of information about the
interior of the earth?

(a) Earthquake waves (c) Gravitational force

(b) Volcanoes (d) Earth magnetism

(iii) Which type of volcanic eruptions have caused Deccan Trap formations?

(a) Shield (c) Composite

(b) Flood (d) Caldera

(iv) Which one of the following describes the lithosphere:

(a) upper and lower mantle (c) crust and core

(b) crust and upper mantle (d) mantle and core

Reprint 2025-26



26 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) What are body waves?

(ii) Name the direct sources of information about the interior of the earth.

(iii) Why do earthquake waves develop shadow zone?

(iv) Briefly explain the indirect sources of information of the interior of the
earth other than those of seismic activity.

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) What are the effects of propagation of earthquake waves on the rock mass
through which they travel?

(ii) What do you understand by intrusive forms? Briefly describe various
intrusive forms.

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

DISTRIBUTION OF OCEANS

AND CONTINENTS

In the previous chapter, you have studied the theory” in 1912. This was regarding the
interior of the earth. You are already familiar distribution of the oceans and the continents.
with the world map. You know that continents According to Wegener, all the continents
cover 29 per cent of the surface of the earth formed a single continental mass and mega
and the remainder is under oceanic waters. ocean surrounded the same.  The super
The positions of the continents and the ocean continent was named PANGAEA, which meant
bodies, as we see them in the map, have not all earth. The mega-ocean was called
been the same in the past. Moreover, it is now PANTHALASSA, meaning all water. He argued
a well-accepted fact that oceans and that, around 200 million years ago, the super
continents will not continue to enjoy their continent, Pangaea, began to split. Pangaea first
present positions in times to come.  If this is broke into two large continental masses as
so, the question arises what were their positions Laurasia and Gondwanaland forming the
in the past? Why and how do they change their northern and southern components
positions? Even if it is true that the continents respectively. Subsequently, Laurasia and
and oceans have changed and are changing Gondwanaland continued to break into various
their positions, you may wonder as to how smaller continents that exist today. A variety of
scientists know this. How have they determined evidence was offered in support of the
their earlier positions? You will find the answers continental drift. Some of these are given below.
to some of these and related questions in this
chapter. Evidence in Support of the Continental Drift

CONTINENTAL DRIFT The Matching of Continents (Jig-Saw-Fit)
Observe the shape of the coastline of the Atlantic The shorelines of Africa and South America
Ocean. You will be surprised by the symmetry facing each other have a remarkable and
of the coastlines on either side of the ocean. No

unmistakable match. It may be noted that a
wonder, many scientists thought of this

map produced using a computer programme
similarity and considered the possibility of the

to find the best fit of the Atlantic margin was
two Americas, Europe and Africa, to be once

presented by Bullard in 1964. It proved to be
joined together. From the known records of the

quite perfect. The match was tried at 1,000-
history of science, it was Abraham Ortelius, a

fathom line instead of the present shoreline.
Dutch map maker, who first proposed such a
possibility as early as 1596. Antonio Pellegrini

Rocks of Same Age Across the Oceans
drew a map showing the three continents together.
However, it was Alfred Wegener—a German The radiometric dating methods developed in
meteorologist who put forth a comprehensive the recent period have facilitated correlating the
argument in the form of  “the continental drift rock formation from different continents across

Reprint 2025-26



28 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

the vast ocean. The belt of ancient rocks of Force for Drifting
2,000 million years from Brazil coast matches

Wegener suggested that the movement
with those from western Africa.  The earliest

responsible for the drifting of the continents
marine deposits along the coastline of South

was caused by pole-fleeing force and tidal force.
America and Africa are of the Jurassic age. The polar-fleeing force relates to the rotation
This suggests that the ocean did not exist prior of the earth. You are aware of the fact that the
to that time. earth is not a perfect sphere; it has a bulge at

the equator. This bulge is due to the rotation
Tillite of the earth. The second force that was
It is the sedimentary rock formed out of suggested by Wegener — the tidal force — is
deposits of glaciers. The Gondawana system due to the attraction of the moon and the sun
of sediments from India is known to have its that develops tides in oceanic waters. Wegener

counterparts in six different landmasses of the believed that these forces would become

Southern Hemisphere. At the base, the system effective when applied over many million years.

has thick tillite indicating extensive and However, most of scholars considered these

prolonged glaciation. Counterparts of this forces to be totally inadequate.

succession are found in Africa, Falkland Island,
Post-drift Studies

Madagascar, Antarctica and Australia. Overall
resemblance of the Gondawana-type sediments It is interesting to note that for continental drift,
clearly demonstrates that these landmasses most of the evidence was collected from the
had remarkably similar histories. The glacial continental areas in the form of distribution of
tillite provides unambiguous evidence of flora and fauna or deposits, like tillite. A
palaeoclimates and also of drifting of continents. number of discoveries during the post–World

War II period added new information to
Placer Deposits geological literature. Particularly, the

information collected from the ocean floor
The occurrence of rich placer deposits of gold mapping provided new dimensions for the
in the Ghana coast and the absolute absence study of distribution of oceans and continents.
of source rock in the region is an amazing fact.
The gold bearing veins are in Brazil and it is Convectional Current Theory
obvious that the gold deposits of the Ghana

Arthur Holmes in 1930s discussed the
are derived from the Brazil plateau when the

possibility of convection currents operating in
two continents lay side by side.

the mantle portion. These currents are
generated due to radioactive elements causing

Distribution of Fossils
thermal differences in the mantle portion.

When identical species of plants and animals Holmes argued that there exists a system of
adapted to living on land or in fresh water are such currents in the entire mantle portion. This
found on either side of the marine barriers, a was an attempt to provide an explanation to
problem arises regarding accounting for such the issue of force, on the basis of which
distribution.  The observations that Lemurs contemporary scientists discarded the
occur in India, Madagascar and Africa led some continental drift theory.

to consider a contiguous landmass ‘Lemuria’
linking these three landmasses.  Mesosaurus Mapping of the Ocean Floor

was a small reptile adapted to shallow brackish Detailed research of the ocean configuration
water.  The skeletons of these are found only revealed that the ocean floor is not just a vast
in two localities: the Southern Cape province plain but it is full of relief. Expeditions to map
of South Africa and Iraver formations of Brazil. the oceanic floor in the post–World War II period
The two localities are  presently 4,800 km apart provided a detailed picture of the ocean relief
with an ocean in between them. and indicated the existence of submerged

Reprint 2025-26



##4##
DISTRIBUTION OF OCEANS AND CONTINENTS 29

mountain ranges as well as deep trenches, Abyssal Plains
mostly located closer to the continent margins.
The mid-oceanic ridges were found to be most These are extensive plains that lie between the

active in terms of volcanic eruptions. The dating continental margins and mid-oceanic ridges.

of the rocks from the oceanic crust revealed The abyssal plains are the areas where the

the fact that they are much younger than the continental sediments that move beyond the

continental areas. Rocks on either side of the margins get deposited.

crest of oceanic ridges and having equi-distant
locations from the crest were found to have Mid-Oceanic Ridges

remarkable similarities both in terms of their This forms an interconnected chain of
constituents and their age. mountain system within the ocean. It is the

longest mountain-chain on the surface of the
Ocean Floor Configuration earth though submerged under the oceanic
In this section we shall note a few things related waters. It is characterised by a central rift
to the ocean floor configuration that help us in system at the crest, a fractionated plateau and
the understanding of the distribution of flank zone all along its length. The rift system
continents and oceans. You will be studying at the crest is the zone of intense volcanic
the details of ocean floor relief in Chapter activity. In the previous chapter, you have been
12. The ocean floor may be segmented into introduced to this type of volcanoes as mid-
three major divisions based on the depth oceanic volcanoes.
as well as the forms of relief. These divisions
are continental margins, deep-sea basins and Distribution of Earthquakes and Volcanoes
mid-ocean ridges. Study the maps showing the distribution of

seismic activity and volcanoes given in Figure
4.2. You will notice a line of dots in the central
parts of the Atlantic Ocean almost parallel to
the coastlines. It further extends into the Indian
Ocean. It bifurcates a little south of the Indian
subcontinent with one branch moving into
East Africa and the other meeting a similar line
from Myanmar to New Guiana. You will notice
that this line of dots coincides with the mid-
oceanic ridges. The shaded belt showing
another area of concentration coincides with
the Alpine-Himalayan system and the rim of
the Pacific Ocean. In general, the foci of the
earthquake in the areas of mid-oceanic ridges

Figure 4.1 : Ocean Floor are at shallow depths whereas along the
Alpine-Himalayan belt as well as the rim of the

Continental Margins Pacific, the earthquakes are deep-seated ones.
The map of volcanoes also shows a similar

These form the transition between continental
pattern. The rim of the Pacific is also called rim

shores and deep-sea basins. They include
of fire due to the existence of active volcanoes in

continental shelf, continental slope, continental
this area.

rise and deep-oceanic trenches.  Of these, the
deep-oceanic trenches are the areas which are

CONCEPT OF SEA FLOOR SPREADING
of considerable interest in so far as the
distribution of oceans and continents is As mentioned above, the post-drift studies
concerned. provided considerable information that was not

Reprint 2025-26



30 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

 Figure 4. 2 : Distribution of earthquakes and volcanoes

available at the time Wegener put forth his (iv) The sediments on the ocean floor are
concept of continental drift. Particularly, the unexpectedly very thin. Scientists were
mapping of the ocean floor and palaeomagnetic expecting, if the ocean floors were as old
studies of rocks from oceanic regions revealed as the continent, to have a complete
the following facts : sequence of sediments for a period of much
(i) It was realised that all along the mid- longer duration. However, nowhere was the

oceanic ridges, volcanic eruptions are sediment column found to be older than
common and they bring huge amounts of 200 million years.
lava to the surface in this area. (v) The deep trenches have deep-seated

(ii) The rocks equidistant on either sides of the earthquake occurrences while in the mid-
crest of mid-oceanic ridges show oceanic ridge areas, the quake foci have
remarkable similarities in terms of period shallow depths.
of formation, chemical compositions and These facts and a detailed analysis of magnetic
magnetic properties. Rocks closer to the properties of the rocks on either sides of the
mid-oceanic ridges have normal polarity mid-oceanic ridge led Hess (1961) to propose
and are the youngest. The age of the rocks his hypothesis, known as the “sea floor
increases as one moves away from the spreading”. Hess argued that constant
crest. eruptions at the crest of oceanic ridges cause

(iii) The ocean crust rocks are much younger the rupture of the oceanic crust and the new
than the continental rocks. The age of rocks lava wedges into it, pushing the oceanic crust
in the oceanic crust is nowhere more than on either side. The ocean floor, thus spreads.
200 million years old. Some of the continental The younger age of the oceanic crust as well
rock formations are as old as 3,200 million as the fact that the spreading of one ocean does
years. not cause the shrinking of the other, made Hess

Reprint 2025-26



DISTRIBUTION OF OCEANS AND CONTINENTS 31

 Figure 4. 3 : Sea floor spreading

think about the consumption of the oceanic PLATE TECTONICS

crust. He further maintained that the ocean Since the advent of the concept of sea floor
floor that gets pushed due to volcanic spreading, the interest in the problem of
eruptions at the crest, sinks down at the distribution of oceans and continents was
oceanic trenches and gets consumed. revived. It was in 1967, McKenzie and Parker

The basic concept of sea floor spreading has and also Morgan, independently collected the
been depicted in Figure 4.3. available ideas and came out with another

The motions of the continents during the past 540
million years. 1. Africa; 2. South America;
3. Antarctica; 4. Australia; 5. India; 6. China; 7. North
America; 8. Europe; 9. and 10. Siberia (Emilani, 1992)

Figure 4.4 : Position of continents through geological past

Reprint 2025-26



32 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

concept termed Plate Tectonics. A tectonic I Antarctica and the surrounding
plate (also called lithospheric plate) is a oceanic plate

massive, irregularly-shaped slab of solid rock, II North American (with western Atlantic

generally composed of both continental and floor separated from the South American

oceanic lithosphere. Plates move horizontally plate along the Caribbean islands) plate

over the asthenosphere as rigid units. The III South American (with western Atlantic

lithosphere includes the crust and top mantle floor separated from the North American

with its thickness range varying between plate along the Caribbean islands) plate

5 and100 km in oceanic parts and about 200 IV Pacific plate

km in the continental areas. A plate may be V India-Australia-New Zealand plate

referred to as the continental plate or oceanic VI Africa with the eastern Atlantic floor plate

plate depending on which of the two occupy a VII Eurasia and the adjacent oceanic plate.

larger portion of the plate. Pacific plate is Some important minor plates are listed below:

largely an oceanic plate whereas the Eurasian (i) Cocos plate : Between Central America
plate may be called a continental plate. The and Pacific plate
theory of plate tectonics proposes that the (ii) Nazca plate : Between South America
earth’s lithosphere is divided into seven major and Pacific plate
and some minor plates. Young Fold Mountain (iii) Arabian plate : Mostly the Saudi Arabian
ridges, trenches, and/or faults surround these landmass
major plates (Figure 4.5).  The major plates (iv) Philippine plate : Between the Asiatic and
are as follows : Pacific plate

Figure 4.5 : Major and minor plates of the world

Reprint 2025-26



DISTRIBUTION OF OCEANS AND CONTINENTS 33

(v) Caroline plate : Between the Philippine Transform Boundaries
and Indian plate (North of New Guinea)

Where the crust is neither produced nor
These plates have been constantly moving

destroyed as the plates slide horizontally past
over the globe throughout the history of the

each other. Transform faults are the planes of
earth. It is not the continent that moves as separation generally perpendicular to the mid-
believed by Wegener. Continents are part of a oceanic ridges. As the eruptions do not take
plate and what moves is the plate. Moreover, it all along the entire crest at the same time, there
may be noted that all the plates, without is a differential movement of a portion of the
exception, have moved in the geological past, plate away from the axis of the earth. Also, the
and shall continue to move in the future as well. rotation of the earth has its effect on the
Wegener had thought of all the continents to separated blocks of the plate portions.
have initially existed as a super continent in
the form of Pangaea. However, later discoveries How do you think the rate of plate

reveal that the continental masses, resting on movement is determined?

the plates, have been wandering all through the
geological period, and Pangaea was a result of Rates of Plate Movement
converging of different continental masses that

The strips of normal and reverse magnetic field
were parts of one or the other plates. Scientists

that parallel the mid-oceanic ridges help
using the palaeomagnetic data have determined scientists determine the rates of plate
the positions held by each of the present movement. These rates vary considerably. The
continental landmass in different geological Arctic Ridge has the slowest rate (less than 2.5
periods (Fig 4.4). Position of the Indian sub- cm/yr), and the East Pacific Rise near Easter
continent (mostly Peninsular India) is traced Island, in the South Pacific about 3,400 km
with the help of the rocks analysed from the west of Chile, has the fastest rate (more than
Nagpur area. 15 cm/yr).

There are three types of plate boundaries:
Force for the Plate Movement

Divergent Boundaries
At the time that Wegener proposed his theory

Where new crust is generated as the plates pull of continental drift, most scientists believed
away from each other. The sites where the that the earth was a solid, motionless body.
plates move away from each other are called However, concepts of sea floor spreading and
spreading sites. The best-known example of the unified theory of plate tectonics have
divergent boundaries is the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. emphasised that both the surface of the earth
At this, the American Plate(s) is/are separated and the interior are not static and motionless
from the Eurasian and African Plates. but are dynamic. The fact that the plates move

is now a well-accepted fact. The mobile rock
Convergent Boundaries beneath the rigid plates is believed to be
Where the crust is destroyed as one plate dived moving in a circular manner. The heated
under another. The location where sinking of material rises to the surface, spreads and
a plate occurs is called a subduction zone. begins to cool, and then sinks back into deeper
There are three ways in which convergence can depths. This cycle is repeated over and over to
occur. These are: (i)  between an oceanic and generate what scientists call a convection cell
continental plate; (ii) between two oceanic or convective flow. Heat within the earth comes
plates; and (iii) between two  continental from two main sources: radioactive decay and
plates. residual heat. Arthur Holmes first considered

Reprint 2025-26



34 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

this idea in the 1930s, which later influenced
Harry Hess’ thinking about seafloor spreading.
The slow movement of hot, softened mantle
that lies below the rigid plates is the driving
force behind the plate movement.

MOVEMENT OF THE INDIAN PLATE

The Indian plate includes Peninsular India
and the Australian continental portions.  The
subduction zone along the Himalayas forms
the northern plate boundary in the form of
continent— continent convergence. In the east,
it extends through Rakinyoma Mountains of
Myanmar towards the island arc along the
Java Trench. The eastern margin is a
spreading site lying to the east of Australia in
the form of an oceanic ridge in SW Pacific.  The
Western margin follows Kirthar Mountain of
Pakistan. It further extends along the Makrana
coast and joins the spreading site from the
Red Sea rift southeastward along the Chagos
Archipelago.  The boundary between India
and the Antarctic plate is also marked by
oceanic ridge (divergent boundary) running
in roughly W-E direction and merging into the
spreading site, a little south of New Zealand.

India was a large island situated off the
Australian coast, in a vast ocean. The Tethys
Sea separated it from the Asian continent till
about 225 million years ago. India is supposed
to have started her northward journey about
200 million years ago at the time when Pangaea
broke. India collided with Asia about 40-50 Figure 4.6 : Movement of the Indian plate

million years ago causing rapid uplift of the plate towards the Eurasian plate, a major event
Himalayas. The positions of India since about that occurred was the outpouring of lava and
71 million years till the present are shown in formation of the Deccan Traps. This started
the Figure 4.6. It also shows the position of somewhere around 60 million years ago and
the Indian subcontinent and the Eurasian continued for a long period of time. Note that
plate. About 140 million years before the the subcontinent was still close to the equator.
present, the subcontinent was located as From 40 million years ago and thereafter, the
south as 50oS. latitude. The two major plates event of formation of the Himalayas took place.
were separated by the Tethys Sea and the Scientists believe that the process is still
Tibetan block was closer to the Asiatic continuing and the height of the Himalayas is
landmass. During the movement of the Indian rising even to this date.

Reprint 2025-26



DISTRIBUTION OF OCEANS AND CONTINENTS 35

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

  (i) Who amongst the following was the first to consider the possibility of
Europe, Africa and America having been located side by side.

(a)  Alfred Wegener (c) Abraham Ortelius

(b)  Antonio Pellegrini (d) Edmond Hess

 (ii) Polar fleeing force relates to:

(a) Revolution of the Earth (c) Rotation of the earth

(b) Gravitation (d) Tides

(iii) Which one of the following is not a minor plate?

(a) Nazca (c) Philippines

(b) Arabia (d) Antarctica

(iv) Which one of the following facts was not considered by those while
discussing the concept of sea floor spreading?

(a) Volcanic activity along the mid-oceanic ridges.

(b) Stripes of normal and reverse magnetic field observed in rocks of ocean
floor.

(c) Distribution of fossils in different continents.

(d) Age of rocks from the ocean floor.

 (v) Which one of the following is the type of plate boundary of the Indian plate
along the Himalayan mountains?

(a) Ocean-continent convergence

(b) Divergent boundary

(c) Transform boundary

(d) Continent-continent convergence

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) What were the forces suggested by Wegener for the movement of the
continents?

(ii) How are the convectional currents in the mantle initiated and maintained?

(iii) What is the major difference between the transform boundary and the
convergent or divergent boundaries of plates?

(iv) What was the location of the Indian landmass during the formation of the
Deccan Traps?

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) What are the evidences in support of the continental drift theory?

(ii) Bring about the basic difference between the drift theory and Plate
tectonics.

(iii) What were the major post-drift discoveries that rejuvenated the interest
of scientists in the study of distribution of oceans and continents?

Project Work

Prepare a collage related to damages caused by an earthquake.

Reprint 2025-26



UNIT

III

LANDFORMS

This unit deals with

• Landforms and their evolution

• Geomorphic processes — weathering, mass wasting, erosion
and deposition; soils — formation

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

##5##
GEOMORPHIC PROCESSES

fter learning about how the earth was forces continuously elevate or build up parts

Aborn, how it evolved its crust and other of the earth’s surface and hence the exogenic
inner layers, how its crustal plates processes fail to even out the relief variations

moved and are moving, and other information of the surface of the earth. So, variations remain
on earthquakes, the forms of volcanism and as long as the opposing actions of exogenic and
about the rocks and minerals the crust is endogenic forces continue. In general terms,
composed of, it is time to know in detail about the endogenic forces are mainly land building
the surface of the earth on which we live. Let forces and the exogenic processes are mainly
us start with this question. land wearing forces. The surface of the earth is

sensitive. Humans depend on it for their
Why is the surface of the earth uneven? sustenance and have been using it extensively

and intensively. So, it is essential to understand
The earth’s crust is dynamic. You are well its nature in order to use it effectively without

aware that it has moved and moves vertically disturbing its balance and diminishing its
and horizontally. Of course, it moved a bit faster potential for the future. Almost all organisms
in the past than the rate at which it is moving contribute to sustain the earth’s environment.
now. The differences in the internal forces However, humans have caused extensive
operating from within the earth which built up damage to the environment through over use
the crust have been responsible for the of resources. Use we must, but must also leave
variations in the outer surface of the crust. The it potential enough to sustain life through the
earth’s surface is being continuously subjected future. Most of the surface of the earth had and
to external forces induced basically by energy has been shaped over very long periods of time
(sunlight). Of course, the internal forces are still (hundreds and thousands of years) and
active though with different intensities. That because of its use and misuse by humans its
means, the earth’s surface is being potential is being diminished at a fast rate. If
continuously subjected to by external forces the processes which shaped and are shaping
originating within the earth’s atmosphere and the surface of the earth into varieties of forms
by internal forces from within the earth. The (shapes) and the nature of materials of which
external forces are known as exogenic forces it is composed of, are understood, precautions
and the internal forces are known as endogenic can be taken to minimise the detrimental effects
forces. The actions of exogenic forces result in of human use and to preserve it for posterity.
wearing down (degradation) of relief/elevations
and filling up (aggradation) of basins/ GEOMORPHIC PROCESSES

depressions, on the earth’s surface. The You would like to know the meaning of
phenomenon of wearing down of relief geomorphic processes. The endogenic and
variations of the surface of the earth through exogenic forces causing physical stresses and
erosion is known as gradation. The endogenic chemical actions on earth materials and

Reprint 2025-26



38 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

bringing about changes in the configuration ENDOGENIC PROCESSES

of the surface of the earth are known as
The energy emanating from within the earth is

geomorphic processes. Diastrophism and
the main force behind endogenic geomorphic

volcanism are endogenic geomorphic processes. This energy is mostly generated by
processes. These have already been discussed radioactivity, rotational and tidal friction and
in brief in the preceding unit. Weathering, mass primordial heat from the origin of the earth.
wasting, erosion and deposition are exogenic This energy due to geothermal gradients and
geomorphic processes. These exogenic heat flow from within induces diastrophism
processes are dealt with in detail in this chapter. and volcanism in the lithosphere. Due to

Any exogenic element of nature (like water, variations in geothermal gradients and heat flow
ice, wind, etc.,) capable of acquiring and from within, crustal thickness and strength,
transporting earth materials can be called a the action of endogenic forces are not uniform
geomorphic agent. When these elements of and hence the tectonically controlled original
nature become mobile due to gradients, they crustal surface is uneven.
remove the materials and transport them over
slopes and deposit them at lower level. Diastrophism
Geomorphic processes and geomorphic agents

All processes that move, elevate or build up
especially exogenic, unless stated separately,

portions of the earth’s crust come under
are one and the same.

diastrophism. They include: (i) orogenic
A process is a force applied on earth

processes involving mountain building
materials affecting the same.  An agent is a

through severe folding and affecting long and
mobile medium (like running water, moving ice narrow belts of the earth’s crust; (ii) epeirogenic
masses, wind, waves and currents etc.) which processes involving uplift or warping of large
removes, transports and deposits earth parts of the earth’s crust; (iii) earthquakes
materials. Running water, groundwater, involving local relatively minor movements;
glaciers, wind, waves and currents, etc., can (iv) plate tectonics involving horizontal
be called geomorphic agents. movements of crustal plates.

In the process of orogeny, the crust is
Do you think it is essential to distinguish severely deformed into folds. Due to epeirogeny,
geomorphic agents and geomorphic there may be simple deformation. Orogeny is
processes? a mountain building process whereas

epeirogeny is continental building process.
Gravity besides being a directional force

Through the processes of orogeny, epeirogeny,
activating all downslope movements of matter

earthquakes and plate tectonics, there can be
also causes stresses on the earth’s materials.

faulting and fracturing of the crust. All these
Indirect gravitational stresses activate wave and

processes cause pressure, volume and
tide induced currents and winds. Without temperature (PVT) changes which in turn
gravity and gradients there would be no induce metamorphism of rocks.
mobility and hence no erosion, transportation
and deposition are possible. So, gravitational Epeirogeny and orogeny, cite the
stresses are as important as the other differences.
geomorphic processes. Gravity is the force that
is keeping us in contact with the surface and it
is the force that switches on the movement of Volcanism

all surface material on earth. All the movements Volcanism includes the movement of molten
either within the earth or on the surface of the rock (magma) onto or toward the earth’s
earth occur due to gradients — from higher surface and also formation of many intrusive
levels to lower levels, from high pressure to low and extrusive volcanic forms. Many aspects of
pressure areas etc. volcanism have already been dealt in detail

Reprint 2025-26



GEOMORPHIC PROCESSES 39

under volcanoes in the Unit II and under driving forces. It should become clear from
igneous rocks in the preceding chapter in this this chart that for each process there exists a
unit. distinct driving force or energy.

As there are different climatic regions owing
What do the words volcanism and to variations in thermal gradients created by
volcanoes indicate? latitudinal, seasonal, and land and water

spread on the surface of the earth, the exogenic
geomorphic processes vary from region to

EXOGENIC PROCESSES
region.  The density, type and distribution of

The exogenic processes derive their energy vegetation which largely depend upon
from atmosphere determined by the ultimate precipitation and temperature also exert
energy from the sun and also the gradients
created by tectonic factors.

Why do you think that the slopes or
gradients are created by tectonic factors?

Gravitational force acts upon all earth
materials having a sloping surface and tend
to produce movement of matter in down
slope direction. Force applied per unit area
is called stress. Stress is produced in a solid Figure 5.1 : Denudational processes and their

by pushing or pulling. This induces driving forces

deformation. Forces acting along the faces of influence indirectly on exogenic geomorphic
earth materials are shear stresses (separating processes. Within different climatic regions
forces). It is this stress that breaks rocks and there may be local variations of the effects of
other earth materials. The shear stresses different climatic elements due to altitudinal
result in angular displacement or slippage. differences, aspect variations and the variation
Besides the gravitational stress earth in the amount of insolation received by north
materials become subjected to molecular and south facing slopes as compared to east
stresses that may be caused by a number of and west facing slopes. Further, due to
factors amongst which temperature changes, differences in wind velocities and directions,
crystallisation and melting are the most amount and kind of precipitation, its intensity,
common. Chemical processes normally lead the relation between precipitation and
to loosening of bonds between grains, evaporation, daily range of temperature,
dissolving of soluble minerals or cementing freezing and thawing frequency, depth of frost
materials. Thus, the basic reason that leads penetration, the geomorphic processes vary
to weathering, mass movements, and erosion within any climatic region.
is development of stresses in the body of the
earth materials. What is the sole driving force behind all

 Temperature and precipitation are the the exogenic processes?
two important climatic elements that control
various processes. Climatic factors being equal, the intensity

All the exogenic geomorphic processes of action of exogenic geomorphic processes
are covered under a general term, depends upon type and structure of rocks. The
denudation. The word ‘denude’ means to term structure includes such aspects of rocks
strip off or to uncover. Weathering, mass as folds, faults, orientation and inclination of
wasting/movements, erosion and beds, presence or absence of joints, bedding
transportation are included in denudation. planes, hardness or softness of constituent
The flow chart (Figure 5.1) gives the minerals, chemical susceptibility of mineral
denudation processes and their respective constituents; the permeability or impermeability

Reprint 2025-26



40 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

etc. Different types of rocks with differences in
their structure offer varying resistances to
various geomorphic processes. A particular
rock may be resistant to one process and non-
resistant to another. And, under varying
climatic conditions, particular rocks may
exhibit different degrees of resistance to
geomorphic processes and hence they operate
at differential rates and give rise to differences
in topography. The effects of most of the
exogenic geomorphic processes are small and
slow and may be imperceptible in a short time
span, but will in the long run affect the rocks
severely due to continued fatigue.

Finally, it boils down to one fact that the
differences on the surface of the earth though Figure 5.2 : Climatic regimes and depth of weathering

mantles (adapted and modified from Strakhov, 1967)
originally related to the crustal evolution
continue to exist in some form or the other due
to differences in the type and structure of earth Activity
materials, differences in geomorphic processes Mark the latitude values of different
and in their rates of operation. climatic regimes in Figure 6.2 and

Some of the exogenic geomorphic processes compare the details.
have been dealt in detail here.

WEATHERING There are three major groups of weathering
processes : (i) chemical; (ii) physical or

Weathering is action of elements of weather and mechanical; (iii) biological weathering processes.
climate over earth materials.  There are a Very rarely does any one of these processes ever
number of processes within weathering which operate completely by itself, but quite often a
act either individually or together to affect the dominance of one process can be seen.
earth materials in order to reduce them to
fragmental state. Chemical Weathering Processes

Weathering is defined as mechanical A group of weathering processes viz; solution,
disintegration and chemical decom- carbonation, hydration, oxidation and
position of rocks through the actions of reduction act on the rocks to decompose,
various elements of weather and climate. dissolve or reduce them to a fine clastic state

through chemical reactions by oxygen, surface
As very little or no motion of materials and/or soil water and other acids.  Water and

takes place in weathering, it is an in-situ or air (oxygen and carbon dioxide) along with heat
on-site process. must be present to speed up all chemical

reactions. Over and above the carbon dioxide
Is this little motion which can occur present in the air, decomposition of plants and
sometimes due to weathering synonymous animals increases the quantity of carbon
with transportation?  If not, why?

dioxide underground. These chemical reactions

Weathering processes are conditioned by on various minerals are very much similar to

many complex geological, climatic, topographic the chemical reactions in a laboratory.
and vegetative factors.  Climate is of particular
importance. Not only weathering processes Physical Weathering Processes
differ from climate to climate, but also the depth Physical or mechanical weathering processes
of the weathering mantle (Figure 5.2). depend on some applied forces. The applied

Reprint 2025-26



GEOMORPHIC PROCESSES 41

forces could be: (i) gravitational forces such as
overburden pressure, load and shearing stress;
(ii) expansion forces due to temperature
changes, crystal growth or animal activity;
(iii) water pressures controlled by wetting and
drying cycles. Many of these forces are applied
both at the surface and within different earth
materials leading to rock fracture. Most of
the physical weathering processes are caused
by thermal expansion and pressure release.
These processes are small and slow but can
cause great damage to the rocks because of
continued fatigue the rocks suffer due to

Fig.5.3 : Exfoliation (Flacking) and granular
repetition of contraction and expansion. disintegration

B SIGNIFICANCE OF WEATHERING
IOLOGICAL ACTIVITY AND WEATHERING

Biological weathering is contribution to or Weathering processes are responsible for

removal of minerals and ions from the breaking down the rocks into smaller

weathering environment and physical changes fragments and preparing the way for

due to growth or movement of organisms. formation of not only regolith and soils, but

Burrowing and wedging by organisms like also erosion and mass movements. Biomes

earthworms, termites, rodents etc., help in and bio-diversity is basically a result of forests

exposing the new surfaces to chemical attack (vegetation) and forests depend upon the

and assists in the penetration of moisture and depth of weathering mantles. Erosion cannot

air. Human beings by disturbing vegetation, be significant if the rocks are not weathered.

ploughing and cultivating soils, also help in That means, weathering aids mass wasting,

mixing and creating new contacts between erosion and reduction of relief and changes

air, water and minerals in the earth materials. in landforms are a consequence of erosion.

Decaying plant and animal matter help in the Weathering of rocks and deposits helps in

production of humic, carbonic and other the enrichment and concentrations of certain

acids which enhance decay and solubility of valuable ores of iron, manganese, aluminium,

some elements. Plant roots exert a tremendous copper etc., which are of great importance

pressure on the earth materials mechanically for the national economy. Weathering is an

breaking them apart. important process in the formation of soils.

S When rocks undergo weathering, some
PECIAL EFFECTS OF WEATHERING

materials are removed through chemical
Exfoliation or physical leaching by groundwater and

thereby the concentration of remaining
This has already been explained under (valuable) materials increases.  Without
physical weathering processes of unloading, such a weathering taking place, the
thermal contraction and expansion and salt concentration of the same valuable
weathering. Exfoliation is a result but not a material may not be sufficient and
process. Flaking off of more or less curved economically viable to exploit, process and
sheets of shells from over rocks or bedrock refine.  This is what is called enrichment.
results in smooth and rounded surfaces
(Figure 5.3). Exfoliation can occur due to

MASS MOVEMENTS
expansion and contraction induced by
temperature changes. Exfoliation domes and These movements transfer the mass of rock
tors result due to unloading and thermal debris down the slopes under the direct
expansion respectively. influence of gravity. That means, air, water or

Reprint 2025-26



42 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

ice do not carry debris with them from place to the relationships among different types of mass
place but on the other hand the debris may movements, their relative rates of movement
carry with it air, water or ice. The movements and moisture limits.
of mass may range from slow to rapid,
affecting shallow to deep columns of materials Landslides
and include creep, flow, slide and fall.  Gravity These are relatively rapid and perceptible
exerts its force on all matter, both bedrock and movements. The materials involved are relatively
the products of weathering. So, weathering is dry. The size and shape of the detached mass
not a pre-requisite for mass movement though depends on the nature of discontinuities in the
it aids mass movements. Mass movements are rock, the degree of weathering and the steepness

very active over weathered slopes rather than of the slope. Depending upon the type of
movement of materials several types are

over unweathered materials.
identified in this category.

Mass movements are aided by gravity and
Slump is slipping of one or several units of

no geomorphic agent like running water, rock debris with a backward rotation with
glaciers, wind, waves and currents participate respect to the slope over which the movement
in the process of mass movements. That means takes place (Figure 5.4). Rapid rolling or sliding
mass movements do not come under erosion
though there is a shift (aided by gravity) of
materials from one place to another. Materials
over the slopes have their own resistance to
disturbing forces and will yield only when force
is greater than the shearing resistance of the
materials. Weak unconsolidated materials, thinly
bedded rocks, faults, steeply dipping beds,
vertical cliffs or steep slopes, abundant
precipitation and torrential rains and scarcity of Figure 5.4 : Slumping of debris with backward rotation

vegetation etc., favour mass movements. of earth debris without backward rotation of
Several activating causes precede mass mass is known as debris slide. Debris fall is

movements. They are : (i) removal of support nearly a free fall of earth debris from a vertical or

from below to materials above through natural overhanging face. Sliding of individual rock
masses down bedding, joint or fault surfaces

or artificial means; (ii) increase in gradient and
is rockslide. Over steep slopes, rock sliding is

height of slopes; (iii) overloading through
very fast and destructive. Figure 5.5 shows

addition of materials naturally or by artificial
landslide scars over steep slopes. Slides occur

filling; (iv) overloading due to heavy rainfall, as planar failures along discontinuities like
saturation and lubrication of slope materials;
(v)  removal of material or load from over the
original slope surfaces; (vi) occurrence of
earthquakes, explosions or machinery;
(vii) excessive natural seepage; (viii) heavy
drawdown of water from lakes, reservoirs and
rivers leading to slow outflow of water from
under the slopes or river banks; (ix) indis-
criminate removal of natural vegetation.

Heave (heaving up of soils due to frost
growth and other causes), flow and slide are

Figure 5.5 : Landslide scars in Shiwalik Himalayan ranges near
the three forms of movements. Figure 5.5 shows river Sarada at India-Nepal border, Uttar Pradesh

Reprint 2025-26



GEOMORPHIC PROCESSES 43

bedding planes that dip steeply. Rock fall is free by rock debris carried by these geomorphic
falling of rock blocks over any steep slope agents also aids greatly in erosion. By erosion,
keeping itself away from the slope. Rock falls relief degrades, i.e., the landscape is worn
occur from the superficial layers of the rock face, down. That means, though weathering aids
an occurrence that distinguishes it from erosion it is not a pre-condition for erosion to
rockslide which affects materials up to a take place. Weathering, mass-wasting and
substantial depth. erosion are degradational processes. It is

erosion that is largely responsible for
Between mass wasting and mass continuous changes that the earth’s surface
movements, which term do you feel is is undergoing. As indicated in Figure 6.1,
most appropriate?  Why? Can solifluction denudational processes like erosion and
be included under rapid flow movements? transportation are controlled by kinetic energy.
Why it can be and can’t be? The erosion and transportation of earth

materials is brought about by wind, running
water, glaciers, waves and ground water. Of

In our country, debris avalanches and
these the first three agents are controlled by

landslides occur very frequently in the
climatic conditions. They represent three states

Himalayas.  There are many reasons for
of matter —gaseous (wind), liquid (running

this.  One, the Himalayas are tectonically
active.  They are mostly made up of water) and solid (glacier) respectively.

sedimentary rocks and unconsolidated
and semi-consolidated deposits.  The Can you compare the three climatically

slopes are very steep. Compared to the controlled agents?

Himalayas, the Nilgiris bordering
Tamilnadu, Karnataka, Kerala and the The work of the other two agents of
Western Ghats along the west coast are erosion-waves and ground water is not
relatively tectonically stable and are

controlled by climate. In case of waves it is
mostly made up of very hard rocks; but,

the location along the interface of litho and
still, debris avalanches and landslides
occur though not as frequently as in  the hydro sphere — coastal region — that will

Himalayas, in these hills.  Why?  Many determine the work of waves, whereas the

slopes are steeper with almost vertical work of ground water is determined more by
cliffs and escarpments in the Western the lithological character of the region. If the
Ghats and Nilgiris. Mechanical  weathering rocks are permeable and soluble and water
due to temperature changes and ranges is available only then karst topography
is pronounced.  They receive heavy develops. In the next chapter we shall be
amounts of rainfall over short periods. dealing with the landforms produced by each
So, there is almost direct rock fall quite of these agents of erosion.
frequently in these places along with Deposition is a consequence of erosion.
landslides and debris avalanches. The erosional agents loose their velocity and

hence energy on gentler slopes and the
materials carried by them start to settle

EROSION AND DEPOSITION
themselves. In other words, deposition is not

Erosion involves acquisition and transportation actually the work of any agent. The coarser
of rock debris. When massive rocks break materials get deposited first and finer ones
into smaller fragments through weathering later. By deposition depressions get filled up.
and any other process, erosional geomorphic The same erosional agents viz., running water,
agents like running water, groundwater, glaciers, wind, waves and groundwater act as
glaciers, wind and waves remove and aggradational or depositional agents also.
transport it to other places depending upon What happens to the surface of the earth
the dynamics of each of these agents. Abrasion due to erosion and deposition is elaborated

Reprint 2025-26



44 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

in the next chapter on landforms and their Is weathering solely responsible for soil
evolution. formation?  If not, why?

There is a shift of materials in mass
movements as well as in erosion from one Pedology is soil science.  A pedologist is a
place to the other.  So, why can’t both be

soil-scientist.
treated as one and the same?  Can there
be appreciable erosion without rocks
undergoing weathering?

Soil-forming Factors

Five basic factors control the formation of soils:
SOIL FORMATION (i) parent material; (ii) topography; (iii) climate;

(iv) biological activity; (v) time. In fact soil
You see plants growing in soils. You play in forming factors act in union and affect the
the ground and come into contact with soil. action of one another.
You touch and feel soil and soil your clothes
while playing. Can you describe it? Parent Material

Soil is a dynamic medium in which
many chemical, physical and biological Parent material is a passive control factor in

activities go on constantly. Soil is a result soil formation. Parent materials can be any

of decay, it is also the medium for growth. in-situ or on-site weathered rock debris

It is a changing and developing body. It has (residual soils) or transported deposits

many characteristics that fluctuate with the (transported soils). Soil formation depends

seasons. It may be alternatively cold and upon the texture (sizes of debris) and structure

warm or dry and moist.  Biological activity (disposition of individual grains/particles of

is slowed or stopped if the soil becomes too debris) as well as the mineral and chemical

cold or too dry. Organic matter increases composition of the rock debris/deposits.

when leaves fall or grasses die. Nature and rate of weathering and depth of
weathering mantle are important considerations

Process of Soil Formation under parent materials. There may be
differences in soil over similar bedrock and

Soil formation or pedogenesis depends first dissimilar bedrocks may have similar soils
on weathering.  It is this weathering mantle above them.  But when soils are very young
(depth of the weathered material) which is and have not matured these show strong links
the basic input for soil to form. First, the with the type of parent rock. Also, in case of
weathered material or transported deposits some limestone areas, where the weathering
are colonised by bacteria and other inferior processes are specific and peculiar, soils will
plant bodies like mosses and lichens. Also, show clear relation with the parent rock.
several minor organisms may take shelter
within the mantle and deposits. The dead Topography
remains of organisms and plants help in
humus accumulation. Minor grasses and Topography like parent materials is another
ferns may grow; later, bushes and trees will passive control factor. The influence of
start growing through seeds brought in by topography is felt through the amount of
birds and wind. Plant roots penetrate down, exposure of a surface covered by parent
burrowing animals bring up particles, mass materials to sunlight and the amount of
of material becomes porous and sponge-like surface and sub-surface drainage over and
with a capacity to retain water and to permit through the parent materials.  Soils will be thin on
the passage of air and finally a mature soil, a steep slopes and thick over flat upland areas.
complex mixture of mineral and organic Over gentle slopes where erosion is slow and
products forms. percolation of water is good, soil formation is

Reprint 2025-26



GEOMORPHIC PROCESSES 45

very favourable. Soils over flat areas may of the soil. Some organic acids which form
develop a thick layer of clay with good during humification aid in decomposing the
accumulation of organic matter giving the soil minerals of the soil parent materials.
dark colour. Intensity of bacterial activity shows up

differences between soils of cold and warm
Climate climates. Humus accumulates in cold climates

Climate is an important active factor in soil as bacterial growth is slow. With

formation. The climatic elements involved in undecomposed organic matter because of low

soil development are : (i) moisture in terms of bacterial activity, layers of peat develop in sub-

its intensity, frequency and duration of arctic and tundra climates. In humid tropical

precipitation - evaporation and humidity; and equatorial climates, bacterial growth and

(ii) temperature in terms of seasonal and action is intense and dead vegetation is rapidly
diurnal variations. oxidised leaving very low humus content in

Precipitation gives soil its moisture content the soil. Further, bacteria and other soil
which makes the chemical and biological organisms take gaseous nitrogen from the air
activities possible. Excess of water helps in the and convert it into a chemical form that can
downward transportation of soil components be used by plants. This process is known as
through the soil (eluviation) and deposits the nitrogen fixation.  Rhizobium, a type of
same down below (illuviation). In climates like bacteria, lives in the root nodules of leguminous
wet equatorial rainy areas with high rainfall, plants and fixes nitrogen beneficial to the host
not only calcium, sodium, magnesium, plant. The influence of large animals like ants,
potassium etc. but also a major part of silica is termites, earthworms, rodents etc., is
removed from the soil.  Removal of silica from mechanical, but, it is nevertheless important
the soil is known as desilication.  In dry climates, in soil formation as they rework the soil up
because of high temperature, evaporation and down.  In case of earthworms, as they
exceeds precipitation and hence ground water feed on soil, the texture and chemistry of the
is brought up to the surface by capillary action soil that comes out of their body changes.
and in the process the water evaporates leaving
behind salts in the soil. Such salts form into a Time
crust in the soil known as hardpans. In tropical

Time is the third important controlling factor
climates and in areas with intermediate
precipitation conditions, calcium carbonate in soil formation.  The length of time the soil

nodules (kanker) are formed. forming processes operate, determines

Temperature acts in two ways — increasing maturation of soils and profile development. A

or reducing chemical and biological activity. soil becomes mature when all soil-forming

Chemical activity is increased in higher processes act for a sufficiently long time

temperatures, reduced in cooler temperatures developing a profile. Soils developing from

(with an exception of carbonation) and stops recently deposited alluvium or glacial till are
in freezing conditions. That is why, tropical soils considered young and they exhibit no horizons
with higher temperatures show deeper profiles or only poorly developed horizons. No specific
and in the frozen tundra regions soils contain length of time in absolute terms can be fixed
largely mechanically broken materials. for soils to develop and mature.

Biological Activity Is it necessary to separate the process of

The vegetative cover and organisms that occupy soil formation and the soil forming

the parent materials from the beginning and also control factors?

at later stages help in adding organic matter, Why are time, topography and parent
moisture retention, nitrogen etc.  Dead plants material considered as passive control
provide humus, the finely divided organic matter factors in soil formation?

Reprint 2025-26



46 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

  (i) Which one of the following processes is a gradational process?

(a) Deposition (c) Volcanism

(b) Diastrophism (d) Erosion

 (ii) Which one of the following materials is affected by hydration process?

(a) Granite (c) Quartz

(b) Clay (d) Salts

(iii) Debris avalanche can be included in the category of:

(a) Landslides (c) Rapid flow mass movements

(b) Slow flow mass movements (d) Subsidence

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) It is weathering that is responsible for bio-diversity on the earth. How?

(ii) What are mass movements that are real rapid and perceptible? List.

(iii) What are the various mobile and mighty exogenic geomorphic agents and
what is the prime job they perform?

(iv) Is weathering essential as a pre-requisite in the formation of soils? Why?

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) “Our earth is a playfield for two opposing groups of geomorphic processes.”
Discuss.

(ii) Exogenic geomorphic processes derive their ultimate energy from the sun’s
heat. Explain.

(iii) Are physical and chemical weathering processes independent of each
other? If not, why? Explain with examples.

(iv) How do you distinguish between the process of soil formation and soil-
forming factors?  What is the role of climate and biological activity as two
important control factors in the formation of soils?

Project Work

Depending upon the topography and materials around you, observe and record
climate, possible weathering process and soil contents and characteristics.

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

LANDFORMS AND THEIR

EVOLUTION

fter weathering processes have had part of the earth’s surface from one landform into

A their actions on the earth materials another or transformation of individual
making up the surface of the earth, the landforms after they are once formed.  That

geomorphic agents like running water, ground means, each and every landform has a history
water, wind, glaciers, waves perform erosion. of development and changes through time. A
It is already known to you that erosion causes landmass passes through stages of development
changes on the surface of the earth. Deposition somewhat comparable to the stages of life —
follows erosion and because of deposition too, youth, mature and old age.
changes occur on the surface of the earth.

As this chapter deals with landforms and What are the two important aspects of
their evolution ‘first’ start with the question, the evolution of landforms?
what is a landform? In simple words, small to
medium tracts or parcels of the earth’s surface
are called landforms. RUNNING WATER

In humid regions, which receive heavy rainfall
If landform is a small to medium sized

running water is considered the most important
part of the surface of the earth, what is a

of the geomorphic agents in bringing about
landscape?

the degradation of the land surface. There are
two components of running water. One is

Several related landforms together make
overland flow on general land surface as a

up landscapes, (large tracts of earth’s surface).
sheet.  Another is linear flow as streams and

Each landform has its own physical shape,
size, materials and is a result of the action of rivers in valleys. Most of the erosional landforms

certain geomorphic processes and agent(s). made by running water are associated with

Actions of most of the geomorphic processes vigorous and youthful rivers flowing over steep

and agents are slow, and hence the results gradients. With time, stream channels over

take a long time to take shape. Every landform steep gradients turn gentler due to continued

has a beginning. Landforms once formed may erosion, and as a consequence, lose their

change in their shape, size and nature slowly velocity, facilitating active deposition. There

or fast due to continued action of geomorphic may be depositional forms associated with

processes and agents. streams flowing over steep slopes. But these
Due to changes in climatic conditions and phenomena will be on a small scale compared

vertical or horizontal movements of land- to those associated with rivers flowing over
masses, either the intensity of processes or the medium to gentle slopes. The gentler the river
processes themselves might change leading to channels in gradient or slope, the greater is
new modifications in the landforms. Evolution the deposition. When the stream beds turn
here implies stages of transformation of either a gentler due to continued erosion, downward

Reprint 2025-26



48 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

cutting becomes less dominant and lateral Mature
erosion of banks increases and as a

During this stage streams are plenty with good
consequence the hills and valleys are reduced

integration. The valleys are still V-shaped but
to plains.

deep; trunk streams are broad enough to have
wider floodplains within which streams may

Is complete reduction of relief of a high
flow in meanders confined within the valley.

land mass possible?
The flat and broad inter stream areas and
swamps and marshes of youth disappear and

Overland flow causes sheet erosion.
the stream divides turn sharp. Waterfalls and

Depending upon irregularities of the land
rapids disappear.

surface, the overland flow may concentrate into
narrow to wide paths. Because of the sheer

Old
friction of the column of flowing water, minor
or major quantities of materials from the Smaller tributaries during old age are few
surface of the land are removed in the direction with gentle gradients. Streams meander freely
of flow and gradually small and narrow rills over vast floodplains showing natural levees,
will form. These rills will gradually develop into oxbow lakes, etc. Divides are broad and flat
long and wide gullies; the gullies will further with lakes, swamps and marshes. Most of
deepen, widen, lengthen and unite to give the landscape is at or slightly above sea level.
rise to a network of valleys. In the early stages,
down-cutting dominates during which EROSIONAL LANDFORMS
irregularities such as waterfalls and cascades
will be removed. In the middle stages, streams

Valleys
cut their beds slower, and lateral erosion of
valley sides becomes severe. Gradually, the Valleys start as small and narrow rills; the rills
valley sides are reduced to lower and lower will gradually develop into long and wide
slopes. The divides between drainage basins gullies; the gullies will further deepen, widen
are likewise lowered until they are almost and lengthen to give rise to valleys. Depending
completely flattened leaving finally, a lowland upon dimensions and shape, many types of
of faint relief with some low resistant remnants valleys like V-shaped valley, gorge, canyon,
called monadnocks standing out here and etc. can be recognised. A gorge is a deep valley
there. This type of plain forming as a result of with very steep to straight sides (Figure 6.1)
stream erosion is called a peneplain (an almost and a canyon is characterised by steep
plain). The characteristics of each of the stages step-like side slopes (Figure 6.2) and may be
of landscapes developing in running water as deep as a gorge. A gorge is almost equal in
regimes may be summarised as follows: width at its top as well as its bottom. In

contrast, a canyon is wider at its top than at
Youth its bottom. In fact, a canyon is a variant of

Streams are few during this stage with poor gorge. Valley types depend upon the type and

integration and flow over original slopes structure of rocks in which they form. For

showing shallow V-shaped valleys with no example, canyons commonly form in

floodplains or with very narrow floodplains horizontal bedded sedimentary rocks and

along trunk streams. Streams divides are gorges form in hard rocks.

broad and flat with marshes, swamp and
Potholes and Plunge Pools

lakes. Meanders if present develop over these
broad upland surfaces. These meanders may Over the rocky beds of hill-streams more or less
eventually entrench themselves into the circular depressions called potholes form
uplands. Waterfalls and rapids may exist where because of stream erosion aided by the
local hard rock bodies are exposed. abrasion of rock fragments. Once a small and

Reprint 2025-26



##6##
LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION 49

waterfalls also, large potholes, quite deep and
wide, form because of the sheer impact of water
and rotation of boulders. Such large and deep
holes at the base of waterfalls are called plunge
pools.

Incised or Entrenched Meanders

In streams that flow rapidly over steep
gradients, normally erosion is concentrated
on the bottom of the stream channel. Also, in
the case of steep gradient streams, lateral
erosion on the sides of the valleys is not much
when compared to the streams flowing on
low and gentle slopes. Because of active lateral
erosion, streams flowing over gentle slopes,
develop sinuous or meandering courses. It is
common to find meandering courses over
floodplains and delta plains where stream
gradients are very gentle. But very deep and
wide meanders can also be found cut in hard
rocks. Such meanders are called incised or
entrenched meanders (Figure 6.2).

River Terraces

River terraces are surfaces marking old valley
floor or floodplain levels. They may be bedrock

Figure 6.1 : The Valley of Kaveri river near Hogenekal, surfaces without any alluvial cover or alluvial
Dharmapuri district, Tamil Nadu in the form of gorge terraces consisting of stream deposits. River

terraces are basically products of erosion as
they result due to vertical erosion by the
stream into its own depositional floodplain.
There can be a number of such terraces at
different heights indicating former river bed
levels. The river terraces may occur at the
same elevation on either side of the rivers in
which case they are called paired terraces..

DEPOSITIONAL LANDFORMS

Figure 6.2 : An entrenched meander loop of river Alluvial Fans
Colorado in USA showing step-like side slopes of

its valley typical of a canyon Alluvial fans (Figure 6.3) are formed when
streams flowing from higher levels break into

shallow depression forms, pebbles and foot slope plains of low gradient. Normally
boulders get collected in those depressions and very coarse load is carried by streams flowing
get rotated by flowing water and consequently over mountain slopes. This load becomes too
the depressions grow in dimensions. A series heavy for the streams to be carried over
of such depressions eventually join and the gentler gradients and gets dumped and
stream valley gets deepened. At the foot of spread as a broad low to high cone shaped

Reprint 2025-26



50 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

deposit called alluvial fan. Usually, the accumulates as a low cone. Unlike in alluvial
streams which flow over fans are not confined fans, the deposits making up deltas are very
to their original channels for long and shift well sorted with clear stratification. The
their position across the fan forming many coarsest materials settle out first and the finer
channels called distributaries. Alluvial fans in fractions like silts and clays are carried out
humid areas show normally low cones with into the sea. As the delta grows, the river
gentle slope from head to toe and they appear distributaries continue to increase in length
as high cones with steep slope in arid and (Figure 6.4) and delta continues to build up
semi-arid climates. into the sea.

Floodplains, Natural Levees and Point Bars

Deposition develops a floodplain just as
erosion makes valleys. Floodplain is a major
landform of river deposition. Large sized
materials are deposited first when stream
channel breaks into a gentle slope. Thus,
normally, fine sized materials like sand, silt
and clay are carried by relatively slow
moving waters in gentler channels usually
found in the plains and deposited over the
bed and when the waters spill over the

Figure 6.3 : An alluvial fan deposited by a hill stream on
the way to Amarnath, Jammu and Kashmir banks during flooding above the bed.

A river bed made of river deposits is the active
floodplain. The floodplain above the bank is

Deltas inactive floodplain.  Inactive floodplain above
Deltas are like alluvial fans but develop at a the banks basically contain two types of
different location. The load carried by the deposits — flood deposits and channel
rivers is dumped and spread into the sea. If deposits. In plains, channels shift laterally
this load is not carried away far into the sea and change their courses occasionally leaving
or distributed along the coast, it spreads and cut-off courses which get filled up gradually.

Such areas over flood plains built up by
abandoned or cut-off channels contain coarse
deposits. The flood deposits of spilled waters
carry relatively finer materials like silt and
clay. The flood plains in a delta are called
delta plains.

Figure 6.4 : A satellite view of part of Krishna river
delta, Andhra Pradesh Figure 6.5 : Natural levee and point bars

Reprint 2025-26



LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION 51

Natural levees and point bars (Figure 6.5)
are some of the important landforms found
associated with floodplains. Natural levees are
found along the banks of large rivers. They are
low, linear and parallel ridges of coarse deposits
along the banks of rivers, quite often cut into
individual mounds. Point bars are also known
as meander bars. They are found on the
concave side of meanders of large rivers and
are sediments deposited in a linear fashion by
flowing waters along the bank. They are almost
uniform in profile and in width and contain mixed
sizes of sediments.

In what way do natural levees differ from
point bars?

Meanders

In large flood and delta plains, rivers rarely
flow in straight courses. Loop-like channel
patterns called meanders develop over flood
and delta plains (Figure 6.6).

Figure 6.7 : Meander growth and cut-off loops and
slip-off and undercut banks

the banks slowly get transformed into a small
curvature in the banks; the curvature deepens
due to deposition on the inside of the curve
and erosion along the bank on the outside. If
there is no deposition and no erosion or
undercutting, the tendency to meander is
reduced. Normally, in meanders of large rivers,
there is active deposition along the concave

Figure 6.6 : A satellite scene showing meandering
Burhi Gandak river near Muzaffarpur, Bihar, showing bank and undercutting along the convex bank.

a number of oxbow lakes and cut-offs The concave bank is known as cut-off bank
which shows up as a steep scarp and the

Meander is not a landform but is only a convex bank presents a long, gentle profile
type of channel pattern. This is because of

(Figure 6.7). As meanders grow into deep
(i) propensity of water flowing over very gentle loops, the same may get cut-off due to erosion
gradients to work laterally on the banks; at the inflection points and are left as ox-bow
(ii) unconsolidated nature of alluvial deposits lakes.
making up the banks with many irregularities
which can be used by water exerting pressure GROUNDWATER
laterally; (iii) coriolis force acting on the fluid
water deflecting it like it deflects the wind. Here the interest is not on groundwater as a
When the gradient of the channel becomes resource. Our focus is on the work of
extremely low, water flows leisurely and starts groundwater in the erosion of landmasses and
working laterally. Slight irregularities along evolution of landforms. The surface water

Reprint 2025-26



52 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Figure 6.8 : Various karst features

percolates well when the rocks are permeable, produced by the action of groundwater
thinly bedded and highly jointed and cracked. through the processes of solution and
After vertically going down to some depth, the deposition is called Karst topography after the
water under the ground flows horizontally typical topography developed in limestone
through the bedding planes, joints or through rocks of Karst region in the Balkans adjacent
the materials themselves. It is this downward to Adriatic sea.
and horizontal movement of water which The karst topography is also characterised
causes the rocks to erode. Physical or by erosional and depositional landforms.
mechanical removal of materials by moving
groundwater is insignificant in developing EROSIONAL LANDFORMS

landforms. That is why, the results of the work
of groundwater cannot be seen in all types of Pools, Sinkholes, Lapies and
rocks. But in rocks like limestones or Limestone Pavements
dolomites rich in calcium carbonate, the
surface water as well as groundwater through Small to medium sized round to sub-rounded

the chemical process of solution and shallow depressions called swallow holes form

precipitation deposition develop varieties of on the surface of limestones through solution.

landforms. These two processes of solution Sinkholes are very common in limestone/

and precipitation are active in limestones or karst areas. A sinkhole is an opening more or

dolomites occurring either exclusively or less circular at the top and funnel-shapped

interbedded  with other rocks. Any limestone towards the bottom with sizes varying in area

or dolomitic region showing typical landforms from a few sq. m to a hectare and with depth

Reprint 2025-26



LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION 53

from a less than half a metre to thirty metres Depositional Landforms
or more. Some of these form solely through

Many depositional forms develop within the
solution action (solution sinks) and others

limestone caves. The chief chemical in
might start as solution forms first and if the limestone is calcium carbonate which is easily
bottom of a sinkhole forms the roof of a void soluble in carbonated water (carbon dioxide
or cave underground, it might collapse leaving absorbed rainwater). This calcium carbonate
a large hole opening into a cave or a void is deposited when the water carrying it in
below (collapse sinks). Quite often, sinkholes solution evaporates or loses its carbon dioxide
are covered up with soil mantle and appear as it trickles over rough rock surfaces.
as shallow water pools. Anybody stepping
over such pools would go down like it Stalactites, Stalagmites and Pillars
happens in quicksands in deserts. The term
doline is sometimes used to refer the collapse Stalactites hang as icicles of dif ferent

sinks. Solution sinks are more common than diameters. Normally they are broad at their

collapse sinks. Quite often the surface run- bases and taper towards the free ends

off simply goes down swallow and sink holes showing up in a variety of forms. Stalagmites

and flow as underground streams and re- rise up from the floor of the caves. In fact,

emerge at a distance downstream through a stalagmites form due to dripping water from

cave opening. When sink holes and dolines the surface or through the thin pipe, of the

join together because of slumping of materials stalactite, immediately below it (Figure 6.9).

along their margins or due to roof collapse of Stalagmites may take the shape of a

caves, long, narrow to wide trenches called column, a disc, with either a smooth, rounded

valley sinks or Uvalas form. Gradually, most bulging end or a miniature crater like

of the surface of the limestone is eaten away
by these pits and trenches, leaving it extremely
irregular with a maze of points, grooves and
ridges or lapies. Especially, these ridges or
lapies form due to differential solution activity
along parallel to sub-parallel joints. The lapie
field may eventually turn into somewhat
smooth limestone pavements.

Caves

In areas where there are alternating beds of
rocks (shales, sandstones, quartzites) with
limestones or dolomites in between or in areas
where limestones are dense, massive and
occurring as thick beds, cave formation is
prominent. Water percolates down either
through the materials or through cracks and
joints and moves horizontally along bedding
planes. It is along these bedding planes  that
the limestone dissolves and long and narrow
to wide gaps called caves result. There can
be a maze of caves at different elevations
depending upon the limestone beds and
intervening rocks. Caves normally have an
opening through which cave streams are
discharged. Caves having openings at both
the ends are called tunnels. Figure 6.9 : Stalactites and stalagmites in limestone caves

Reprint 2025-26



54 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

depression. The stalagmite and stalactites fragments) get dragged along the floors or sides
eventually fuse to give rise to columns and of the valleys and cause great damage through
pillars of different diameters. abrasion and plucking. Glaciers can cause

significant damage to even un-weathered rocks
GLACIERS and can reduce high mountains into low hills

and plains.
Masses of ice moving as sheets over the land

As glaciers continue to move, debris gets
(continental glacier or piedmont glacier if a

removed, divides get lowered and eventually
vast sheet of ice is spread over the plains at

the slope is reduced to such an extent that
the foot of mountains) or as linear flows down

glaciers will stop moving leaving only a mass
the slopes of mountains in broad trough-like

of low hills and vast outwash plains along
valleys (mountain and valley glaciers) are

with other depositional features. Figures 6.11
called glaciers (Figure 6.10). The movement of

and 6.12 show various glacial erosional and
glaciers is slow unlike water flow. The

depositional forms described in the text.
movement could be a few centimetres to a
few metres a day or even less or more. Glaciers

EROSIONAL LANDFORMS
move basically because of the force of gravity.

Cirque

Cirques are the most common of landforms
in glaciated mountains.  The cirques quite
often are found at the heads of glacial valleys.
The accumulated ice cuts these cirques while
moving down the mountain tops. They are
deep, long and wide troughs or basins with
very steep concave to vertically dropping high
walls at its head as well as sides. A lake of
water can be seen quite often within the
cirques after the glacier disappears. Such
lakes are called cirque or tarn lakes. There

Figure 6.10 : A glacier in its valley can be two or more cirques one leading into
another down below in a stepped sequence.

We have many glaciers in our country
Horns and Serrated Ridges

moving down the slopes and valleys in
Himalayas. Higher reaches of Uttaranchal, Horns form through head ward erosion of
Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and the cirque walls. If three or more radiating
Kashmir, are places to see some of them. glaciers cut headward until their cirques meet,
Do you know where one can see river high, sharp pointed and steep sided peaks
Bhagirathi is basically fed by meltwaters called horns form. The divides between cirque
from under the snout (Gaumukh) of the

side walls or head walls get narrow because
Gangotri glacier.  In fact, Alkapuri glacier

of progressive erosion and turn into serrated
feeds waters to Alakananda river. Rivers
Alkananda and Bhagirathi join to make or saw-toothed ridges sometimes referred to

river Ganga near Deoprayag. as arêtes with very sharp crest and a zig-zag
outline.

Erosion by glaciers is tremendous because The highest peak in the Alps, Matterhorn
of friction caused by sheer weight of the ice. and the highest peak in the Himalayas,

The material plucked from the land by glaciers Everest are in fact horns formed through

(usually large-sized angular blocks and headward erosion of radiating cirques.

Reprint 2025-26



LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION 55

Figure 6.11 : Some glacial erosional and depositional forms (adapted and modified from Spencer, 1962)

Glacial Valleys/Troughs Depositional Landforms

Glaciated valleys are trough-like and U- The unassorted coarse and fine debris
shaped with broad floors and relatively dropped by the melting glaciers is called glacial
smooth, and steep sides. The valleys may till. Most of the rock fragments in till are
contain littered debris or debris shaped as angular to sub-angular in form. Streams form
moraines with swampy appearance. There by melting ice at the bottom, sides or lower
may be lakes gouged out of rocky floor or ends of glaciers.  Some amount of rock debris
formed by debris within the valleys. There small enough to be carried by such melt-
can be hanging valleys at an elevation on one water streams is washed down and deposited.
or both sides of the main glacial valley. The Such glacio-fluvial deposits are called
faces of divides or spurs of such hanging outwash deposits. Unlike till deposits, the
valleys opening into main glacial valleys are outwash deposits are roughly stratified and
quite often truncated to give them an assorted. The rock fragments in outwash
appearance like triangular facets. Very deep deposits are somewhat rounded at their edges.

glacial troughs filled with sea water and Figure 6.12 shows a few depositional

making up shorelines (in high latitudes) are landforms commonly found in glaciated areas.

called fjords/fiords.
Moraines

What are the basic differences between
They are long ridges of deposits of glacial till.

glacial valleys and river valleys?
Terminal moraines are long ridges of debris

Reprint 2025-26



56 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Figure  6.12 : A panoramic diagram of glacial landscape with various  depositional landforms
(adapted and modified from Spencer, 1962)

deposited at the end (toe) of the glaciers. Lateral over the ground (not in a valley cut in the
moraines form along the sides parallel to the ground) with ice forming its banks. Very
glacial valleys. The lateral moraines may join a coarse materials like boulders and blocks
terminal moraine forming a horse-shoe shaped along with some minor fractions of rock debris
ridge (Fig. 6.11). There can be many lateral carried into this stream settle in the valley of
moraines on either side in a glacial valley. These ice beneath the glacier and after the ice melts
moraines partly or fully owe their origin to can be found as a sinuous ridge called esker.
glacio-fluvial waters pushing up materials to
the sides of glaciers. Many valley glaciers Outwash Plains
retreating rapidly leave an irregular sheet of

The plains at the foot of the glacial mountains
till over their valley floors. Such deposits varying

or beyond the limits of continental ice sheets
greatly in thickness and in surface topography

are covered with glacio-fluvial deposits in the
are called ground moraines. The moraine in the

form of broad flat alluvial fans which may
centre of the glacial valley flanked by lateral

join to form outwash plains of gravel, silt,
moraines is called medial moraine. They are

sand and clay.
imperfectly formed as compared to lateral
moraines. Sometimes medial moraines are

Distinguish between river alluvial plains
indistinguishable from ground moraines. and glacial outwash plains.

Eskers
Drumlins

When glaciers melt in summer, the water
flows on the surface of the ice or seeps down Drumlins are smooth oval shaped ridge-like
along the margins or even moves through features composed mainly of glacial till with
holes in the ice. These waters accumulate some masses of gravel and sand. The long
beneath the glacier and flow like streams in axes of drumlins are parallel to the direction
a channel beneath the ice. Such streams flow of ice movement. They may measure up to 1

Reprint 2025-26



LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION 57

km in length and 30 m or so in height. One and gently sloping sedimentary coasts
end of the drumlins facing the glacier called (emerged coasts).
the stoss end is blunter and steeper than the
other end called tail. The drumlins form due HIGH ROCKY COASTS

to dumping of rock debris beneath heavily Along the high rocky coasts, the rivers appear
loaded ice through fissures in the glacier. The to have been drowned with highly irregular
stoss end gets blunted due to pushing by coastline. The coastline appears highly indented
moving ice. Drumlins give an indication of

with extension of water into the land where
direction of glacier movement.

glacial valleys (fjords) are present. The hill sides
drop off sharply into the water. Shores do not

What is the difference between till and
show any depositional landforms initially.

alluvium?
Erosion features dominate.

Along high rocky coasts, waves break with

WAVES AND CURRENTS great force against the land shaping the hill
sides into cliffs. With constant pounding by

Coastal processes are the most dynamic and waves, the cliffs recede leaving a wave-cut
hence most destructive. So, don’t you think platform in front of the sea cliff. Waves
it is important to know about the coastal gradually minimise the irregularities along
processes and forms? the shore.

Some of the changes along the coasts take The materials which fall off, and removed
place very fast. At one place, there can be from the sea cliffs, gradually break into
erosion in one season and deposition in smaller fragments and roll to roundness, will
another. Most of the changes along the coasts get deposited in the of fshore. After a
are accomplished by waves. When waves considerable period of cliff development and
break, the water is thrown with great force retreat when coastline turns somewhat
onto the shore, and simultaneously, there is smooth, with the addition of some more
a great churning of sediments on the sea material to this deposit in the offshore, a
bottom. Constant impact of breaking waves wave-built terrace would develop in front of
drastically affects the coasts.  Storm waves wave-cut terrace. As the erosion along the
and tsunami waves can cause far-reaching coast takes place a good supply material
changes in a short period of time than normal becomes available to longshore currents and
breaking waves. As wave environment waves to deposit them as beaches along the
changes, the intensity of the force of breaking shore and as bars (long ridges of sand and/
waves changes. or shingle parallel to the coast) in the nearshore

zone. Bars are submerged features and when
Do you know about the generating forces bars show up above water, they are called
behind waves and currents?  If not, refer barrier bars. Barrier bar which get keyed up
to the chapter on movements in ocean to the headland of a bay is called a spit.  When
waters. barrier bars and spits form at the mouth of a

bay and block it, a lagoon forms. The lagoons
Other than the action of waves, the coastal

would gradually get filled up by sediments
landforms depend upon (i) the configuration

from the land giving rise to a coastal plain.
of land and sea floor; (ii) whether the coast is
advancing (emerging) seaward or retreating LOW SEDIMENTARY COASTS
(submerging) landward. Assuming sea level
to be constant, two types of coasts Along low sedimentary coasts the rivers
are considered to explain the concept of appear to extend their length by building
evolution of coastal landforms: (i) high, rocky coastal plains and deltas. The coastline
coasts (submerged coasts); (ii) low, smooth appears smooth with occasional incursions

Reprint 2025-26



58 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

of water in the form of lagoons and tidal creeks. some remnants of rock standing isolated as
The land slopes gently into the water. Marshes small islands just off the shore. Such resistant
and swamps may abound along the coasts. masses of rock, originally parts of a cliff or
Depositional features dominate. hill are called sea stacks. Like all other

When waves break over a gently sloping features, sea stacks are also temporary and
sedimentary coast, the bottom sediments get eventually coastal hills and cliffs will disappear
churned and move readily building bars, because of wave erosion giving rise to narrow
barrier bars, spits and lagoons. Lagoons coastal plains, and with onrush of deposits
would eventually turn into a swamp which from over the land behind may get covered
would subsequently turn into a coastal plain. up by alluvium or may get covered up by
The maintenance of these depositional features shingle or sand to form a wide beach.
depends upon the steady supply of materials.
Storm and tsunami waves cause drastic DEPOSITIONAL LANDFORMS

changes irrespective of supply of sediments.
Large rivers which bring lots of sediments Beaches and Dunes
build deltas along low sedimentary coasts. Beaches are characteristic of shorelines that

are dominated by deposition, but may occur
The west coast of our country is a high as patches along even the rugged shores. Most
rocky retreating coast.  Erosional forms of the sediment making up the beaches comes
dominate in the west coast.  The east from land carried by the streams and rivers
coast of India is a low sedimentary coast. or from wave erosion. Beaches are temporary
Depositional forms dominate in the east features. The sandy beach which appears so
coast. permanent may be reduced to a very narrow

strip of coarse pebbles in some other season.
Most of the beaches are made up of sand

What are the various differences sized materials. Beaches called shingle
between a high rocky coast and a low beaches contain excessively small pebbles and
sedimentary coast in terms of processes even cobbles.
and landforms? Just behind the beach, the sands lifted and

winnowed from over the beach surfaces
EROSIONAL LANDFORMS will be deposited as sand dunes. Sand dunes

forming long ridges parallel to the coastline are
Cliffs, Terraces, Caves and Stacks very common along low sedimentary coasts.

Wave-cut cliffs and terraces are two forms Bars, Barriers and Spits
usually found where erosion is the dominant
shore process. Almost all sea cliffs are steep A ridge of sand and shingle formed in the sea
and may range from a few m to 30 m or even in the off-shore zone lying approximately
more. At the foot of such cliffs there may be parallel to the coast is called an off-shore bar.
a flat or gently sloping platform covered by An off-shore bar which is exposed due to
rock debris derived from the sea cliff behind. further addition of sand is termed a barrier
Such platforms occurring at elevations above bar. The off-shore bars and barriers commonly
the average height of waves is called a wave- form across the mouth of a river or at the
cut terrace. The lashing of waves against the entrance of a bay. Sometimes such barrier bars
base of the cliff and the rock debris that gets get keyed up to one end of the bay when they
smashed against the cliff along with lashing are called spits (Figure 6.13). Spits may also
waves create hollows and these hollows get develop attached to headlands/hills. The
widened and deepened to form sea caves. The barriers, bars and spits at the mouth of the
roofs of caves collapse and the sea cliffs recede bay gradually extend leaving only a small
further inland. Retreat of the cliff may leave opening of the bay into the sea and the bay

Reprint 2025-26



LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION 59

are storm winds which are very destructive.
Winds cause deflation, abrasion and impact.
Deflation includes lifting and removal of dust and
smaller particles from the surface of rocks.  In
the transportation process sand and silt act as
effective tools to abrade the land surface. The
impact is simply sheer force of momentum which
occurs when sand is blown into or against a rock
surface. It is similar to sand-blasting operation.
The wind action creates a number of interesting
erosional and depositional features in
the deserts.

In fact, many features of deserts owe their
Figure 6.13 : A satellite picture of a part of formation to mass wasting and running water

Godavari river delta showing a spit
as sheet floods. Though rain is scarce in
deserts, it comes down torrentially in a short

will eventually develop into a lagoon. The
period of time. The desert rocks devoid of

lagoons get filled up gradually by sediment
vegetation, exposed to mechanical and

coming from the land or from the beach itself
chemical weathering processes due to drastic

(aided by wind) and a broad and wide coastal
diurnal temperature changes, decay faster

plain may develop replacing a lagoon.
and the torrential rains help in removing the
weathered materials easily. That means, the

Do you know, the coastal off-shore bars weathered debris in deserts is moved by not
offer the first buffer or defence against only wind but also by rain/sheet wash. The
storm or tsunami by absorbing most of wind moves fine materials and general mass
their destructive force.  Then come the erosion is accomplished mainly through sheet
barriers, beaches, beach dunes and floods or sheet wash. Stream channels in
mangroves, if any, to absorb the desert areas are broad, smooth and indefinite
destructive force of storm and tsunami and flow for a brief time after rains.
waves.  So, if we do anything which
disturbs the ‘sediment budget’ and the EROSIONAL LANDFORMS

mangroves along the coast, these coastal
forms will get eroded away leaving human Pediments and Pediplains
habitations to bear first strike of storm Landscape evolution in deserts is primarily
and tsunami waves. concerned with the formation and extension

of pediments. Gently inclined rocky floors
close to the mountains at their foot with or

WINDS without a thin cover of debris, are called

Wind is one of the two dominant agents in hot pediments. Such rocky floors form through

deserts. The desert floors get heated up too the erosion of mountain front through a

much and too quickly because of being dry combination of lateral erosion by streams and
and barren. The heated floors heat up the air sheet flooding.
directly above them and result in upward Erosion starts along the steep margins of
movements in the hot lighter air with the landmass or the steep sides of the
turbulence, and any obstructions in its path tectonically controlled steep incision features
sets up eddies, whirlwinds, updrafts and over the landmass. Once, pediments are
downdrafts. Winds also move along the desert formed with a steep wash slope followed by
floors with great speed and the obstructions in cliff or free face above it, the steep wash slope
their path create turbulence. Of course, there and free face retreat backwards. This method

Reprint 2025-26



60 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

of erosion is termed as parallel retreat of slopes
List the erosional features carved out by

through backwasting. So, through parallel wind action and action of sheet floods.
retreat of slopes, the pediments extend
backwards at the expense of mountain front,
and gradually, the mountain gets reduced Depositional Landforms

leaving an inselberg which is a remnant of the
Wind is a good sorting agent. Depending upon

mountain. That’s how the high relief in desert
the velocity of wind, different sizes of grains are

areas is reduced to low featureless plains called
moved along the floors by rolling or saltation

pediplains.
and carried in suspension and in this process
of transportation itself, the materials get sorted.

Playas
When the wind slows or begins to die down,

Plains are by far the most prominent depending upon sizes of grains and their
landforms in the deserts. In basins with critical velocities, the grains will begin to settle.
mountains and hills around and along, the So, in depositional landforms made by wind,
drainage is towards the centre of the basin good sorting of grains can be found. Since
and due to gradual deposition of sediment wind is there everywhere and wherever there
from basin margins, a nearly level plain forms is good source of sand and with constant wind
at the centre of the basin. In times of sufficient directions, depositional features in arid regions
water, this plain is covered up by a shallow can develop anywhere.
water body. Such types of shallow lakes are
called as playas where water is retained only Sand Dunes
for short duration due to evaporation and
quite often the playas contain good deposition Dry hot deserts are good places for sand dune
of salts. The playa plain covered up by salts formation. Obstacles to initiate dune formation
is called alkali flats. are equally important. There can be a great

variety of dune forms (Figure 6.14).
Deflation Hollows and Caves

Weathered mantle from over the rocks or bare
soil, gets blown out by persistent movement
of wind currents in one direction. This process
may create shallow depressions called
deflation hollows. Deflation also creates
numerous small pits or cavities over rock
surfaces. The rock faces suffer impact and
abrasion of wind-borne sand and first
shallow depressions called blow outs are
created, and some of the blow outs become
deeper and wider fit to be called caves.

Mushroom, Table and Pedestal Rocks

Many rock-outcrops in the deserts easily
susceptible to wind deflation and abrasion
are worn out quickly leaving some remnants
of resistant rocks polished beautifully in the
shape of mushroom with a slender stalk and
a broad and rounded pear shaped cap above.
Sometimes, the top surface is broad like a
table top and quite often, the remnants stand

Figure 6.14 : Various types of sand dunes
out like pedestals. Arrows indicate wind direction

Reprint 2025-26



LANDFORMS AND THEIR EVOLUTION 61

Crescent shaped dunes called barchans form when supply of sand is poor and wind
with the points or wings directed away from direction is constant. They appear as long
wind direction i.e., downwind, form where the ridges of considerable length but low in height.
wind direction is constant and moderate and Transverse dunes are aligned perpendicular
where the original surface over which sand is to wind direction. These dunes form when the
moving is almost uniform. Parabolic dunes wind direction is constant and  the source of
form when sandy surfaces are partially covered sand is an elongated feature at right angles to
with vegetation. That means parabolic dunes the wind direction. They may be very long and
are reversed barchans with wind direction low in height. When sand is plenty, quite often,
being the same. Seif is similar to barchan with the regular shaped dunes coalesce and lose
a small difference. Seif has only one wing or their individual characteristics.  Most of the
point. This happens when there is shift in dunes in the deserts shift and a few of them
wind conditions. The lone wings of seifs can will get stabilised especially near human
grow very long and high. Longitudinal dunes habitations.

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

  (i) In which of the following stages of landform development, downward cutting
is dominated?

(a) Youth stage (c) Early mature stage

(b) Late mature stage (d) Old stage

 (ii) A deep valley characterised by steep step-like side slopes is known as

(a) U-shaped valley (c) Blind valley

(b) Gorge (d) Canyon

(iii) In which one of the following regions the chemical weathering process is
more dominant than the mechanical process?

(a)  Humid region (c) Arid region
(b) Limestone region (d) Glacier region

(iv) Which one of the following sentences best defines the term ‘Lapies’ ?

(a) A small to medium sized shallow depression

(b) A landform whose opening is more or less circular at the top and
funnel shaped towards bottom

(c) A landform formed due to dripping water from surface

(d) An irregular surface with sharp pinnacles, grooves and ridges

(v) A deep, long and wide trough or basin with very steep concave high walls
at its head as well as in sides is known as:

(a) Cirque (c) Lateral Moraine

(b) Glacial valley (d) Esker

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) What do incised meanders in rocks and meanders in plains of alluvium
indicate?

Reprint 2025-26



62 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

(ii) Explain the evolution of valley sinks or uvalas.

(iii) Underground flow of water is more common than surface run-off in
limestone areas. Why?

(iv) Glacial valleys show up many linear depositional forms.  Give their
locations and names.

(v) How does wind perform its task in desert areas?  Is it the only agent
responsible for the erosional features in the deserts?

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) Running water is by far the most dominating geomorphic agent in shaping
the earth’s surface in humid as well as in arid climates. Explain.

(ii) Limestones behave differently in humid and arid climates. Why?  What is
the dominant and almost exclusive geomorphic process in limestone areas
and what are its results?

(iii) How do glaciers accomplish the work of reducing high mountains into low
hills and plains?

Project Work

Identify the landforms, materials and processes around your area.

Reprint 2025-26



UNIT

IV

CLIMATE

This unit deals with

• Atmosphere — compositions and structure; elements of
weather and climate

• Insolation — angle of incidence and distribution; heat budget
of the earth — heating and cooling of atmosphere (conduction,
convection, terrestrial radiation, advection); temperature — factors
controlling temperature; distribution of temperature — horizontal
and vertical; inversion of temperature

• Pressure — pressure belts; winds-planetary seasonal and local,
air masses and fronts; tropical and extra tropical cyclones

• Precipitation — evaporation; condensation — dew, frost, fog,
mist and cloud; rainfall — types and world distributon

• World climates — classification (Koeppen), greenhouse effect,
global warming and climatic changes

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

COMPOSITION AND STRUCTURE

OF ATMOSPHERE

an a person live without air? We eat Gases

C food two - three times a day and drink
Carbon dioxide is meteorologically a very

water more frequently but breathe
important gas as it is transparent to the

every few seconds. Air is essential to the
incoming solar radiation but opaque to the

survival of all  organisms. Some organisms like outgoing terrestrial radiation. It absorbs a part
humans may survive for some time without of terrestrial radiation and reflects back some
food and water but can’t survive even a few part of it towards the earth’s surface. It is
minutes without breathing air. That shows the largely responsible for the green house effect.
reason why we should understand the The volume of other gases is constant but the
atmosphere in greater detail. Atmosphere is a volume of carbon dioxide has been rising in
mixture of different gases and it envelopes the the past few decades mainly because of the
earth all round. It contains life-giving gases like burning of fossil fuels. This has also increased
oxygen for humans and animals and carbon the temperature of the air. Ozone is another
dioxide for plants. The air is an integral part of important component of the atmosphere found
the earth’s mass and 99 per cent of the total between 10 and 50 km above the earth’s
mass of the atmosphere is confined to the surface and acts as a filter and absorbs the
height of 32 km from the earth’s surface. The ultra-violet rays radiating from the sun and
air is colourless and odourless and can be felt prevents them from reaching the surface of the
only when it blows as wind. earth.

Can you imagine what will happen Water Vapour
to us in the absence of ozone in the
atmosphere? Water vapour is also a variable gas in the

atmosphere, which decreases with altitude. In
the warm and wet tropics, it may account for

COMPOSITION OF THE ATMOSPHERE four per cent of the air by volume, while in the
dry and cold areas of desert and polar regions,

The atmosphere is composed of gases, water it may be less than one per cent of the air.
vapour and dust particles. The proportion of Water vapour also decreases from the equator
gases changes in the higher layers of the towards the poles. It also absorbs parts of the
atmosphere in such a way that oxygen will be insolation from the sun and preserves the earth’s
almost in negligible quantity at the height of radiated heat. It thus, acts like a blanket
120 km.  Similarly, carbon dioxide and water allowing the earth neither to become too cold
vapour are found only up to 90 km from the nor too hot. Water vapour also contributes to
surface of the earth. the stability and instability in the air.

Reprint 2025-26



##7##
COMPOSITION AND STRUCTURE OF ATMOSPHERE 65

Dust Particles tropopause. The stratosphere is found above
the tropopause and extends up to a height of

Atmosphere has a sufficient capacity to keep
50 km. One important feature of the

small solid particles, which may originate from
stratosphere is that it contains the ozone layer.

different sources and include sea salts, fine
This layer absorbs ultra-violet radiation and

soil, smoke-soot, ash, pollen, dust and
shields life on the earth from intense, harmful

disintegrated particles of meteors. Dust
form of energy.

particles are generally concentrated in the
The mesosphere lies above the stratosphere,

lower layers of the atmosphere; yet,
which extends up to a height of 80 km. In this

convectional air currents may transport them
layer, once again, temperature starts decreasing

to great heights. The higher concentration of
with the increase in altitude and reaches up to

dust particles is found in subtropical and
minus 100°C at the height of 80 km. The upper

temperate regions due to dry winds in
limit of mesosphere is known as the mesopause.

comparison to equatorial and polar regions.
The ionosphere is located between 80 and 400

Dust and salt particles act as  hygroscopic
km above the mesopause. It contains electrically

nuclei around which water vapour condenses
charged particles known as ions, and hence, it

to produce clouds.
is known as ionosphere. Radio waves

S transmitted from the earth are reflected back
TRUCTURE OF THE ATMOSPHERE

to the earth by this layer. Temperature here
The atmosphere consists of different layers starts increasing with height. The uppermost
with varying density and temperature. Density layer of the atmosphere above the thermosphere
is highest near the surface of the earth and
decreases with increasing altitude.  The
column of atmosphere is divided into five
dif ferent layers depending upon the
temperature condition. They are: troposphere,
stratosphere, mesosphere, thermosphere and
exosphere.

The troposphere is the lowermost layer of
the atmosphere. Its average height is 13 km
and extends roughly to a height of 8 km near
the poles and about 18 km at the equator.
Thickness of the troposphere is greatest at
the equator because heat is transported to
great heights by strong convectional currents.
This layer contains dust particles and water
vapour. All changes in climate and weather
take place in this layer. The temperature in
this layer decreases at the rate of 1°C for every
165m of height. This is the most important
layer for all biological activity.

The zone separating the tropsophere from
stratosphere is known as the tropopause. The
air temperature at the tropopause is about
minus 800C over the equator and about minus
45oC over the poles.  The temperature here is
nearly constant, and hence, it is called the Figure 7.1 : Structure of atmosphere

Reprint 2025-26



66 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

is known as the exosphere. This is the highest layer Elements of Weather and Climate
but very little is known about it. Whatever contents
are there, these are extremely rarefied in this layer, The main elements of atmosphere which are

and it gradually merges with the outer space. subject to change and which influence human

Although all layers of the atmosphere must be life on earth are temperature, pressure, winds,
exercising influence on us, geographers are humidity, clouds and precipitation. These
concerned with the first two layers of elements have been dealt in detail in
the atmosphere. Chapters 8, 9 and 10.

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

  (i) Which one of the following gases constitutes the major portion of the
atmosphere?

(a) Oxygen (c) Argon

(b) Nitrogen (d) Carbon dioxide

 (ii) Atmospheric layer important for human beings is:

(a) Stratosphere (c) Troposphere

(b) Mesosphere (d) Ionosphere

(iii) Sea salt, pollen, ash, smoke soot, fine soil — these are associated with:

(a) Gases (c) Water vapour

(b) Dust particles (d) Meteors

(iv) Oxygen gas is in negligible quantity at the height of atmosphere:

(a) 90 km (c) 100 km

(b) 120 km (d) 150 km

(v) Which one of the following gases is transparent to incoming solar radiation
and opaque to outgoing terrestrial radiation?

(a) Oxygen (c) Helium

(b) Nitrogen (d) Carbon dioxide

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) What do you understand by atmosphere?

(ii) What are the elements of weather and climate?

(iii) Describe the composition of atmosphere.

(iv) Why is troposphere the most important of all the layers of the atmosphere?

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) Describe the composition of the atmosphere.

(ii) Draw a suitable diagram for the structure of the atmosphere and label it
and describe it.

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

SOLAR RADIATION, HEAT BALANCE

AND TEMPERATURE

o you feel air around you? Do you The solar output received at the top of the

D know that we live at the bottom of a atmosphere varies slightly in a year due to the
huge pile of air? We inhale and exhale variations in the distance between the earth and

but we feel the air when it is  in motion. It means the sun. During its revolution around the sun,
air in motion is wind. You have already learnt the earth is farthest from the sun (152 million
about the fact that earth is surrounded by air km) on 4th July. This position of the earth is
all around. This envelop of air is atmosphere called aphelion. On 3rd January, the earth is
which is composed of numerous gases. These the nearest to the sun (147 million km). This
gases support life over the earth’s surface. position is called perihelion. Therefore, the

The earth receives almost all of its energy annual insolation received by the earth on 3rd
from the sun. The earth in turn radiates back January is slightly more than the amount
to space the energy received from the sun. As received on 4th July. However, the effect of this
a result, the earth neither warms up nor does variation in the solar output is masked by
it get cooled over a period of time. Thus, the other factors like the distribution of land and
amount of heat received by different parts of sea and the atmospheric circulation. Hence, this
the earth is not the same. This variation causes variation in the solar output does not have
pressure differences in the atmosphere. This great effect on daily weather changes on the
leads to transfer of heat from one region to the surface of the earth.
other by winds. This chapter explains the

Variability of Insolation at
process of heating and cooling of the

the Surface of the Earth
atmosphere and the resultant temperature
distribution over the earth’s surface. The amount and the intensity of insolation vary

during a day, in a season and in a year.  The factors
SOLAR RADIATION that cause these variations in insolation are : (i)

the rotation of earth on its axis; (ii)  the angle of
The earth’s surface receives most of its energy inclination of the sun’s rays; (iii) the length of the
in short wavelengths. The energy received by day; (iv) the transparency of the atmosphere; (v)
the earth is known as incoming solar radiation the configuration of land in terms of its aspect.
which in short is termed as insolation. The last two however, have less influence.

As the earth is a geoid resembling a sphere, The fact that the earth’s axis makes an angle
the sun’s rays fall obliquely at the top of the of 66½ with the plane of its orbit round the
atmosphere and the earth intercepts a very sun has a greater influence on the amount of
small portion of the sun’s energy. On an insolation received at different latitudes.
average the earth receives 1.94 calories per sq. The second factor that determines the
cm per minute at the top of its atmosphere. amount of insolation received is the angle of

Reprint 2025-26



68 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

inclination of the rays. This depends on the insolation is received over the subtropical
latitude of a place. The higher the latitude deserts, where the cloudiness is the least.
the less is the angle they make with the surface Equator receives comparatively less insolation
of the earth resulting in slant sun rays. The than the tropics. Generally, at the same
area covered by vertical rays is always less latitude the insolation is more over the
than the slant rays. If more area is covered, continent than over the oceans. In winter, the
the energy gets distributed and the net energy middle and higher latitudes receive less
received per unit area decreases. Moreover, radiation than in summer.
the slant rays are required to pass through
greater depth of the atmosphere resulting in HEATING AND COOLING OF ATMOSPHERE
more absorption, scattering and diffusion.

There are different ways of heating and
cooling of the atmosphere.

The earth after being heated by insolation
transmits the heat to the atmospheric layers near
to the earth in long wave form. The air in contact
with the land gets heated slowly and the upper
layers in contact with the lower layers also get
heated. This process is called conduction.
Conduction takes place when two bodies of
unequal temperature are in contact with one
another, there is a flow of energy from the warmer
to cooler body. The transfer of heat continues
until both the bodies attain the same

Figure 8.1 : Summer Solstice temperature or the contact is broken. Conduction
is important in heating the lower layers of the

The Passage of Solar Radiation atmosphere.
through the Atmosphere The air in contact with the earth rises

The atmosphere is largely transparent to short vertically on heating in the form of currents
wave solar radiation. The incoming solar and further transmits the heat of the
radiation passes through the atmosphere atmsphere. This process of vertical heating
before striking the earth’s surface. Within the of the atmosphere is known as convection.
troposphere water vapour, ozone and other The convective transfer of energy is confined
gases absorb much of the near infrared only to the troposphere.
radiation. The transfer of heat through horizontal

Very small-suspended particles in the movement of air is called advection. Horizontal
troposphere scatter visible spectrum both to movement of the air is relatively more
the space and towards the earth surface. This important than the vertical movement. In
process adds colour to the sky. The red colour middle latitudes, most of dirunal (day and
of the rising and the setting sun and the blue night) variation in daily weather are caused
colour of the sky are the result of scattering by advection alone. In tropical regions
of light within the atmosphere. particularly in northern India during summer

season local winds called ‘loo’ is the outcome
Spatial Distribution of Insolation of advection process.
at the Earth’s Surface

Terrestrial Radiation
The insolation received at the surface varies
from about 320 Watt/m2 in the tropics to The insolation received by the earth is in short
about 70 Watt/m2 in the poles. Maximum waves forms and heats up its surface. The

Reprint 2025-26



##8##
SOLAR RADIATION, HEAT BALANCE AND TEMPERATURE 69

earth after being heated itself becomes a the earth surface. Roughly 35 units are
radiating body and it radiates energy to the reflected back to space even before reaching
atmosphere in long wave form. This energy the earth’s surface. Of these, 27 units are
heats up the atmosphere from below. This reflected back from the top of the clouds and
process is known as terrestrial radiation. 2 units from the snow and ice-covered areas

The long wave radiation is absorbed by of the earth. The reflected amount of radiation
the atmospheric gases particularly by carbon is called the albedo of the earth.
dioxide and the other green house gases. Thus, The remaining 65 units are absorbed,
the atmosphere is indirectly heated by the 14 units within the atmosphere and 51 units
earth’s radiation. by the earth’s surface. The earth radiates

The atmosphere in turn radiates and back 51 units in the form of terrestrial
transmits heat to the space. Finally the amount radiation. Of these, 17 units are radiated
of heat received from the sun is returned to to space directly and the remaining 34 units
space, thereby maintaining constant temperature are absorbed by the atmosphere (6 units
at the earth’s surface and in the atmosphere. absorbed directly by the atmosphere, 9 units

Heat Budget of the Planet Earth through convection and turbulence and 19
units through latent heat of condensation).

Figure 9.2 depicts the heat budget of the 48 units absorbed by the atmosphere
planet earth. The earth as a whole does not (14 units from insolation +34 units from
accumulate or loose heat. It maintains its terrestrial radiation) are also radiated back
temperature. This can happen only if the into space. Thus, the total radiation
amount of heat received in the form of returning from the earth and the atmosphere
insolation equals the amount lost by the earth respectively is 17+48=65 units which
through terrestrial radiation. balance the total of 65 units received from

Consider that the insolation received at the sun. This is termed the heat budget or
the top of the atmosphere is 100 per cent. heat balance of the earth.
While passing through the atmosphere some This explains, why the earth neither warms
amount of energy is reflected, scattered and up nor cools down despite the huge transfer of
absorbed. Only the remaining part reaches heat that takes place.

Figure 8.2 : Heat budget of the earth

Reprint 2025-26



70 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Variation in the Net Heat Budget at the Earth’s the sea, the air-mass circulation; (iv) the
Surface presence of warm and cold ocean currents;

(v) local aspects.
As explained earlier, there are variations in
the amount of radiation received at the earth’s The latitude : The temperature of a place
surface. Some part of the earth has surplus depends on the insolation received. It has been
radiation balance while the other part has explained earlier that the insolation varies
deficit. according to the latitude hence the

Figure 8.3 depicts the latitudinal variation temperature also varies accordingly.
in the net radiation balance of the earth —
the atmosphere system. The figure shows that The altitude : The atmosphere is indirectly
there is a surplus of net radiation balance heated by terrestrial radiation from below.
between 40 degrees north and south and the Therefore, the places near the sea-level record
regions near the poles have a deficit. The higher temperature than the places situated
surplus heat energy from the tropics is at higher elevations. In other words, the
redistributed pole wards and as a result the temperature generally decreases with
tropics do not get progressively heated up increasing height. The rate of decrease of
due to the accumulation of excess heat or temperature with height is termed as the
the high latitudes get permanently frozen due normal lapse rate. It is 6.5°C per 1,000 m.
to excess deficit.

Distance from the sea : Another factor that
influences the temperature is the location of a
place with respect to the sea. Compared to
land, the sea gets heated slowly and loses heat
slowly. Land heats up and cools down quickly.
Therefore, the variation in temperature over the
sea is less compared to land. The places
situated near the sea come under the
moderating influence of the sea and land
breezes which moderate the temperature.

Figure 8.3 : Latitudinal variation in net Air-mass and Ocean currents : Like the land
    radiation balance and sea breezes, the passage of air masses

also affects the temperature. The places,
Temperature which come under the influence of warm air-

The interaction of insolation with the masses experience higher temperature and

atmosphere and the earth’s surface creates the places that come under the influence of

heat which is measured in terms of cold air-masses experience low temperature.

temperature. While heat represents the Similarly, the places located on the coast where

molecular movement of particles comprising the warm ocean currents flow record higher

a substance, the temperature is the temperature than the places located on the

measurement in degrees of how hot (or cold) coast where the cold currents flow.

a thing (or a place) is.
Distribution of Temperature

Factors Controlling Temperature Distribution
The global distribution of temperature can

The temperature of air at any place is well be understood by studying the
influenced by  (i) the latitude of the place; temperature distribution in January and July.
(ii) the altitude of the place; (iii) distance from The temperature distribution is generally

Reprint 2025-26



SOLAR RADIATION, HEAT BALANCE AND TEMPERATURE 71

shown on the map with the help of isotherms. bend towards the north. Over the land the
The Isotherms are lines joining places having temperature decreases sharply and the
equal temperature. Figure 8.4 (a) and (b) show isotherms bend towards south in Europe.
the distribution of surface air temperature in It is much pronounced in the Siberian
the month of January and July. plain. The mean January temperature along

In general the effect of the latitude on 60° E longitude is minus 20° C both at 80° N
temperature is well pronounced on the map, and 50° N latitudes. The mean monthly
as the isotherms are generally parallel to the temperature for January is over 27° C, in
latitude.  The deviation from this general equatorial oceans over 24° C in the tropics
trend is more pronounced in January than and 2° C - 0° C in the middle latitudes
in July, especially in the northern and –18° C to –48° C in the Eurasian
hemisphere. In the northern hemisphere the continental interior.
land surface area is much larger than in the  The effect of the ocean is well pronounced
southern hemisphere. Hence, the effects of in the southern hemisphere. Here the isotherms
land mass and the ocean currents are well are more or less parallel to the latitudes and
pronounced. In January the isotherms the variation in temperature is more gradual
deviate to the north over the ocean and to than in the northern hemisphere. The isotherm
the south over the continent. This can be seen of 20° C, 10° C, and 0° C runs parallel to 35°
on the North Atlantic Ocean. The presence S, 45° S and 60° S latitudes respectively.
of warm ocean currents, Gulf Stream and In July the isotherms generally run
North Atlantic drift, make the Northern parallel to the latitude. The equatorial oceans
Atlantic Ocean warmer and the isotherms record warmer temperature, more than 27°C.

Figure 8.4 (a) : The distribution of surface air temperature in the month of January

Reprint 2025-26



72 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Figure 8.4 (b) : The distribution of surface air temperature in the month of July

Figure 8.5 : The range of temperature between January and July

Reprint 2025-26



SOLAR RADIATION, HEAT BALANCE AND TEMPERATURE 73

Over the land more than 30°C is noticed in the Surface inversion promotes stability in the
subtropical continental region of Asia, along lower layers of the atmosphere. Smoke and
the 30° N latitude. Along the 40° N runs the dust particles get collected beneath the
isotherm of 10° C and along the 40° S the inversion layer and spread horizontally to fill
temperature is 10° C. the lower strata of the atmosphere. Dense fogs

Figure 8.5 shows the range of in mornings are common occurrences
temperature between January and July. The especially during winter season. This inversion
highest range of temperature is more than 60° commonly lasts for few hours until the sun
C over the north-eastern part of Eurasian comes up and beings to warm the earth.
continent. This is due to continentality. The The inversion takes place in hills and
least range of temperature, 3°C, is found mountains due to air drainage. Cold air at the
between 20° S and 15° N. hills and mountains, produced during night,

flows under the influence of gravity. Being
INVERSION OF TEMPERATURE heavy and dense, the cold air acts almost like

Normally, temperature decreases with increase water and moves down the slope to pile up

in elevation. It is called normal lapse rate. At deeply in pockets and valley bottoms with warm

times, the situations is reversed and the air above. This is called air drainage. It protects

normal lapse rate is inverted. It is called plants from frost damages.
Inversion of temperature. Inversion is usually
of short duration but quite common
nonetheless. A long winter night with clear l Plank’s law states that hotter a body,

skies and still air is ideal situation for the more energy it will radiate and

inversion. The heat of the day is radiated off shorter the wavelength of that

during the night, and by early morning hours, radiation.

the earth is cooler than the air above. Over l Specific heat is the energy needed

polar areas, temperature inversion is normal to raise the temperature of one gram

throughout the year. of substance by one Celsius.

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

  (i) The sun is directly overhead at noon on 21st June at:

(a) The equator (c) 23.5° N

(b) 23.5° S (d) 66.5° N

 (ii) In which one of the following cities, are the days the longest?

(a) Tiruvanantpuram (c) Hyderabad

(b) Chandigarh (d) Nagpur

(iii) The atmosphere is mainly heated by the:

(a) Short wave solar radiation (c) Long wave terrestrial radiation

(b) Reflected solar radiation (d) Scattered solar radiation

Reprint 2025-26



74 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

(iv) Make correct pairs from the following two columns.

(i) Insolation      (a) The difference between the mean
temperature of the warmest and the coldest
months

(ii) Albedo      (b) The lines joining the places of equal
temperature

(iii) Isotherm      (c) The incoming solar radiation

(iv) Annual range      (d) The percentage of visible light reflected by
an object

 (v) The main reason that the earth experiences highest temperatures in the
subtropics in the northern hemisphere rather than at the equator is :

(a) Subtropical areas tend to have less cloud cover than equatorial areas.

(b) Subtropical areas have longer day hours in the summer than the
equatorial.

(c) Subtropical areas have an enhanced “green house effect” compared
to equatorial areas.

(d) Subtropical areas are nearer to the oceanic areas than the equatorial
locations.

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) How does the unequal distribution of heat over the planet earth in space
and time cause variations in weather and climate?

(ii) What are the factors that control temperature distribution on the surface
of the earth?

(iii) In India, why is the day temperature maximum in May and why not after
the summer solstice?

(iv) Why is the annual range of temperature high in the Siberian plains?

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) How do the latitude and the tilt in the axis of rotation of the earth affect
the amount of radiation received at the earth’s surface?

(ii) Discuss the processes through which the earth-atmosphere system
maintains heat balance.

(iii) Compare the global distribution of temperature in January over the
northern and the southern hemisphere of the earth.

Project Work

Select a meteorological observatory located in your city or near your town.  Tabulate
the temperature data as given in the climatological table of observatories :

(i) Note the altitude, latitude of the observatory and the period for which the
mean is calculated.

(ii) Define the terms related to temperature as given in the table.

(iii) Calculate the daily mean monthly temperature.

Reprint 2025-26



SOLAR RADIATION, HEAT BALANCE AND TEMPERATURE 75

(iv) Draw a graph to show the daily mean maximum, the daily mean minimum and the mean
temperature.

(v) Calculate the annual range of temperature.

(vi) Find out in which months the daily range of temperature is the highest and the lowest.

(vii) List out the factors that determine the temperature of the place and explain the possible
causes for temperature variation in the months of January, May, July and October.

Example

Observatory : New Delhi (Safdarjung)

Latitude : 28°35°’ N

Based on observations : 1951 - 1980

Altitude above mean sea level : 216 m

Month Mean of Mean of Highest Lowest
Daily Daily Recorded Recorded
Max.(°C) Min.(°C) (°C) (°C)

January 21.1 7.3 29.3 0.6

May 39.6 25.9 47.2 17.5

Daily mean monthly temperature

21.1+7.3
O

January = 14.2 C
2

39.6+25.9
O

May = 32.75 C
2

Annual range of temperature

Mean Max. Temperature in May - Mean Temperature in January

Annual range of temperature = 32.75°C – 14.2°C = 18.55°C

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION

AND WEATHER SYSTEMS

arlier Chapter 8 described the uneven pressure is measured with the help of a

E distribution of temperature over the mercury barometer or the aneroid barometer.
surface of the earth. Air expands when Consult your book, Practical Work in

heated and gets compressed when cooled. This Geography — Part I (NCERT, 2006) and learn
results in variations in the atmospheric about these instruments. The pressure
pressure. The result is that it causes the decreases with height. At any elevation it varies
movement of air from high pressure to low from place to place and its variation is the
pressure, setting the air in motion. You already primary cause of air motion, i.e. wind which
know that air in horizontal motion is wind. moves from high pressure areas to low
Atmospheric pressure also determines when pressure areas.
the air will rise or sink. The wind redistributes
the heat and moisture across the planet, Vertical Variation of Pressure
thereby, maintaining a constant temperature

In the lower atmosphere the pressure
for the planet as a whole. The vertical rising of

decreases rapidly with height. The decrease
moist air cools it down to form the clouds and

amounts to about 1 mb for each 10 m
bring precipitation. This chapter has been

increase in elevation. It does not always
devoted to explain the causes of pressure

decrease at the same rate. Table 9.1 gives the
differences, the forces that control the

average pressure and temperature at
atmospheric circulation, the turbulent pattern

selected levels of elevation for a standard
of wind, the formation of air masses, the

atmosphere.
disturbed weather when air masses interact
with each other and the phenomenon of violent Table 9.1 : Standard Pressure and Temperature at
tropical storms. Selected Levels

Level Pressure in mb Temperature °C
ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE

Sea Level 1,013.25 15.2
Do you realise that our body is subjected to a

1 km 898.76 8.7
lot of air pressure. As one moves up the air
gets varified and one feels breathless. 5 km 540.48 –17. 3

The weight of a column of air contained in 10 km 265.00 – 49.7
a unit area from the mean sea level to the top
of the atmosphere is called the atmospheric The vertical pressure gradient force is much
pressure. The atmospheric pressure is larger than that of the horizontal pressure
expressed in units of milibar. At sea level the gradient. But, it is generally balanced by a
average atmospheric pressure is 1,013.2 nearly equal but opposite gravitational force.
milibar. Due to gravity the air at the surface is Hence, we do not experience strong upward
denser and hence has higher pressure. Air winds.

Reprint 2025-26



##9##
ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION AND WEATHER SYSTEMS 77

Horizontal Distribution of Pressure purposes of comparison. The sea level pressure
distribution is shown on weather maps.

Small differences in pressure are highly
Figure 9.1 shows the patterns of isobars

significant in terms of the wind direction and
corresponding to pressure systems. Low-
pressure system is enclosed by one or more
isobars with the lowest pressure in the centre.
High-pressure system is also enclosed by one
or more isobars with the highest pressure in
the centre.

World Distribution of Sea Level Pressure

The world distribution of sea level pressure in
January and July has been shown in Figures
9.2 and 9.3. Near the equator the sea level

Figure 9.1 : Isobars, pressure and wind systems in pressure is low and the area is known as
Northern Hemisphere

equatorial low. Along 30° N and 30o S are
velocity. Horizontal distribution of pressure is found the high-pressure areas known as the
studied by drawing isobars at constant levels. subtropical highs. Further pole wards along
Isobars are lines connecting places having 60o N and 60o S, the low-pressure belts are
equal pressure. In order to eliminate the effect termed as the sub polar lows. Near the poles
of altitude on pressure, it is measured at any the pressure is high and it is known as the polar
station after being reduced to sea level for high. These pressure belts are not permanent

Figure 9.2 : Distribution of pressure (in millibars) — January

Reprint 2025-26



78 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Figure 9.3 : Distribution of pressure (in millibars) — July

in nature. They oscillate with the apparent Pressure Gradient Force
movement of the sun. In the northern

The differences in atmospheric pressure
hemisphere in winter they move southwards

produces a force. The rate of change of pressure
and in the summer northwards.

with respect to distance is the pressure

Forces Affecting the Velocity gradient. The pressure gradient is strong where

and Direction of Wind the isobars are close to each other and is weak
where the isobars are apart.

You already know that the air is set in motion
due to the differences in atmospheric pressure. Frictional Force
The air in motion is called wind. The wind

It affects the speed of the wind. It is greatest at
blows from high pressure to low pressure. The

the surface and its influence generally extends
wind at the surface experiences friction. In

upto an elevation of 1 - 3 km. Over the sea
addition, rotation of the earth also affects the

surface the friction is minimal.
wind movement. The force exerted by the
rotation of the earth is known as the Coriolis

Coriolis Force
force. Thus, the horizontal winds near the
earth surface respond to the combined effect The rotation of the earth about its axis affects
of three forces – the pressure gradient force, the direction of the wind. This force is called
the frictional force and the Coriolis force. In the Coriolis force after the French physicist who
addition, the gravitational force acts described it in 1844. It deflects the wind to the
downward. right direction in the northern hemisphere and

Reprint 2025-26



ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION AND WEATHER SYSTEMS 79

to the left in the southern hemisphere. The The wind circulation around a low is
deflection is more when the wind  velocity is called cyclonic circulation. Around a high
high. The Coriolis force is directly proportional it is called anti cyclonic circulation. The
to the angle of latitude. It is maximum at the direction of winds around such systems
poles and is absent at the equator. changes according to their location in

The Coriolis force acts perpendicular to the different hemispheres (Table 9.2).
pressure gradient force. The pressure gradient The wind circulation at the earth’s surface
force is perpendicular to an isobar. The higher around low and high on many occasions is
the pressure gradient force, the more is the closely related to the wind circulation at higher
velocity of the wind and the larger is the level. Generally, over low pressure area the air
deflection in the direction of wind. As a result of will converge and rise. Over high pressure area
these two forces operating perpendicular to each the air will subside from above and diverge at
other, in the low-pressure areas the wind blows the surface (Figure 9.5). Apart from
around it. At the equator, the Coriolis force is convergence, some eddies, convection
zero and the wind blows perpendicular to the currents, orographic uplift and uplift along
isobars. The low pressure gets filled instead of fronts cause the rising of air, which is essential
getting intensified. That is the reason why tropical for the formation of clouds and precipitation.
cyclones are not formed near the equator.

Pressure and Wind

The velocity and direction of the wind are the
net result of the wind generating forces. The
winds in the upper atmosphere, 2 - 3 km above
the surface, are free from frictional effect of the
surface and are controlled mainly by the
pressure gradient and the Coriolis force. When
isobars are straight and when there is no

Figure 9.5 : Convergence and divergence of winds
friction, the pressure gradient force is balanced
by the Coriolis force and the resultant wind
blows parallel to the isobar. This wind is known General circulation of the atmosphere

as the geostrophic wind (Figure 9.4). The pattern of planetary winds largely depends
on : (i) latitudinal variation of atmospheric
heating; (ii) emergence of pressure belts; (iii)
the migration of belts following apparent path
of the sun; (iv) the distribution of continents
and oceans; (v) the rotation of earth. The pattern
of the movement of the planetary winds is
called the general circulation of the
atmosphere. The general circulation of the
atmosphere also sets in motion the ocean water
circulation which influences the earth’s

Figure 9.4 : Geostropic Wind

Table 9.2 : Pattern of Wind Direction in Cyclones and Anticyclones

Pressure System Pressure Condition Pattern of Wind Direction
at the Centre Northern Hemisphere Southern Hemisphere

Cyclone Low Anticlockwise Clockwise

Anticyclone High Clockwise Anticlockwise

Reprint 2025-26



80 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

climate. A schematic description of the general The general circulation of the atmosphere
circulation is shown in Figure 9.6. also affects the oceans. The large-scale winds

of the atmosphere initiate large and slow
moving currents of the ocean. Oceans in turn
provide input of energy and water vapour into
the air. These interactions take place rather
slowly over a large part of the ocean.

General Atmospheric Circulation and
its Effects on Oceans

Warming and cooling of the Pacific Ocean
is most important in terms of general
atmospheric circulation. The warm water
of the central Pacific Ocean slowly drifts
towards South American coast and
replaces the cool Peruvian current. Such
appearance of warm water off the coast
of Peru is known as the El Nino.  The El

Figure 9. 6 : Simplified general circulation
    of the atmosphere Nino event is closely associated with the

pressure changes in the Central Pacific
The air at the Inter Tropical Convergence and Australia. This change in pressure

Zone (ITCZ) rises because of convection caused condition over Pacific is known as the
by high insolation and a low pressure is southern oscillation.  The combined
created. The winds from the tropics converge phenomenon of southern oscillation and
at this low pressure zone. The converged air El Nino is known as ENSO. In the years
rises along with the convective cell. It reaches when the ENSO is strong, large-scale
the top of the troposphere up to an altitude of variations in weather occur over the
14 km. and moves towards the poles. This world.  The arid west coast of South
causes accumulation of air at about 30o N and America receives heavy rainfall, drought
S. Part of the accumulated air sinks to the occurs in Australia and sometimes in
ground and forms a subtropical high. Another India and floods in China. This
reason for sinking is the cooling of air when it phenomenon is closely monitored and is
reaches 30o N and S latitudes. Down below used for long range forecasting in major
near the land surface the air flows towards the parts of the world.
equator as the easterlies. The easterlies from
either side of the equator converge in the Inter Seasonal Wind
Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ). Such
circulations from the surface upwards and The pattern of wind circulation is modified in
vice-versa are called cells. Such a cell in the different seasons due to the shifting of regions
tropics is called Hadley Cell. In the middle of maximum heating, pressure and wind belts.
latitudes the circulation is that of sinking cold The most pronounced effect of such a shift is
air that comes from the poles and the rising noticed in the monsoons, especially over
warm air that blows from the subtropical high. southeast Asia. You would be studying the
At the surface these winds are called westerlies details of monsoon in the book India : Physical
and the cell is known as the Ferrel cell. At polar Environment (NCERT, 2006). The other local
latitudes the cold dense air subsides near the deviations from the general circulation system
poles and blows towards middle latitudes as are as follows.
the polar easterlies. This cell is called the polar

Local Winds
cell. These three cells set the pattern for the
general circulation of the atmosphere.  The Differences in the heating and cooling of earth
transfer of heat energy from lower latitudes to surfaces and the cycles those develop daily or
higher latitudes maintains the general annually can create several common, local or
circulation. regional winds.

Reprint 2025-26



ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION AND WEATHER SYSTEMS 81

Land and Sea Breezes as the valley breeze. During the night the
slopes get cooled and the dense air descends

As explained earlier, the land and sea absorb
into the valley as the mountain wind. The cool

and transfer heat differently. During the day the
air, of the high plateaus and ice fields draining

land heats up faster and becomes warmer than
into the valley is called katabatic wind. Another

the sea. Therefore, over the land the air rises
type of warm wind occurs on the leeward side

giving rise to a low pressure area, whereas the
of the mountain ranges. The moisture in these

sea is relatively cool and the pressure over sea
winds, while crossing the mountain ranges

is relatively high. Thus, pressure gradient from
condense and precipitate. When it descends

sea to land is created and the wind blows from
down the leeward side of the slope the dry air

the sea to the land as the sea breeze. In the night
gets warmed up by adiabatic process. This dry

the reversal of condition takes place. The land
air may melt the snow in a short time.

loses heat faster and is cooler than the sea. The
pressure gradient is from the land to the sea

Air Masses
and hence land breeze results (Figure 9.7).

When the air remains over a homogenous area
for a sufficiently longer time, it acquires the
characteristics of the area.  The homogenous
regions can be the vast ocean surface or vast
plains. The air with distinctive characteristics
in terms of temperature and humidity is called
an airmass. It is defined as a large body of air
having little horizontal variation in temperature
and moisture. The homogenous surfaces, over
which air masses form, are called the source
regions.

The air masses are classified according to
the source regions. There are five major source
regions. These are: (i) Warm tropical and
subtropical oceans; (ii) The subtropical hot
deserts; (iii) The relatively cold high latitude
oceans; (iv) The very cold snow covered
continents in high latitudes; (v) Permanently
ice covered continents in the Arctic and
Antarctica. Accordingly, following types of air-
masses are recognised: (i) Maritime tropical
(mT); (ii) Continental tropical (cT); (iii) Maritime
polar (mP); (iv) Continental polar (cP);
(v) Continental arctic (cA). Tropical air masses
are warm and polar air masses are cold.

Fronts

When two different air masses meet, the
Figure 9.7 : Land and sea breezes boundary zone between them is called a

front. The process of formation of the
Mountain and Valley Winds

fronts is known as frontogenesis. There
In mountainous regions, during the day the are four types of fronts: (a) Cold; (b) Warm;
slopes get heated up and air moves upslope (c) Stationary; (d) Occluded. When the
and to fill the resulting gap the air from the front remains stationary, it is called a
valley blows up the valley. This wind is known stationary front. When the cold air moves

Reprint 2025-26



82 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

anticlockwise cyclonic circulation. The cyclonic
circulation leads to a well developed extra
tropical cyclone, with a warm front and a cold
front. The plan and cross section of a well
developed cyclone is given in Figure 9.9. There
are pockets of warm air or warm sector wedged
between the forward and the rear cold air or
cold sector. The warm air glides over the cold
air and a sequence of clouds appear over the
sky ahead of the warm front and cause
precipitation. The cold front approaches the
warm air from behind and pushes the warm
air up. As a result, cumulus clouds develop
along the cold front. The cold front moves faster
than the warm front ultimately overtaking the
warm front. The warm air is completely lifted
up and the front is occluded and the cyclone
dissipates.

The processes of wind circulation both at
the surface and aloft are closely interlinked.

Figure 9.8 : Vertical Sections of : (a) Warm Front; The extra tropical cyclone differs from the
(b) Cold Front; (c) Occluded Front tropical cyclone in number of ways. The extra

tropical cyclones have a clear frontal system
towards the warm air mass, its contact zone is
called the cold front, whereas if the warm air
mass moves towards the cold air mass, the
contact zone is a warm front. If an air mass is
fully lifted above the land surface, it is called
the occluded front. The fronts occur in middle
latitudes and are characterised by steep gradient
in temperature and pressure. They bring
abrupt changes in temperature and cause the
air to rise to form clouds and cause precipitation.

Extra Tropical Cyclones

The systems developing in the mid and high
latitude, beyond the tropics are called the
middle latitude or extra tropical cyclones. The
passage of front causes abrupt changes in the
weather conditions over the area in the middle
and high latitudes.

Extra tropical cyclones form along the polar
front. Initially, the front is stationary. In the
northern hemisphere, warm air blows from the
south and cold air from the north of the front.
When the pressure drops along the front, the
warm air moves northwards and the cold air
move towards, south setting in motion an Figure 9. 9 : Extra tropical cyclones

Reprint 2025-26



ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION AND WEATHER SYSTEMS 83

which is not present in the tropical cyclones. A schematic representation of the vertical
They cover a larger area and can originate over structure of a mature tropical cyclonic storm
the land and sea. Whereas the tropical cyclones is shown in Figure 9.10.
originate only over the seas and on reaching A mature tropical cyclone is characterised
the land they dissipate. The extra tropical by the strong spirally circulating wind around
cyclone affects a much larger area as the centre, called the eye. The diameter of the
compared to the tropical cyclone. The wind circulating system can vary between 150 and

velocity in a tropical cyclone is much higher 250 km.

and it is more destructive. The extra tropical The eye is a region of calm with subsiding

cyclones move from west to east but tropical air. Around the eye is the eye wall, where there

cyclones, move from east to west. is a strong spiralling ascent of air to greater
height reaching the tropopause. The wind
reaches maximum velocity in this region,

Tropical Cyclones
reaching as high as 250 km per hour.

Tropical cyclones are violent storms that Torrential rain occurs here. From the eye wall
originate over oceans in tropical areas and rain bands may radiate and trains of cumulus
move over to the coastal areas bringing about and cumulonimbus clouds may drift into the
large scale destruction caused by violent outer region. The diameter of the storm over
winds, very heavy rainfall and storm surges. the Bay of Bengal, Arabian sea and Indian
This is one of the most devastating natural ocean is between 600 - 1200 km. The system
calamities. They are known as Cyclones in the moves slowly about 300 - 500 km per day.

Indian Ocean, Hurricanes in the Atlantic, The cyclone creates storm surges and they

Typhoons in the Western Pacific and South inundate the coastal low lands. The storm

China Sea, and Willy-willies in the Western peters out on the land.
Australia.

Tropical cyclones originate and intensify
over warm tropical oceans.  The conditions
favourable for the formation and intensification
of tropical storms are: (i) Large sea surface with
temperature higher than 27° C;  (ii) Presence
of the Coriolis force; (iii) Small variations in the
vertical wind speed; (iv) A pre-existing weak-
low-pressure area or low-level-cyclonic
circulation; (v) Upper divergence above the sea
level system.

The energy that intensifies the storm, comes
from the condensation process in the towering
cumulonimbus clouds, surrounding the
centre of the storm. With continuous supply
of moisture from the sea, the storm is further
strengthened. On reaching the land the
moisture supply is cut off and the storm
dissipates. The place where a tropical cyclone
crosses the coast is called the landfall of the
cyclone. The cyclones, which cross 20o N
latitude generally, recurve and they are more

Figure 9.10 : Vertical section of the tropical cyclone
destructive. (after Rama Sastry)

Reprint 2025-26



84 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Thunderstorms and Tornadoes greater height. This causes precipitation. Later,
downdraft brings down to earth the cool air

Other severe local storms are thunderstorms and the rain. From severe thunderstorms
and tornadoes. They are of short duration, sometimes spiralling wind descends like a
occurring over a small area but are violent. trunk of an elephant with great force, with very
Thunderstorms are caused by intense low pressure at the centre, causing massive
convection on moist hot days. A thunderstorm destruction on its way. Such a phenomenon is
is a well-grown cumulonimbus cloud called a tornado. Tornadoes generally occur
producing thunder and lightening. When the in middle latitudes. The tornado over the sea
clouds extend to heights where sub-zero is called water spouts.
temperature prevails, hails are formed and they These violent storms are the manifestation
come down as hailstorm. If there is insufficient of the atmosphere’s adjustments to varying
moisture, a thunderstorm can generate dust- energy distribution. The potential and heat
storms. A thunderstorm is characterised by energies are converted into kinetic energy in
intense updraft of rising warm air, which these storms and the restless atmosphere again
causes the clouds to grow bigger and rise to returns to its stable state.

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

  (i) If the surface air pressure is 1,000 mb, the air pressure at 1 km above the
surface will be:

(a) 700 mb (c) 900 mb

(b) 1,100 mb (d) 1,300 mb

 (ii) The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone normally occurs:

(a) near the Equator (b) near the Tropic of Cancer

(c) near the Tropic of Capricorn (d) near the Arctic Circle

(iii) The direction of wind around a low pressure in northern hemisphere is:

(a) clockwise (c) anti-clock wise

(b) perpendicular to isobars (d) parallel to isobars

(iv) Which one of the following is the source region for the formation of air
masses?

(a) the Equatorial forest (c) the Siberian Plain

(b) the Himalayas (d) the Deccan Plateau

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) What is the unit used in measuring pressure? Why is the pressure measured
at station level reduced to the sea level in preparation of weather maps?

(ii) While the pressure gradient force is from north to south, i.e. from the
subtropical high pressure to the equator in the northern hemisphere,
why are the winds north easterlies in the tropics.

(iii) What are the geotrophic winds?

(iv) Explain the land and sea breezes.

Reprint 2025-26



ATMOSPHERIC CIRCULATION AND WEATHER SYSTEMS 85

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) Discuss the factors affecting the speed and direction of wind.

(ii) Draw a simplified diagram to show the general circulation of the
atmosphere over the globe. What are the possible reasons for the formation
of subtropical high pressure over 30o N and S latitudes?

(iii) Why does tropical cyclone originate over the seas? In which part of the
tropical cyclone do torrential rains and high velocity winds blow and why?

Project Work

(i) Collect weather information over media such as newspaper, TV and radio
for understanding the weather systems.

(ii) Read the section on weather in any newspaper, preferably, one having a
map showing a satellite picture. Mark the area of cloudiness. Attempt to
infer the atmospheric circulation from the distribution of clouds. Compare
the forecast given in the newspaper with the TV coverage, if you have
access to TV. Estimate, how many days in a week was the forecast were
accurate.

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

##10##
WATER IN THE ATMOSPHERE

ou have already learnt that the air EVAPORATION AND CONDENSATION

Y contains water vapour. It varies from
zero to four per cent by volume of the The amount of water vapour in the atmosphere

atmosphere and plays an important role in the is added or withdrawn due to evaporation and
weather phenomena. Water is present in the condensation respectively. Evaporation is a
atmosphere in three forms namely – gaseous, process by which water is transformed from
liquid and solid. The moisture in the liquid to gaseous state. Heat is the main cause
atmosphere is derived from water bodies for evaporation. The temperature at which the
through evaporation and from plants through water starts evaporating is referred to as the
transpiration. Thus, there is a continuous latent heat of vapourisation.
exchange of water between the atmosphere, the Increase in temperature increases water
oceans and the continents through the absorption and retention capacity of the given
processes of evaporation, transpiration, parcel of air. Similarly, if the moisture content
condensation and precipitation. is low, air has a potentiality of absorbing and

Water vapour present in the air is known retaining moisture. Movement of air replaces
as humidity.  It is expressed quantitatively in the saturated layer with the unsaturated layer.
different ways. The actual amount of the water Hence, the greater the movement of air, the
vapour present in the atmosphere is known as greater is the evaporation.
the absolute humidity. It is the weight of water The transformation of water vapour into
vapour per unit volume of air and is expressed water is called condensation. Condensation is
in terms of grams per cubic metre. The ability caused by the loss of heat. When moist air is
of the air to hold water vapour depends entirely cooled, it may reach a level when its capacity
on its temperature. The absolute humidity to hold water vapour ceases. Then, the excess
differs from place to place on the surface of the water vapour condenses into liquid form. In
earth. The percentage of moisture present in free air, condensation results from cooling
the atmosphere as compared to its full capacity

around very small particles termed as
at a given temperature is known as the relative

hygroscopic condensation nuclei. Particles of
humidity. With the change of air temperature,

dust, smoke and salt from the ocean are
the capacity to retain moisture increases or

particularly good nuclei because they absorb
decreases and the relative humidity is also

water.  Condensation also takes place when the
affected. It is greater over the oceans and least

moist air comes in contact with some colder
over the continents.

object and it may also take place when the
The air containing moisture to its full

capacity at a given temperature is said to be temperature is close to the dew point.

saturated. It means that the air at the given Condensation, therefore, depends upon the

temperature is incapable of holding any amount of cooling and the relative humidity of

additional amount of moisture at that stage. the air. Condensation is influenced by the

The temperature at which saturation occurs volume of air, temperature, pressure and
in a given sample of air is known as dew point. humidity. Condensation takes place:  (i) when

Reprint 2025-26



WATER IN THE ATMOSPHERE 87

the temperature of the air is reduced to dew condition when fog is mixed with smoke, is
point with its volume remaining constant; (ii) described as smog. The only difference between
when both the volume and the temperature are the mist and fog is that mist contains more
reduced; (iv) when moisture is added to the air moisture than the fog. In mist each nuceli
through evaporation. However, the most contains a thicker layer of moisture. Mists are
favourable condition for condensation is the frequent over mountains as the rising warm
decrease in air temperature. air up the slopes meets a cold surface. Fogs

After condensation the water vapour or the are drier than mist and they are prevalent where
moisture in the atmosphere takes one of the warm currents of air come in contact with cold
following forms — dew, frost, fog and clouds. currents. Fogs are mini clouds in which
Forms of condensation can be classified on the condensation takes place around nuclei
basis of temperature and location. provided by the dust, smoke, and the salt
Condensation takes place when the dew point particles.
is lower than the freezing point as well as
higher than the freezing point. Clouds

Cloud is a mass of minute water droplets or
Dew

tiny crystals of ice formed by the condensation
When the moisture is deposited in the form of of the water vapour in free air at considerable
water droplets on cooler surfaces of solid elevations. As the clouds are formed at some
objects (rather than nuclei in air above the height over the surface of the earth, they take
surface) such as stones, grass blades and plant various shapes. According to their height,
leaves, it is known as dew. The ideal conditions expanse, density and transparency or
for its formation are clear sky, calm air, high opaqueness clouds are grouped under four
relative humidity, and cold and long nights. types : (i) cirrus; (ii) cumulus; (iii) stratus;
For the formation of dew, it is necessary that (iv) nimbus.
the dew point is above the freezing point.

Cirrus
Frost

Cirrus clouds are formed at high altitudes
Frost forms on cold surfaces when (8,000 - 12,000m).  They are thin and detatched
condensation takes place below freezing point clouds having a feathery appearance. They are
(00C), i.e. the dew point is at or below the always white in colour.
freezing point. The excess moisture is deposited
in the form of minute ice crystals instead of Cumulus
water droplets. The ideal conditions for the

Cumulus clouds look like cotton wool. They
formation of white frost are the same as those

are generally formed at a height of 4,000 -
for the formation of dew, except that the air

7,000 m. They exist in patches and can be seen
temperature must be at or below the freezing

scattered here and there.  They have a flat base.
point.

Stratus
Fog and Mist

As their name implies, these are layered clouds
When the temperature of an air mass

covering large portions of the sky.  These clouds
containing a large quantity of water vapour falls

are generally formed either due to loss of heat
all of a sudden, condensation takes place within

or the mixing of air masses with different
itself on fine dust particles. So, the fog is a cloud

temperatures.
with its base at or very near to the ground.
Because of the fog and mist, the visibility

Nimbus
becomes poor to zero. In urban and industrial
centres smoke provides plenty of nuclei which Nimbus clouds are black or dark gray. They
help the formation of fog and mist. Such a form at middle levels or very near to the surface

Reprint 2025-26



88 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

of the earth. These are extremely dense and Precipitation
opaque to the rays of the sun. Sometimes, the

The process of continuous condensation in free
clouds are so low that they seem to touch the

air helps the condensed particles to grow in
ground. Nimbus clouds are shapeless masses

size. When the resistance of the air fails to hold
of thick vapour.

them against the force of gravity, they fall on to
the earth’s surface. So after the condensation
of water vapour, the release of moisture is
known as precipitation. This may take place
in liquid or solid form. The precipitation in the
form of water is called rainfall, when the
temperature is lower than the 00C, precipitation
takes place in the form of fine flakes of snow
and is called snowfall. Moisture is released in
the form of hexagonal crystals. These crystals
form flakes of snow. Besides rain and snow,
other forms of precipitation are sleet and hail,

Figure 10.1 though the latter are limited in occurrence and
are sporadic in both time and space.

Sleet is frozen raindrops and refrozen
melted snow-water. When a layer of air with
the temperature above freezing point overlies
a subfreezing layer near the ground,
precipitation takes place in the form of sleet.
Raindrops, which leave the warmer air,
encounter the colder air below. As a result, they
solidify and reach the ground as small pellets
of ice not bigger than the raindrops from which
they are formed.

Sometimes, drops of rain after being
released by the clouds become solidified into
small rounded solid pieces of ice and which
reach the surface of the earth are called
hailstones. These are formed by the rainwater
passing through the colder layers.   Hailstones
have several concentric layers of ice one over
the other.

Types of Rainfall

On the basis of origin, rainfall may be classified
Figure 10.2

into three main types – the convectional,
Identify these cloud types which are orographic or relief and the cyclonic or frontal.
shown in Figure 10.1 and 10.2.

Convectional Rain
A combination of these four basic types can

The, air on being heated, becomes light and
give rise to the following types of clouds: high
clouds – cirrus, cirrostratus, cirrocumulus; rises up in convection currents. As it rises,  it

middle clouds – altostratus and altocumulus; expands and loses heat and consequently,

low clouds – stratocumulus and nimbostratus condensation takes place and cumulous

and clouds with extensive vertical clouds are formed. With thunder and lightening,
development – cumulus and cumulonimbus. heavy rainfall takes place but this does not last

Reprint 2025-26



WATER IN THE ATMOSPHERE 89

long. Such rain is common in the summer or the continents. The rainfall is more over the
in the hotter part of the day. It is very common oceans than on the landmasses of the world
in the equatorial regions and interior parts of because of being great sources of water.
the continents, particularly in the northern Between the latitudes 350 and 400 N and S of
hemisphere. the equator, the rain is heavier on the eastern

coasts and goes on decreasing towards the

Orographic Rain west. But, between 450 and 650 N and S of
equator, due to the westerlies, the rainfall is

When the saturated air mass comes across a first received on the western margins of the
mountain, it is forced to ascend and as it rises, continents and it goes on decreasing towards
it expands; the temperature falls, and the the east. Wherever mountains run parallel to
moisture is condensed. The chief characteristic the coast, the rain is greater on the coastal
of this sort of rain is that the windward slopes plain, on the windward side and it decreases
receive greater rainfall. After giving rain on the towards the leeward side.
windward side, when these winds reach the On the basis of the total amount of annual
other slope, they descend, and their precipitation, major precipitation regimes of the
temperature rises. Then their capacity to take world are identified as follows.
in moisture increases and hence, these leeward The equatorial belt, the windward slopes
slopes remain rainless and dry. The area of the mountains along the western coasts in
situated on the leeward side, which gets less the cool temperate zone and the coastal areas
rainfall is known as the rain-shadow area.  It of the monsoon land receive heavy rainfall of
is also known as the relief rain. over 200 cm per annum. Interior continental

areas receive moderate rainfall varying from
Cyclonic Rain 100 - 200 cm per annum. The coastal areas of

the continents receive moderate amount of
You have already read about extra tropical

rainfall. The central parts of the tropical land
cyclones and cyclonic rain in Chapter 9. Please

and the eastern and interior parts of the
consult Chapter 9 to understand cyclonic

temperate lands receive rainfall varying
rainfall.

between 50 - 100 cm per annum. Areas lying
in the rain shadow zone of the interior of the

World Distribution of Rainfall continents and high latitudes receive very low
Different places on the earth’s surface receive rainfall-less than 50 cm per annum. Seasonal
different amounts of rainfall in a year and that distribution of rainfall provides an important
too in different seasons. aspect to judge its effectiveness. In some

In general, as we proceed from the equator regions rainfall is distributed evenly
towards the poles, rainfall goes on decreasing throughout the year such as in the equatorial
steadily. The coastal areas of the world receive belt and in the western parts of cool temperate
greater amounts of rainfall than the interior of regions.

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

(i) Which one of the following is the most important constituent of the
atmosphere for human beings?

(a) Water vapour (c) Dust particle

(b) Nitrogen (d) Oxygen

Reprint 2025-26



90 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

 (ii) Which one of the following process is responsible for transforming liquid
into vapour?

(a) Condensation (c) Evaporation

(b) Transpiration (d) Precipitation

(iii) The air that contains moisture to its full capacity :

(a) Relative humidity (c) Absolute humidity

(b) Specific humidity (d) Saturated air

(iv) Which one of the following is the highest cloud in the sky?

(a) Cirrus (c) Nimbus

(b) Stratus (d) Cumulus

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) Name the three types of precipitation.

(ii) Explain relative humidity.

(iii) Why does the amount of water vapour decreases rapidly with altitude?

(iv) How are clouds formed? Classify  them.

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) Discuss the salient features of the world distribution of precipitation.

(ii) What are forms of condensation?  Describe the process of dew and frost
formation.

Project Work

Browse through the newspaper from 1st June to 31st December and note the news
about extreme rainfall in different parts of the country.

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

WORLD CLIMATE AND

CLIMATE CHANGE

he world climate can be studied by related them to the distribution of vegetation

T organising information and data on and used these values for classifying the
climate and synthesising them in climates.  It is an empirical classification based

smaller units for easy understanding, on mean annual and mean monthly
description and analysis. Three broad temperature and precipitation data. He
approaches have been adopted for classifying introduced the use of capital and small letters
climate. They are empirical, genetic and to designate climatic groups and types.
applied. Empirical classification is based on Although developed in 1918 and modified over
observed data, particularly on temperature a period of time, Koeppen’s scheme is still
and precipitation. Genetic classification popular and in use.
attempts to organise climates according to their Koeppen recognised five major climatic
causes. Applied classification is for specific groups, four of them are based on temperature
purpose. and one on precipitation. Table 11.1 lists the

climatic groups and their characteristics

KOEPPE N ’S SCHEME  OF CLASSIFICATION according to Koeppen. The capital letters :  A,C,
D and E delineate humid climates and B dry

OF CLIMATE
climates.

The most widely used classification of climate The climatic groups are subdivided into
is the empirical climate classification scheme types, designated by small letters, based on
developed by V. Koeppen. Koeppen identified seasonality of precipitation and temperature
a close relationship between the distribution characteristics. The seasons of dryness are
of vegetation and climate. He selected certain indicated by the small letters : f, m, w and s,
values of temperature and precipitation and where f corresponds to no dry season,

Table 11.1 : Climatic Groups According to Koeppen

Group Characteristics

A - Tropical Average temperature of the coldest month is 18° C or higher

B - Dry Climates Potential evaporation exceeds precipitation

C - Warm Temperate The average temperature of the coldest month of the (Mid-latitude) climates
years is higher than minus 3°C but below 18°C

D - Cold Snow Forest Climates The average  temperature of the coldest month is  minus 3° C or below

E - Cold Climates Average temperature for all months is below 10° C

Reprint 2025-26



92 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

m - monsoon climate, w- winter dry season and islands of East Indies. Significant amount of
s - summer dry season. The small letters a, b, rainfall occurs in every month of the year as
c and d refer to the degree of severity of thunder showers in the afternoon. The
temperature. The B- Dry Climates are temperature is uniformly high and the annual

subdivided using the capital letters S for steppe range of temperature is negligible. The

or semi-arid and W for deserts. The climatic maximum temperature on any day is around
30°C while the minimum temperature is

types are listed in Table 11.2. The distribution
around 20°C. Tropical evergreen forests with

of climatic groups and types is shown in
dense canopy cover and large biodiversity are

Table 11.1.
found in this climate.

Table 11.2 : Climatic Types According to Koeppen

Group Type Letter Code Characteristics

Tropical wet Af No dry season
A-Tropical Humid

Climate Tropical monsoon Am Monsoonal, short dry season

Tropical wet and dry Aw Winter dry season

Subtropical steppe BSh Low-latitude semi arid or dry

Subtropical desert BWh Low-latitude arid or dry
B-Dry Climate

Mid-latitude steppe BSk Mid-latitude semi arid or dry

Mid-latitude desert BWk Mid-latitude arid or dry

Humid subtropical Cfa No dry season, warm summer
C-Warm

temperate (Mid- Mediterranean Cs Dry hot summer
latitude) Climates

Marine west coast Cfb No dry season, warm and cool summer

D-Cold Snow- Humid continental Df No dry season, severe winter
forest Climates Subarctic Dw  Winter dry and very severe

Tundra ET No true summer
E-Cold Climates

Polar ice cap EF Perennial ice

Group A : Tropical Humid Climates Tropical Monsoon Climate (Am)

Tropical humid climates exist between Tropic Tropical monsoon climate (Am) is found over
of Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn. The sun the Indian sub-continent, North Eastern part
being overhead throughout the year and the of South America and Northern Australia.
presence of Inter Tropical Convergence Zone Heavy rainfall occurs mostly in summer. Winter
(ITCZ) make the climate hot and humid. is dry. The detailed climatic account of this
Annual range of temperature is very low and climatic type is given in the book on India:
annual rainfall is high. The tropical group is Physical Environment.
divided into three types, namely (i) Af- Tropical
wet climate; (ii) Am - Tropical monsoon climate; Tropical Wet and Dry Climate (Aw)
(iii) Aw- Tropical wet and dry climate.

Tropical wet and dry climate occurs north and
south of Af type climate regions. It borders with

Tropical Wet Climate (Af)
dry climate on the western part of the continent

Tropical wet climate is found near the equator. and Cf or Cw on the eastern part. Extensive
The major areas are the Amazon Basin in South Aw climate is found to the north and south of
America, western equatorial Africa and the the Amazon forest in Brazil and adjoining parts

Reprint 2025-26



##11##
WORLD CLIMATE AND CLIMATE CHANGE 93

of Bolivia and Paraguay in South America, often causing famine. Rain occurs in short
Sudan and south of Central Africa. The annual intense thundershowers in deserts and is
rainfall in this climate is considerably less than ineffective in building soil moisture. Fog is
that in Af and Am climate types and is variable common in coastal deserts bordering cold
also. The wet season is shorter and the dry currents. Maximum temperature in the summer
season is longer with the drought being more is very high. The highest shade temperature of
severe. Temperature is high throughout the 58° C was recorded at Al Aziziyah, Libya on
year and diurnal ranges of temperature are the 13 September 1922. The annual and diurnal
greatest in the dry season. Deciduous forest and ranges of temperature are also high.
tree-shredded grasslands occur in this climate.

Warm Temperate (Mid-Latitude) Climates-C
Dry Climates : B

Warm temperate (mid-latitude) climates extend
Dry climates are characterised by very low from 30° - 50° of latitude mainly on the eastern
rainfall that is not adequate for the growth of and western margins of continents. These
plants. These climates cover a very large area climates generally have warm summers with
of the planet extending over large latitudes from mild winters. They are grouped into four types:
15° - 60° north and south of the equator. At (i) Humid subtropical, i.e. dry in winter and
low latitudes, from 15° - 30°, they occur in the hot in summer (Cwa); (ii) Mediterranean (Cs);
area of subtropical high where subsidence and (iii) Humid subtropical, i.e. no dry season and
inversion of temperature do not produce mild winter (Cfa); (iv) Marine west coast climate
rainfall. On the western margin of the (Cfb).
continents, adjoining the cold current,
particularly over the west coast of South Humid Subtropical Climate (Cwa)
America, they extend more equatorwards and

Humid subtropical climate occurs poleward of
occur on the coast land. In middle latitudes,

Tropic of Cancer and Capricorn, mainly in
from 35° - 60° north and south of equator, they

North Indian plains and South China interior
are confined to the interior of continents where

plains. The climate is similar to Aw climate
maritime-humid winds do not reach and to

except that the temperature in winter is warm.
areas often surrounded by mountains.

Dry climates are divided into steppe or Mediterranean Climate (Cs)
semi-arid climate (BS) and desert climate (BW).
They are further subdivided as subtropical As the name suggests, Mediterranean climate
steppe (BSh) and subtropical desert (BWh) at occurs around Mediterranean sea, along the
latitudes from 15° - 35° and mid-latitude west coast of continents in subtropical latitudes
steppe (BSk) and mid-latitude desert (BWk) at between 30° - 40° latitudes e.g. — Central
latitudes between 35° - 60°. California, Central Chile, along the coast in

south eastern and south western Australia.
Subtropical Steppe (BSh) and Subtropical These areas come under the influence of sub
Desert (BWh) Climates tropical high in summer and westerly wind in

winter. Hence, the climate is characterised by
Subtropical steppe (BSh) and subtropical

hot, dry summer and mild, rainy winter. Monthly
desert (BWh) have common precipitation and

average temperature in summer is around
temperature characteristics. Located in the

25° C and in winter below 10°C. The annual
transition zone between humid and dry

precipitation ranges between 35 - 90 cm.
climates, subtropical steppe receives slightly
more rainfall than the desert, adequate enough Humid Subtropical (Cfa) Climate
for the growth of sparse grasslands. The rainfall
in both the climates is highly variable. The Humid subtropical climate lies on the eastern
variability in the rainfall affects the life in the parts of the continent in subtropical latitudes.
steppe much more than in the desert, more In this region the air masses are generally

Reprint 2025-26



94 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

unstable and cause rainfall throughout the snowy. The frost free season is short. The
year. They occur in eastern United States of annual ranges of temperature are large. The
America, southern and eastern China, weather changes are abrupt and short.
southern Japan, northeastern Argentina, Poleward, the winters are more severe.
coastal south Africa and eastern coast of
Australia. The annual averages of precipitation

Cold Climate with Dry Winters (Dw)
vary from 75-150 cm. Thunderstorms in
summer and frontal precipitation in winter are Cold climate with dry winter occurs mainly
common. Mean monthly temperature in over Northeastern Asia. The development of
summer is around 27°C, and in winter it varies pronounced winter anti cyclone and its
from 5°-12° C. The daily range of temperature weakening in summer sets in monsoon like
is small. reversal of wind in this region. Poleward

summer temperatures are lower and winter

Marine West Coast Climate (Cfb) temperatures are extremely low with many
locations experiencing below freezing point

Marine west coast climate is located poleward temperatures for up to seven months in a year.
from the Mediterranean climate on the west Precipitation occurs in summer. The annual
coast of the continents. The main areas are: precipitation is low from 12-15 cm.
Northwestern Europe, west coast of North
America, north of California, southern Chile, Polar Climates (E)
southeastern Australia and New Zealand. Due
to marine influence, the temperature is Polar climates exist poleward beyond 70°

moderate and in winter, it is warmer than for latitude. Polar climates consist of two types:

its latitude. The mean temperature in summer (i) Tundra (ET); (ii) Ice Cap (EF).

months ranges from 15°-20°C and in winter
Tundra Climate (ET)

4°-10°C. The annual and daily ranges of
temperature are small. Precipitation occurs The tundra climate (ET) is so called after the
throughout the year. Precipitation varies types of vegetation, like low growing mosses,
greatly from 50-250cm. lichens and flowering plants. This is the region

of permafrost where the sub soil is permanently

Cold Snow Forest Climates (D) frozen. The short growing season and water
logging support only low growing plants.

Cold snow forest climates occur in the large During summer, the tundra regions have very
continental area in the northern hemisphere long duration of day light.
between 40°-70° north latitudes in Europe,
Asia and North America. Cold snow forest Ice Cap Climate (EF)
climates are divided into two types: (i) Df- cold
climate with humid winter; (ii) Dw- cold climate The ice cap climate (EF) occurs over interior

with dry winter. The severity of winter is more Greenland and Antartica. Even in summer, the

pronounced in higher latitudes. temperature is below freezing point. This area
receives very little precipitation. The snow and
ice get accumulated and the mounting pressure

Cold Climate with Humid Winters (Df)
causes the deformation of the ice sheets and

Cold climate with humid winter occurs they break. They move as icebergs that float in
poleward of marine west coast climate and mid the Arctic and Antarctic waters. Plateau
latitude steppe. The winters are cold and Station, Antarctica ,79°S, portray this climate.

Reprint 2025-26



WORLD CLIMATE AND CLIMATE CHANGE 95

CLIMATE CHANGE crop failures, of floods and migration of people
tell about the effects of changing climate. A

The earlier chapters on climate summarised
number of times Europe witnessed warm, wet,

our understanding of climate as it prevails now.
cold and dry periods, the significant episodes

The type of climate we experience now might
were the warm and dry conditions in the tenth

be prevailing over the last 10,000 years with
and eleventh centuries, when the Vikings

minor and occasionally wide fluctuations. The
settled in Greenland. Europe witnessed “Little

planet earth has witnessed many variations in
Ice Age” from 1550 to about 1850. From about

climate since the beginning.  Geological records
1885-1940 world temperature showed an

show alteration of glacial and inter-glacial
upward trend. After 1940, the rate of increase

periods. The geomorphological features,
in temperature slowed down.

especially in high altitudes and high latitudes,
exhibit traces of advances and retreats of

Causes of Climate Change
glaciers. The sediment deposits in glacial lakes
also reveal the occurrence of warm and cold The causes for climate change are many. They
periods. The rings in the trees provide clues can be grouped into astronomical and
about wet and dry periods. Historical records terrestrial causes. The astronomical causes are
describe the vagaries in climate. All these the changes in solar output associated with
evidences indicate that change in climate is a sunspot activities. Sunspots are dark and
natural and continuous process. cooler patches on the sun which increase and

India also witnessed alternate wet and dry decrease in a cyclical manner. According to
periods. Archaeological findings show that the some meteorologists, when the number of
Rajasthan desert experienced wet and cool sunspots increase, cooler and wetter weather
climate around 8,000 B.C. The period 3,000- and greater storminess occur. A decrease in
1,700 B.C. had higher rainfall. From about sunspot numbers is associated with warm and
2,000-1,700 B.C., this region was the centre drier conditions. Yet, these findings are not
of the Harappan civilisation. Dry conditions statistically significant.
accentuated since then. An another astronomical theory is

In the geological past, the earth was warm Millankovitch oscillations, which infer cycles
some 500-300 million years ago, through the in the variations in the earth’s orbital
Cambrian, Ordovician and Silurian periods. characteristics around the sun, the wobbling
During the Pleistocene epoch, glacial and of the earth and the changes in the earth’s axial
inter-glacial periods occurred, the last major tilt. All these alter the amount of insolation
peak glacial period was about 18,000 years received from the sun, which in turn, might
ago. The present inter-glacial period started have a bearing on the climate.
10,000 years ago. Volcanism is considered as another cause

for climate change. Volcanic eruption throws
Climate in the recent past up lots of aerosols into the atmosphere. These
Variability in climate occurs all the time. The aerosols remain in the atmosphere for a
nineties decade of the last century witnessed considerable period of time reducing the sun’s
extreme weather events. The 1990s recorded radiation reaching the Earth’s surface. After the
the warmest temperature of the century and recent Pinatoba and El Cion volcanic
some of the worst floods around the world. The eruptions, the average temperature of the earth
worst devastating drought in the Sahel region, fell to some extent for some years.
south of the Sahara desert, from 1967-1977 The most important anthropogenic effect
is one such variability. During the 1930s, on the climate is the increasing trend in the
severe drought occurred in southwestern Great concentration of greenhouse gases in the
Plains of the United States, described as the atmosphere which is likely to cause global
dust bowl. Historical records of crop yield or warming.

Reprint 2025-26



96 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Global Warming it will take for earth’s atmospheric system to
recover from any change brought about by the

Due to the presence of greenhouse gases, the
latter.

atmosphere is behaving like a greenhouse. The
The largest concentration of GHGs in the

atmosphere also transmits the incoming solar
atmosphere is carbon dioxide. The emission

radiation but absorbs the vast majority of long
of CO  comes mainly from fossil fuel

wave radiation emitted  upwards by the earth’s 2
combustion (oil, gas and coal). Forests and

surface. The gases that absorb long wave
oceans are the sinks for the carbon dioxide.

radiation are called greenhouse gases. The
Forests use CO  in their growth. So,

processes that warm the atmosphere are often 2

deforestation due to changes in land use, also
collectively referred to as the greenhouse effect.

increases the concentration of Co . The time
2

taken for atmospheric CO  to adjust to changes
The term greenhouse is derived from the 2

analogy to a greenhouse used in cold in sources to sinks is 20-50 years. It is rising

areas for preserving heat. A greenhouse at about 0.5 per cent annually. Doubling of
is made up of glass. The glass which is concentration of CO  over pre-industrial level

2

transparent to incoming short wave solar is used as an index for estimating the changes
radiation is opaque to outgoing long wave in climate in climatic models.
radiation. The glass, therefore, allows in Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are products
more radiation and prevents the long of human activity. Ozone occurs in the
wave radiation going outside the glass stratosphere where ultra-violet rays convert
house, causing the temperature inside oxygen into ozone. Thus, ultra violet rays do
the glasshouse structure warmer than

not reach the earth’s surface. The CFCs which
outside. When you enter a car or a bus,

drift into the stratosphere destroy the ozone.
during summers, where windows are
closed, you feel more heat than outside. Large depletion of ozone occurs over Antarctica.
Likewise during winter the vehicles with The depletion of ozone concentration in the
closed doors and windows remain warmer stratosphere is called the ozone hole. This
than the temperature outside. This is allows the ultra violet rays to pass through the
another example of the greenhouse effect. troposphere.

International efforts have been initiated for

Greenhouse Gases(GHGs) reducing the emission of GHGs into the
atmosphere. The most important one is the

The primary GHGs of concern today are carbon Kyoto protocol proclaimed in 1997. This
dioxide (CO ), Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs),

2 protocol went into effect in 2005, ratified by
methane (CH ), nitrous oxide (N O) and ozone

4 2 141 nations. Kyoto protocol bounds the 35
(O ). Some other gases such as nitric oxide (NO)

3 industrialised countries to reduce their
and carbon monoxide (CO) easily react with emissions by the year 2012 to 5 per cent less
GHGs and affect their concentration in the than the levels prevalent in the year 1990.
atmosphere. The increasing trend in the concentration

The effectiveness of any given GHG of GHGs in the atmosphere may, in the long
molecule will depend on the magnitude of the run, warm up the earth. Once the global
increase in its concentration, its life time in the warming sets in, it will be difficult to reverse it.
atmosphere and the wavelength of radiation The effect of global warming may not be
that it absorbs. The chlorofluorocarbons uniform everywhere. Nevertheless, the adverse
(CFCs) are highly effective. Ozone which effect due to global warming will adversely affect
absorbs ultra violet radiation in the the life supporting system. Rise in the sea level
stratosphere is very effective in absorbing due to melting of glaciers and ice-caps and
terrestrial radiation when it is present in the thermal expansion of the sea may inundate
lower troposphere. Another important point to large parts of the coastal area and islands,
be noted is that the more time the GHG leading to social problems. This is another
molecule remains in the atmosphere, the longer cause for serious concern for the world

Reprint 2025-26



WORLD CLIMATE AND CLIMATE CHANGE 97

community. Efforts have already been initiated warming of the 20th century was during the
to control the emission of GHGs and to arrest two periods, 1901-44 and 1977-99. Over each
the trend towards global warming. Let us hope of these two periods, global temperatures rose
the world community responds to this challenge by about 0.4oC. In between, there was a slight
and adopts a lifestyle that leaves behind a livable cooling, which was more marked in the
world for the generations to come. Northern Hemisphere.

One of the major concerns of the world The globally averaged annual mean
today is global warming. Let us look at how temperature at the end of the 20th century was
much the planet has warmed up from the about 0.6oC above that recorded at the end of
temperature records. the 19th century. The seven warmest years

The annual average near-surface air during the 1856-2000 were recorded in the
temperature of the world is approximately 14oC. last decade. The year 1998 was the warmest

An increasing trend in temperature was year, probably not only for the 20th century
discernible in the 20th century. The greatest but also for the whole millennium.

Write an explanatory note
on “global warming”.

Reprint 2025-26



98 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

(i) Which one of the following is suitable for Koeppen’s “A” type of climate?

(a) High rainfall in all the months

(b) Mean monthly temperature of the coldest month more than freezing
point

(c) Mean monthly temperature of all the months more than 18o C

(d) Average temperature for all the months below 10° C

(ii) Koeppen’s system of classification of climates can be termed as :

(a) Applied (b) Systematic (c) Genetic (d) Empirical

(iii) Most of the Indian Peninsula will be grouped according to Koeppen’s system
under:

(a) “Af” (b) “BSh” (c) “Cfb” (d) “Am”

(iv) Which one of the following years is supposed to have recorded the warmest
temperature the world over?

(a) 1990 (b) 1998 (c) 1885 (d) 1950

(v) Which one of the following groups of four climates represents humid
conditions?

(a) A—B—C—E

(b) A—C—D—E

(c) B—C—D—E

(d) A—C—D—F

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) Which two climatic variables are used by Koeppen for classification of the
climate?

(ii) How is the “genetic” system of classification different from the “empirical
one”?

(iii) Which types of climates have very low range of temperature?

 (iv) What type of climatic conditions would prevail if the sun spots increase?

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) Make a comparison of the climatic conditions between the “A” and “B”
types of climate.

(ii) What type of vegetation would you find in the “C” and “A” type(s) of climate?

(iii) What do you understand by the term “Greenhouse Gases”? Make a list of
greenhouse gases.

Project Work

Collect information about Kyoto declaration related to global climate changes.

Reprint 2025-26



UNIT

V

##12##
WATER (OCEANS)

This unit deals with

• Hydrological Cycle

• Oceans — submarine relief; distribution of temperature and
salinity; movements of ocean water-waves, tides and currents

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

WATER (OCEANS)

an we think of life without water? It is the ocean to land and land to ocean. The

Csaid that the water is life.  Water is an hydrological cycle describes the movement of
essential component of all life forms that water on, in, and above the earth. The water

exist over the surface of the earth.  The creatures cycle has been working for billions of years
on the earth are lucky that it is a water planet, and all the life on earth depends on it. Next to
otherwise we all would have no existence. Water air, water is the most important element
is a rare commodity in our solar system. There required for the existence of life on earth. The
is no water on the sun or anywhere else in the distribution of water on earth is quite uneven.
solar system.  The earth, fortunately has an

Many locations have plenty of water while
abundant supply of water on its surface. Hence,

others have very limited quantity. The
our planet is called the ‘Blue Planet’.

hydrological cycle, is the circulation of water
within the earth’s hydrosphere in different

HYDROLOGICAL CYCLE
forms i.e. the liquid, solid and the gaseous

Water is a cyclic resource. It can be used and phases. It also refers to the continuous
re-used. Water also undergoes a cycle from exchange of water between the oceans,

Figure 12.1 : Hydrological Cycle

Reprint 2025-26



WATER (OCEANS) 101

Table 12.1 : Components  and  Processes Southern ocean and the Arctic. The various
    of the Water Cycle seas, bays, gulfs and other inlets are parts of

Components Processes these four large oceans.
A major portion of the ocean floor is found

Water storage Evaporation between 3-6 km below the sea level. The ‘land’
in oceans Evapotranspiration

under the waters of the oceans, that is, the
Sublimation

ocean floor exhibits complex and varied
Water in the Condensation features as those observed over the land
atmosphere Precipitation

(Figure 12.2). The floors of the oceans are
Water storage in Snowmelt runoff rugged with the world’s largest mountain
ice and snow to streams

ranges, deepest trenches and the largest plains.
Surface runoff Stream flow freshwater These features are formed, like those of the

storage infiltration continents, by the factors of tectonic, volcanic
Groundwater storage Groundwater and depositional processes.

discharge springs

Divisions of the Ocean Floors
atmosphere, landsurface and subsurface and The ocean floors can be divided into four
the organisms. major divisions: (i) the Continental Shelf; (ii)

About 71 per cent of the planetary water the Continental Slope; (iii) the Deep Sea Plain;
is found in the oceans. The remaining is held (iv) the Oceanic Deeps. Besides, these divisions
as freshwater in glaciers and icecaps, there are also major and minor relief features
groundwater sources, lakes, soil moisture, in the ocean floors like ridges, hills, sea
atmosphere, streams and within life. Nearly mounts, guyots, trenches, canyons, etc.
59 per cent of the water that falls on land
returns to the atmosphere through Continental Shelf
evaporation from over the oceans as well as The continental shelf is the extended margin
from other places. The remainder runs-off on of each continent occupied by relatively
the surface, infiltrates into the ground or a part shallow seas and gulfs. It is the shallowest
of it becomes glacier. part of the ocean showing an average gradient

It is to be noted that the renewable water of 1° or even less. The shelf typically ends at
on the earth is constant while the demand is a very steep slope, called the shelf break.
increasing tremendously. This leads to water The width of the continental shelves vary
crisis in different parts of the world — spatially from one ocean to another. The average width
and temporally. The pollution of river waters of continental shelves is about 80 km. The
has further aggravated the crisis.  How can shelves are almost absent or very narrow along
you intervene in improving the water quality some of the margins like the coasts of Chile,
and augmenting the available quantity of

the west coast of Sumatra, etc. On the contrary,
water?

the Siberian shelf in the Arctic Ocean, the
largest in the world, stretches to 1,500 km in

RELIEF OF THE OCEAN FLOOR
width. The depth of the shelves also varies. It

The oceans are confined to the great may be as shallow as 30 m in some areas
depressions of the earth’s outer layer. In this while in some areas it is as deep as 600 m.
section, we shall see the nature of the ocean The continental shelves are covered with
basins of the earth and their topography. The variable thicknesses of sediments brought
oceans, unlike the continents, merge so down by rivers, glaciers, wind, from the land
naturally into one another that it is hard to and distributed by waves and currents.
demarcate them. The geographers have divided Massive sedimentary deposits received over a
the oceanic part of the earth into five oceans, long time by the continental shelves, become
namely the Pacific, the Atlantic, the Indian, the source of fossil fuels.

Reprint 2025-26



102 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

vary between 3,000 and 6,000m. These plains
are covered with fine-grained sediments like
clay and silt.

Oceanic Deeps or Trenches

These areas are the deepest parts of the
oceans. The trenches are relatively steep sided,
narrow basins.  They are some 3-5 km deeper
than the surrounding ocean floor. They occur
at the bases of continental slopes and along
island arcs and are associated with active
volcanoes and strong earthquakes. That is
why they are very significant in the study of
plate movements. As many as 57 deeps have
been explored so far; of which 32 are in the
Pacific Ocean; 19 in the Atlantic Ocean and 6
in the Indian Ocean.

Minor Relief Features

Apart from the above mentioned major relief
features of the ocean floor, some minor but
significant features predominate in different
parts of the oceans.

Mid-Oceanic Ridges

A mid-oceanic ridge is composed of two chains
of mountains separated by a large depression.
The mountain ranges can have peaks as high

Figure 12.2 : Relief features of ocean floors as 2,500 m and some even reach above the
ocean’s surface. Iceland, a part of the mid-

Continental Slope Atlantic Ridge, is an example.
The continental slope connects the continental
shelf and the ocean basins. It begins where the Seamount

bottom of the continental shelf sharply drops It is a mountain with pointed summits, rising
off into a steep slope. The gradient of the slope from the seafloor that does not reach the surface
region varies between 2-5°. The depth of the of the ocean. Seamounts are volcanic in origin.
slope region varies between 200 and 3,000 m. These can be 3,000-4,500 m tall. The Emperor
The slope boundary indicates the end of the seamount, an extension of the Hawaiian Islands
continents. Canyons and trenches are observed in the Pacific Ocean, is a good example.
in this region.

Submarine Canyons
Deep Sea Plain

These are deep valleys, some comparable to
Deep sea plains are gently sloping areas of the the Grand Canyon of the Colorado river. They
ocean basins. These are the flattest and are sometimes found cutting across the
smoothest regions of the world. The depths continental shelves and slopes, often extending

Reprint 2025-26



WATER (OCEANS) 103

from the mouths of large rivers. The Hudson (iv) Ocean currents : warm ocean currents
Canyon is the best known submarine canyon raise the temperature in cold areas while
in the world. the cold currents decrease the

temperature in warm ocean areas.  Gulf
Guyots stream (warm current) raises the

temperature near the eastern coast of
It is a flat topped seamount. They show

North America and the West Coast of
evidences of gradual subsidence through

Europe while the Labrador current (cold
stages to become flat topped submerged

current) lowers the temperature near the
mountains. It is estimated that more than

north-east coast of North America.
10,000 seamounts and guyots exist in the

All these factors influence the temperature
Pacific Ocean alone.

of the ocean currents locally. The enclosed seas
in the low latitudes record relatively higher

Atoll
temperature than the open seas; whereas the

These are low islands found in the tropical enclosed seas in the high latitudes have lower
oceans consisting of  coral reefs surrounding temperature than the open seas.
a central depression. It may be a part of the
sea (lagoon), or sometimes form enclosing a Horizontal and Vertical Distribution
body of fresh, brackish, or highly saline water. of Temperature

TEMPERATURE OF OCEAN WATERS The temperature-depth profile for the ocean
water shows how the temperature decreases

This section deals with the spatial and vertical with the increasing depth. The profile shows  a
variations of temperature in various oceans. boundary region between the surface waters
Ocean waters get heated up by the solar energy of the ocean and the deeper layers. The
just as land. The process of heating and cooling boundary usually begins around 100 - 400 m
of the oceanic water is slower than land. below the sea surface and extends several

hundred of metres downward (Figure 12.3).
Factors Affecting Temperature Distribution This boundary region, from where there is a
The factors which affect the distribution of rapid decrease of temperature, is called the
temperature of ocean water are : thermocline. About 90 per cent of the total

(i) Latitude : the temperature of surface water volume of water is found below the thermocline
decreases from the equator towards the in the deep ocean. In this zone, temperatures
poles because the amount of insolation approach 0° C.
decreases poleward. The temperature structure of oceans over

(ii) Unequal distribution of land and water : middle and low latitudes can be described as
the oceans in the northern hemisphere a three-layer system from surface to the bottom.
receive more heat due to their contact The first layer represents the top layer of
with larger extent of land than the oceans warm oceanic water and it is about 500m
in the southern hemisphere. thick with temperatures ranging between 20°

(iii) Prevailing wind : the winds blowing from and 25° C. This layer, within the tropical
the land towards the oceans drive warm region, is present throughout the year but in
surface water away form the coast mid latitudes it develops only during summer.
resulting in the upwelling of cold water The second layer called the thermocline
from below. It results into the longitudinal layer lies below the first layer and is characterised
variation in the temperature. Contrary to by rapid decrease in temperature with increasing
this, the onshore winds pile up warm depth. The thermocline is 500 -1,000 m thick.
water near the coast and this raises the The third layer is very cold and extends
temperature. upto the deep ocean floor. In the Arctic and

Reprint 2025-26



104 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Figure 12.4 shows the spatial pattern of
surface temperature of the oceans.

It is a well known fact that the maximum
temperature of the oceans is always at their
surfaces because they directly receive the heat
from the sun and the heat is transmitted to
the lower sections of the oceans through the
process of convection. It results into decrease
of temperature with the increasing depth, but
the rate of decrease is not uniform
throughout. The temperature falls very
rapidly up to the depth of 200 m and
thereafter, the rate of decrease of temperature
is slowed down.

SALINITY OF OCEAN WATERS

All waters in nature, whether rain water or
ocean water, contain dissolved mineral salts.
Salinity is the term used to define the total
content of dissolved salts in sea water
(Table 12.4). It is calculated as the amount of
salt (in gm) dissolved in 1,000 gm (1 kg) of
seawater. It is usually expressed as parts per
thousand (o/ ) or ppt.  Salinity is an important

oo

Figure 12.3 : Thermocline property of sea water. Salinity of 24.7 o/  has
oo

been considered as the upper limit to
Antartic circles, the surface water temperatures demarcate ‘brackish water’.
are close to 0° C and so the temperature change Factors af fecting ocean salinity are
with the depth is very slight. Here, only one mentioned below:
layer of cold water exists, which extends from (i) The salinity of water in the surface layer
surface to deep ocean floor. of  oceans depend mainly on

The average temperature of surface water evaporation and precipitation.
of the oceans is about 27°C and it gradually (ii) Surface salinity is greatly influenced in
decreases from the equator towards the coastal regions by the fresh water flow
poles. The rate of decrease of temperature from rivers, and in polar regions by the
with increasing latitude is generally 0.5°C processes of freezing and thawing of
per latitude. The average temperature is ice.
around 22°C at 20° latitudes, 14° C at 40° (iii) Wind, also influences salinity of an area
latitudes and 0° C near poles. The oceans by transferring water to other areas.

in the northern hemisphere record relatively (iv) The ocean currents contribute to the

higher temperature than in the southern salinity variations. Salinity, temperature

hemisphere. The highest temperature is not and density of water are interrelated.

recorded at the equator but slightly towards Hence, any change in the temperature or

north of it .  The average annual density influences the salinity of water in

temperatures for the northern and southern an area.

hemisphere are around 19° C and 16° C
Highest salinity in water bodies

respectively. This variation is due to the
Lake Van in Turkey (330 o/ ),

unequal distribution of land and water in oo
Dead Sea (238 o/ ),

the northern and southern hemispheres. oo
Great Salt Lake (220 o/ )

oo

Reprint 2025-26



WATER (OCEANS) 105

Figure 12.4 : Spatial pattern of surface temperature (°C) of the oceans

HORIZONTAL DISTRIBUTION OF SALINITY The North Sea, in spite of its location in
higher latitudes, records higher salinity due

The salinity for normal open ocean ranges
to more saline water brought by the North

between 33o/  and 37 o/ . In the land
oo oo Atlantic Drift. Baltic Sea records low salinity

locked Red Sea, it is as high as 41o/ , while
oo due to influx of river waters in large

in the estuaries and the Arctic, the salinity quantity. The Mediterranean Sea records
fluctuates from 0 - 35 o/ , seasonally. In hot

oo higher salinity due to high evaporation.
and dry regions, where evaporation is high, Salinity is, however, very low in Black Sea
the salinity sometimes reaches to 70 o/ .

oo due to enormous fresh water influx by rivers.
The salinity variation in the Pacific Ocean See the atlas to find out the rivers joining

is mainly due to its shape and larger areal Black Sea.
extent. Salinity decreases from 35 o/  -  31 o/

oo oo The average salinity of the Indian Ocean
on the western parts of the northern hemisphere is 35 o/ The low salinity trend is observed

oo. 
because of the influx of melted water from the in the Bay of Bengal due to influx of river
Arctic region.  In the same way, after 15° - 20° water. On the contrary, the Arabian Sea shows
south, it decreases to 33 o/  .

oo higher salinity due to high evaporation and
The average salinity of the Atlantic low influx of fresh water. Figure 12.5 shows the

Ocean is around 36 o/ The highest salinity salinity of the World’s oceans.
oo. 

is recorded between 15° and 20° latitudes.
Vertical Distribution of Salinity

Maximum salinity (37  o/ ) is observed
oo

between 20° N and 30° N and 20° W - 60° W. Salinity changes with depth, but the way it
It gradually decreases towards the north. changes depends upon the location of the

Reprint 2025-26



106 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

120º 60º 60º 120º

120º 60º 60º 120º

Figure12.5 : Surface salinity of the World’s Oceans

sea. Salinity at the surface increases by the the higher salinity dense water. Salinity,
loss of water to ice or evaporation, or generally, increases with depth and there is a
decreased by the input of fresh waters, such distinct zone called the halocline, where
as from the rivers. Salinity at depth is very salinity increases sharply. Other factors being
much fixed, because there is no way that constant, increasing salinity of seawater
water is ‘lost’, or the salt is ‘added.’  There is causes its density to increase. High salinity
a marked difference in the salinity between seawater, generally, sinks below the lower
the surface zones and the deep zones of the salinity water. This leads to stratification by
oceans.  The lower salinity water rests above salinity.

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

(i) Identify the element which is not a part of the hydrological cycle

(a) Evaporation (c) Precipitation

(b) Hydration (d) Condensation

 (ii) The average depth of continental slope varies between

(a) 2–20m (c) 20–200m

(b) 200–2,000m (d) 2,000–20,000m

Reprint 2025-26



WATER (OCEANS) 107

(iii) Which one of the following is not a minor relief feature in the oceans:

(a) Seamount (c) Oceanic Deep

(b) Atoll (d) Guyot

(iv) Salinity is expressed as the amount of salt in grams dissolved in sea
water per

(a) 10 gm (c) 100 gm

(b) 1,000 gm (d) 10,000 gm

(v) Which one of the following is the smallest ocean:

(a) Indian Ocean (c) Atlantic Ocean

(b) Arctic Ocean (d) Pacific Ocean

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) Why do we call the earth a Blue Planet?

(ii) What is a continental margin?

(iii) List out the deepest trenches of various oceans.

(iv) What is a thermocline?

(v) When you move into the ocean what thermal layers would you encounter?
Why the temperature varies with depth?

(vi) What is salinity of sea water?

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) How are various elements of the hydrological cycle interrelated?

(ii) Examine the factors that influence the temperature distribution of the
oceans.

Project Work

(i) Consult the atlas and show ocean floor relief on the outline of the world
map.

(ii) Identify the areas of mid oceanic ridges from the Indian Ocean.

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

##13##
MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER

he ocean water is dynamic. Its physical wavelength of the wave, the wave breaks. The

T characteristics like temperature, largest waves are found in the open oceans.
salinity, density and the external Waves continue to grow larger as they move

forces like of the sun, moon and the winds and absorb energy from the wind.
influence the movement of ocean water. The Most of the waves are caused by the wind
horizontal and vertical motions are common driving against water. When a breeze of two
in ocean water bodies.  The horizontal motion knots or less blows over calm water, small
refers to the ocean currents and waves. The ripples form and grow as the wind speed
vertical motion refers to tides. Ocean currents increases until white caps appear in the
are the continuous flow of huge amount of breaking waves. Waves may travel thousands
water in a definite direction while the waves of km before rolling ashore, breaking and
are the horizontal motion of water. Water moves dissolving as surf.
ahead from one place to another through ocean A wave’s size and shape reveal its origin.
currents while the water in the waves does not Steep waves are fairly young ones and are
move, but the wave trains move ahead. The probably formed by local wind. Slow and
vertical motion refers to the rise and fall of water steady waves originate from far away places,
in the oceans and seas.  Due to attraction of possibly from another hemisphere. The
the sun and the moon, the ocean water is raised maximum wave height is determined by the
up and falls down twice a day. The upwelling strength of the wind, i.e. how long it blows and
of cold water from subsurface and the sinking the area over which it blows in a single direction.
of surface water are also forms of vertical Waves travel because wind pushes the
motion of ocean water. water body in its course while gravity pulls the

crests of the waves downward.  The falling water
WAVES pushes the former troughs upward, and the

Waves are actually the energy, not the water
as such, which moves across the ocean surface.
Water particles only travel in a small circle as a
wave passes. Wind provides energy to the
waves. Wind causes waves to travel in the ocean
and the energy is released on shorelines. The
motion of the surface water seldom affects the
stagnant deep bottom water of the oceans. As
a wave approaches the beach, it slows down.
This is due to the friction occurring between
the dynamic water and the sea floor. And, when
the depth of water is less than half the Figure13.1 : Motion of waves and water molecules

Reprint 2025-26



MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER 109

wave moves to a new position (Figure 13.1). is less as it is farther away, the centrifugal force
The actual motion of the water beneath the causes tidal bulge on the other side
waves is circular. It indicates that things are (Figure 13.2).
carried up and forward as the wave The ‘tide-generating’ force is the difference
approaches, and down and back as it passes. between these two forces; i.e. the gravitational

attraction of the moon and the centrifugal force.
Characteristics of Waves On the surface of the earth, nearest the moon,

Wave crest and trough : The highest and pull or the attractive force of the moon is greater
lowest points of a wave are called the crest than the centrifugal force, and so there is a net
and trough respectively. force causing a bulge towards the moon. On
Wave height : It is the vertical distance the opposite side of the earth, the attractive
from the bottom of a trough to the top of force is less, as it is farther away from the moon,
a crest of a wave. the centrifugal force is dominant. Hence, there
Wave amplitude : It is one-half of the wave is a net force away from the moon. It creates
height. the second bulge away from the moon. On the

Wave period : It is merely the time interval surface of the earth, the horizontal tide

between two successive wave crests or generating forces are more important than the
troughs as they pass a fixed point. vertical forces in generating the tidal bulges.

Wavelength : It is the horizontal distance
between two successive crests.

Wave speed : It is the rate at which the
wave moves through the water, and is
measured in knots.

Wave frequency : It is the number of waves
passing a given point during a one-
second time interval.

TIDES

The periodical rise and fall of the sea level, once
or twice a day, mainly due to the attraction of
the sun and the moon, is called a tide.
Movement of water caused by meteorological
effects (winds and atmospheric pressure
changes) are called surges. Surges are not
regular like tides. The study of tides is very
complex, spatially and temporally, as it has great
variations in frequency, magnitude and height. Figure13.2 : Relation between gravitational

The moon’s gravitational pull to a great forces and tides
extent and to a lesser extent the sun’s
gravitational pull, are the major causes for the The tidal bulges on wide continental
occurrence of tides. Another factor is centrifugal shelves, have greater height. When tidal bulges
force, which is the force that acts to counter hit the mid-oceanic islands they become low.
balance the gravity. Together, the gravitational The shape of bays and estuaries along a
pull and the centrifugal force are responsible coastline can also magnify the intensity of tides.
for creating the two major tidal bulges on the Funnel-shaped bays greatly change tidal
earth. On the side of the earth facing the moon, magnitudes. When the tide is channelled
a tidal bulge occurs while on the opposite side between islands or into bays and estuaries
though the gravitational attraction of the moon they are called tidal currents.

Reprint 2025-26



110 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Spring tides : The position of both the sun and
Tides of Bay of Fundy, Canada the moon in relation to the earth has direct

The highest tides in the world occur in bearing on tide height. When the sun, the moon
the Bay of Fundy in Nova Scotia, Canada. and the earth are in a straight line, the height
The tidal bulge is 15 - 16 m. Because of the tide will be higher. These are called spring
there are two high tides and two low tides tides and they occur twice a month, one on
every day (roughly a 24 hour period); then full moon period and another during new moon
a tide must come in within about a six period.
hour period. As a rough estimate, the tide
rises about 240 cm an hour (1,440 cm Neap tides : Normally, there is a seven day
divided by 6 hours). If you have walked interval between the spring tides and neap
down a beach with a steep cliff alongside tides. At this time the sun and moon are at
(which is common there), make sure you right angles to each other and the forces of the
watch the tides. If you walk for about an

sun and moon tend to counteract one another.
hour and then notice that the tide is

The Moon’s attraction, though more than twice
coming in, the water will be over your

as strong as the sun’s, is diminished by the
head before you get back to where you

counteracting force of the sun’s gravitational
started!

pull.
Once in a month, when the moon’s orbit is

Types of Tides closest to the earth (perigee), unusually high

Tides vary in their frequency, direction and and low tides occur. During this time the tidal

movement from place to place and also from range is greater than normal.  Two weeks later,

time to time. Tides may be grouped into various when the moon is farthest from earth (apogee),

types based on their frequency of occurrence the moon’s gravitational force is limited and

in one day or 24 hours or based on their height. the tidal ranges are less than their average
heights.

Tides based on Frequency When the earth is closest to the sun
(perihelion), around 3rd January each year,

Semi-diurnal tide : The most common tidal tidal ranges are also much greater, with
pattern, featuring two high tides and two low unusually high and unusually low tides. When
tides each day. The successive high or low tides the earth is farthest from the sun (aphelion),
are approximately of the same height. around 4th July each year, tidal ranges are

much less than average.
Diurnal tide : There is only one high tide and The time between the high tide and low tide,
one low tide during each day. The successive when the water level is falling, is called the ebb.
high and low tides are approximately of the The time between the low tide and high tide,
same height. when the tide is rising, is called the flow or flood.

Mixed tide : Tides having variations in height
are known as mixed tides. These tides generally Importance of Tides

occur along the west coast of North America Since tides are caused by the earth-moon-sun
and on many islands of the Pacific Ocean. positions which are known accurately, the

tides can be predicted well in advance. This
Tides based on the Sun, Moon and the Earth helps the navigators and fishermen plan their
Positions activities. Tidal flows are of great importance
The height of rising water (high tide) varies in navigation. Tidal heights are very important,
appreciably depending upon the position of especially harbours near rivers and within
sun and moon with respect to the earth. estuaries having shallow ‘bars’ at the entrance,
Spring tides and neap tides come under this which prevent ships and boats from entering
category. into the harbour. Tides are also helpful in

Reprint 2025-26



MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER 111

desilting the sediments and in removing Differences in water density affect vertical
polluted water from river estuaries. Tides are mobility of ocean currents. Water with high
used to generate electrical power (in Canada, salinity  is denser than water with low salinity
France, Russia, and  China). A 3 MW tidal and in the same way cold water is denser than
power project at Durgaduani in Sunderbans warm water. Denser water tends to sink, while
of West Bengal is under way. relatively lighter water tends to rise. Cold-water

ocean currents occur when the cold water at
OCEAN CURRENTS the poles sinks and slowly moves towards the

equator. Warm-water currents travel out from
Ocean currents are like river flow in oceans. the equator along the surface, flowing towards
They represent a regular volume of water in a the poles to replace the sinking cold water.
definite path and direction. Ocean currents are
influenced by two types of forces namely :
(i) primary forces that initiate the movement of Types of Ocean Currents

water; (ii) secondary forces that influence the The ocean currents may be classified based on
currents to flow. their depth as surface currents and deep water

The primary forces that influence the currents : (i) surface currents constitute about
currents are: (i) heating by solar energy; 10 per cent of all the water in the ocean, these
(ii) wind; (iii) gravity; (iv) coriolis force. Heating waters are the upper 400 m of the ocean;
by solar energy causes the water to expand. (ii) deep water currents make up the other 90
That is why, near the equator the ocean water per  cent of the ocean water. These waters move
is about 8 cm higher in level than in the middle around the ocean basins due to variations in
latitudes. This causes a very slight gradient the density and gravity. Deep waters sink into
and water tends to flow down the slope. Wind the deep ocean basins at high latitudes, where
blowing on the surface of the ocean pushes the the temperatures are cold enough to cause the
water to move. Friction between the wind and density to increase.
the water surface affects the movement of the Ocean currents can also be classified
water body in its course. Gravity tends to pull based on temperature : as cold currents and
the water down the pile and create gradient warm currents: (i) cold currents bring cold
variation. The Coriolis force intervenes and water into warm water areas. These currents
causes the water to move to the right in the are usually found on the west coast of the
northern hemisphere and to the left in the continents in the low and middle latitudes
southern hemisphere. These large accumulations (true in both hemispheres) and on the east
of water and the flow around them are called coast in the higher latitudes in the Northern
Gyres. These produce large circular currents Hemisphere; (ii) warm currents bring warm
in all the ocean basins. water into cold water areas and are usually

observed on the east coast of continents in the
Characteristics of Ocean Currents low and middle latitudes (true in both

hemispheres). In the northern hemisphere
Currents are referred to by their “drift”. they are found on the west coasts of continents
Usually, the currents are strongest near in high latitudes.
the surface and may attain speeds over
five knots. At depths, currents are Major Ocean Currents
generally slow with speeds less than 0.5
knots. We refer to the speed of a current Major ocean currents are greatly influenced by

as its “drift.” Drift is measured in terms the stresses exerted by the prevailing winds and

of knots. The strength of a current refers coriolis force. The oceanic circulation pattern
roughly corresponds to the earth’s atmospheric

to the speed of the current. A fast current
circulation pattern. The air circulation over the

is considered strong. A current is usually
oceans in the middle latitudes is mainly

strongest at the surface and decreases
anticyclonic (more pronounced in the southern

in strength (speed) with depth. Most
hemisphere than in the northern hemisphere).

currents have speeds less than or equal
The oceanic circulation pattern also

to 5 knots.
corresponds with the same. At higher latitudes,

Reprint 2025-26



112 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Fig.13.3 : Major currents in the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian oceans

where the wind flow is mostly cyclonic, the Effects of Ocean Currents
oceanic circulation follows this pattern. In

Ocean currents have a number of direct and
regions of pronounced monsoonal flow, the

indirect influences on human activities. West
monsoon winds influence the current

coasts of the continents in tropical and
movements. Due to the coriolis force, the warm

subtropical latitudes (except close to the
currents from low latitudes tend to move to the

equator) are bordered by cool waters. Their
right in the northern hemisphere and to their

average temperatures are relatively low with a
left in the southern hemisphere.

narrow diurnal and annual ranges. There is
The oceanic circulation transports heat

fog, but generally the areas are arid. West coasts
from one latitude belt to another in a manner

of the continents in the middle and higher
similar to the heat transported by the general

latitudes are bordered by warm waters which
circulation of the atmosphere. The cold waters

cause a distinct marine climate. They are
of the Arctic and Antarctic circles move towards

characterised by cool summers and relatively
warmer water in tropical and equatorial

mild winters with a narrow annual range of
regions, while the warm waters of the lower

temperatures. Warm currents flow parallel to
latitudes move polewards. The major currents

the east coasts of the continents in tropical and
in the different oceans are shown in Figure13.3.

subtropical latitudes. This results in warm and
rainy climates. These areas lie in the western

Prepare a list of currents which are margins of the subtropical anti-cyclones. The
found in Pacific, Atlantic and Indian mixing of warm and cold currents help to
Oceans.

replenish the oxygen and favour the growth of
How is the movement of currents planktons, the primary food for fish population.
influenced by prevailing winds? Give

The best fishing grounds of the world exist
some examples from Figure13.3.

mainly in these mixing zones.

Reprint 2025-26



MOVEMENTS OF OCEAN WATER 113

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

  (i) Upward and downward movement of ocean water is known as the :

(a) tide (c) wave

(b) current (d) none of the above

 (ii) Spring tides are caused :

(a) As result of the moon and the sun pulling the earth gravitationally
in the same direction.

(b) As result of the moon and the sun pulling the earth gravitationally
in the opposite direction.

(c) Indention in the coast line.

(d) None of the above.

(iii) The distance between the earth and the moon is minimum when the moon
is in :

(a) Aphelion (c) Perihelion

(b) Perigee (d) Apogee

(iv) The earth reaches its perihelion in:

(a) October (c) July

(b) September (d) January

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) What are waves?

(ii) Where do waves in the ocean get their energy from?

(iii) What are tides?

(iv) How are tides caused?

(v) How are tides related to navigation?

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) How do  currents affect the temperature? How does it affect the temperature
of coastal areas in the N. W. Europe?

(ii) What are the causes of currents?

Project Work

(i) Visit a lake or a pond and observe the movement of waves. Throw a stone
and notice how waves are generated.

(ii) Take a globe and a map showing the currents of the oceans. Discuss why
certain currents are warm or cold and why they deflect in certain places
and examine the reasons.

Reprint 2025-26



114 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

UNIT

VI

LIFE ON THE EARTH

This unit deals with

• Biosphere — biodiversity and conservation

Reprint 2025-26



C H A P T E R

##14##
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION

ou have already learnt about the the earth are today extinct. Biodiversity is not

Y geomorphic processes particularly found evenly on the earth. It is consistently
weathering and depth of weathering richer in the tropics. As one approaches the

mantle in different climatic zones.  See the polar regions, one finds larger and larger
Figure 5.2 in Chapter 5 in order to recapitulate. populations of fewer and fewer species.
You should know that this weathering mantle Biodiversity itself is a combination of two
is the basis for the diversity of vegetation and words, Bio (life) and diversity (variety). In
hence, the biodiversity. The basic cause for simple terms, biodiversity is the number and
such weathering variations and resultant variety of organisms found within a specified
biodiversity is the input of solar energy and geographic region. It refers to the varieties of
water. No wonder that the areas that are rich plants, animals and micro-organisms, the
in these inputs are the areas of wide spectrum genes they contain and the ecosystems they
of biodiversity. form. It relates to the variability among living

organisms on the earth, including the
Biodiversity as we have today is the result variability within and between the species and
of 2.5-3.5 billion years of evolution. Before that within and between the ecosystems.
the advent of humans, our earth Biodiversity is our living wealth. It is a result
supported more biodiversity than in any of hundreds of millions of years of evolutionary
other period. Since, the emergence of

history.
humans, however, biodiversity has begun
a rapid decline, with one species after Biodiversity can be discussed at three

another bearing the brunt of extinction levels : (i) Genetic diversity; (ii) Species diversity;
due to overuse. The number of species (iii) Ecosystem diversity.
globally vary from 2 million to 100 million,
with 10 million being the best estimate. Genetic Diversity
New species are regularly discovered
most of which are yet to be classified (an Genes are the basic building blocks of various

estimate states that about 40 per cent of life forms. Genetic biodiversity refers to the
fresh water fishes from South America variation of genes within species. Groups of
are not classified yet). Tropical forests are individual organisms having certain
very rich in bio-diversity. similarities in their physical characteristics are

called species. Human beings genetically
Biodiversity is a system in constant belong to the homo sapiens group and also

evolution, from a view point of species, as well differ in their characteristics such as height,
as from view point of an individual organism. colour, physical appearance, etc., considerably.
The average half-life of a species is estimated This is due to genetic diversity. This genetic
at between one and four million years, and 99 diversity is essential for a healthy breeding of
per cent of the species that have ever lived on population of species.

Reprint 2025-26



116 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

Species Diversity ecosystem evolves and sustains without any
reason.  That means, every organism, besides

This refers to the variety of species. It relates to
extracting its needs, also contributes something

the number of species in a defined area. The
of useful to other organisms.  Can you think of

diversity of species can be measured through
the way we, humans contribute to the

its richness, abundance and types. Some areas
sustenance of ecosystems.  Species capture

are more rich in species than others. Areas rich
and store energy, produce and decompose

in species diversity are called hotspots of
organic materials, help to cycle water and

diversity (Figure 14.5).
nutrients throughout the ecosystem, fix
atmospheric gases and help regulate the

Ecosystem Diversity
climate. These functions are important for

You have studied about the ecosystem in the ecosystem function and human survival. The
earlier chapter. The broad differences between more diverse an ecosystem, better are the
ecosystem types and the diversity of habitats chances for the species to survive through
and ecological processes occurring within each adversities and attacks, and consequently, is
ecosystem type constitute the ecosystem more productive.  Hence, the loss of species
diversity. The ‘boundaries’ of communities would decrease the ability of the system to
(associations of species) and ecosystems are not maintain itself.  Just like a species with a high
very rigidly defined. Thus, the demarcation of genetic diversity, an ecosystem with high
ecosystem boundaries is difficult and complex. biodiversity may have a greater chance of

adapting to environmental change. In other
words, the more the variety of species in an
ecosystem, the more stable the ecosystem is
likely to be.

Economic Role of Biodiversity

For all humans, biodiversity is an important
resource in their day-to-day life. One important
part of biodiversity is ‘crop diversity’, which is
also called agro-biodiversity. Biodiversity is
seen as a reservoir of resources to be drawn
upon for the manufacture of food,
pharmaceutical, and cosmetic products. This

Figure 14.1 : Grasslands and sholas in Indira
Gandhi National Park, Annamalai, Western Ghats concept of biological resources is responsible

— an example of ecosystem diversity for the deterioration of biodiversity. At the same
time, it is also the origin of new conflicts dealing

Importance of Biodiversity with rules of division and appropriation of
natural resources. Some of the important

Biodiversity has contributed in many ways to economic commodities that biodiversity
the development of human culture and, in supplies to humankind are: food
turn, human communities have played a major crops, livestock, forests, fish, medicinal
role in shaping the diversity of nature at the resources, etc.
genetic, species and ecological levels.
Biodiversity plays the following roles: Scientific Role of Biodiversity
ecological, economic  and scientific.

Biodiversity is important because each species

Ecological Role of Biodiversity can give us some clue as to how life evolved
and will continue to evolve. Biodiversity also

Species of many kinds perform some function helps in understanding how life functions and
or the other in an ecosystem.  Nothing in an the role of each species in sustaining

Reprint 2025-26



BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION 117

ecosystems of which we are also a species.  This The International Union of Conservation of
fact must be drawn upon every one of us so Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) has
that we live and let other species also live their classified the threatened species of plants and
lives. animals into three categories for the purpose

It is our ethical responsibility to consider of their conservation.
that each and every species along with us have
an intrinsic right to exist.  Hence, it is morally Endangered Species
wrong to voluntarily cause the extinction of any

It includes those species which are in danger
species. The level of biodiversity is a good

of extinction. The IUCN publishes information
indicator of the state of our relationships with

about endangered species world-wide as the
other living species. In fact, the concept of

Red List of threatened species.
biodiversity is an integral part of many human
cultures.

LOSS OF BIODIVERSITY

Since the last few decades, growth in human
population has increased the rate of
consumption of natural resources. It has
accelerated the loss of species and habitation
in different parts of the world. Tropical regions
which occupy only about one-fourth of the
total area of the world, contain about three-
fourth of the world human population. Over-
exploitation of resources and deforestation
have become rampant to fulfil the needs of large
population. As these tropical rain forests
contain 50 per cent of the species on the earth, Figure 14.2 : Red Panda — an endangered species
destruction of natural habitats have proved

Vulnerable Species
disastrous for the entire biosphere.

Natural calamities such as earthquakes, This includes the species which are likely to
floods, volcanic eruptions, forest fires, be in danger of extinction in near future if the
droughts, etc. cause damage to the flora and factors threatening to their extinction continue.
fauna of the earth, bringing change the Survival of these species is not assured as their
biodiversity of respective affected regions. population has reduced greatly.
Pesticides and other pollutants such as
hydrocarbons and toxic heavy metals destroy Rare Species
the weak and sensitive species. Species which Population of these species is very small in the
are not the natural inhabitants of the local world; they are confined to limited areas or
habitat but are introduced into the system, are

thinly scattered over a wider area.
called exotic species. There are many
examples when a natural biotic community of CONSERVATION OF BIODIVERSITY
the ecosystem suffered extensive damage
because of the introduction of exotic species. Biodiversity is important for human existence.
During the last few decades, some animals like All forms of life are so closely interlinked that
tigers, elephants, rhinoceros, crocodiles, minks disturbance in one gives rise to imbalance in
and birds were hunted mercilessly by poachers the others. If species of plants and animals
for their horn, tusks, hides, etc. It has resulted become endangered, they cause degradation
in the rendering of certain types of organisms in the environment, which may threaten
as endangered category. human being’s own existence.

Reprint 2025-26



118 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

(iv) Each country should identify habitats
of wild relatives and ensure their
protection.

(v) Habitats where species feed, breed, rest
and nurse their young should be
safeguarded and protected.

(vi) International trade in wild plants and
animals be regulated.

To protect, preserve and propagate the
variety of species within natural boundaries,
the Government of India passed the Wild Life
(Protection) Act, 1972, under which national
parks and sanctuaries were established and
biosphere reserves declared.  Details of these

Figure 14.3 : Humbodtia decurrens Bedd — highly biosphere reserves are given in the book India:
rare endemic tree of Southern Western Ghats (India) Physical Environment (NCERT, 2006).

There are some countries which are
There is an urgent need to educate people

situated in the tropical region; they possess
to adopt environment-friendly practices and

a large number of the world’s species diversity.
reorient their activities in such a way that our

They are called mega diversity centres. There
development is harmonious with other life

are 12 such countries, namely Mexico,
forms and is sustainable. There is an

Columbia, Ecuador, Peru, Brazil, Democratic
increasing consciousness of the fact that such

Republic of Congo, Madagascar, China, India,
conservation with sustainable use is possible Malaysia, Indonesia and Australia in which
only with the involvement and cooperation of these centres are located. In order to
local communities and individuals. For this, concentrate resources on those areas that are
the development of institutional structures at most vulnerable, the International Union for
local levels is necessary. The critical problem the Conservation of Nature and Natural
is not merely the conservation of species nor Resources (IUCN) has identified certain areas
the habitat but the continuation of process of as biodiversity hotspots (Figure 14.1).
conservation. Hotspots are defined according to their

The Government of India along with 155 vegetation. Plants are important because these
other nations have signed the Convention of determine the primary productivity of an
Biodiversity at the Earth Summit held at ecosystem. Most, but not all, of the hotspots
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in June 1992. The world rely on species-rich ecosystems for food,
conservation strategy has suggested the firewood, cropland, and income from timber.
following steps for biodiversity conservation: In Madagascar, for example, about 85 per

(i) Efforts should be made to preserve cent of the plants and animals are found
the species that are endangered. nowhere else in the world, Other hotspots in

(ii) Prevention of extinction requires wealthy countries are facing different types
proper planning and management. of pressures. The islands of Hawaii have

(iii) Varieties of food crops, forage plants, many unique plants and animals that are
timber trees, livestock, animals and their threatened by introduced species and
wild relatives should be preserved; land development.

Reprint 2025-26



BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION 119

Figure 14.4 : Some ecological ‘hotspots’ in the world

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

  (i) Conservation of biodiversity is important for :

(a) Animals (c) Plants

(b) Animals and plants (d) All organisms

 (ii) Threatened species are those which :

(a) threaten others

(b) Lion and tiger

(c) are abundant in number

(d) are suffering from the danger of extinction

(iii) National parks and sanctuaries are established for the purpose of :

(a) Recreation (c) Pets

(b) Hunting (d) Conservation

Reprint 2025-26



120 FUNDAMENTALS OF PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

(iv) Biodiversity is richer in :

(a) Tropical Regions (c) Temperate Regions

(b) Polar Regions (d) Oceans

(v) In which one of the following countries, the ‘Earth Summit’ was held?

(a) the UK (c) Brazil

(b) Mexico (d) China

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) What is biodiversity?

(ii) What are the different levels of biodiversity?

(iii) What do you understand by ‘hotspots’?

(iv) Discuss briefly the importance of animals to human kind.

(v) What do you understand by ‘exotic species’?

3. Answer the following questions in about 150 words.

(i) What are the roles played by biodiversity in the shaping of nature?

(ii) What are the major factors that are responsible for the loss of biodiversity?
What steps are needed to prevent them?

Project Work

Collect the names of national parks, sanctuaries and biosphere reserves of the
state where your school is located and show their location on the map of India.

Reprint 2025-26