##1##
Physical Education

1
In modern times, Physical Education is one of the most Do You Know?
exciting and dynamic subjects. This subject has changed •• Sharir Madhyam Khalu 
dramatically during the last 50 years. It has expanded in Dharma Sadhnam means 
different areas from school to non-school setting and from physique is the prime source 
school-aged children to people of all ages. Earlier, physical of performing all duties.
education was generally understood as physical activities •• Swami Vivekananda and 
either in school time table or some free hand exercises, other philosophers like 
games, sports, racing, swimming, etc. If we look at the Indian Socrates, Aristotle, and 
history of physical education after Independence, a number Plato were of the opinion 
of schemes were launched by the Government of India for that physical training was 
schools, where every student must participate in physical necessary for the youth. 
activities. We can witness the growing interest in games and 
sports exemplified by the fitness boom and the wellness 
movement. Sports events receive worldwide coverage. In 
schools, students like sports and other forms of physical 
activities, which help to achieve and maintain their health 
and well-being.

Meaning and Definition
Physical Education is an education which brings improvement 
in human performance with the help of physical activities. 
Physical activities range from simple walking to jogging, 
running, sprinting, hopping, jumping, climbing, throwing, 
pushing, pulling, kicking, etc. Education without physical 
activities is like body without soul. There is no controversy 
in giving due place to physical education and different forms 
of exercises in the total set-up of education. All teachings in 
human education begin with physical education. Physical 
education is also considered as movement education as the life 
begins from movement only. In general life is characterised 
by movement. The movement starts from the birth of a child, 
till the end of life.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   1 31-07-2020   15:24:29



2 Health and Physical Education - XI

Mental, intellectual, emotional and social development of 
a growing child is dependent and closely related to physical 
development. A physically fit individual possesses a well-
balanced personality which is, mentally sharp, emotionally 
stable and socially well-adjusted.

Physical education teaches how to acquire ability to develop 
strength, speed, endurance and coordination abilities. It also 
emphasises on achieving social qualities, such as, empathy, 
cooperation, friendliness, team spirit, and respect for rules, 
which are essential for healthy social relations with others. 
In this era of technological advancement, physical education 
and sports are considered essential for health, fitness, 
wellness, vigour and strength. 

The concept of physical education is not new. The fact is 
that it has its roots in the ancient period. At various stages in 
history, different people have associated different meanings to 
the word ‘Physical Education’. Physical Education in simple 
words is understood as learning with the help of movements 
of body and realising the benefits at mental level. It simply 
means education through the use of physique and physical 
movements and deriving the advantage for social gain. Some 
of the definitions given by well known authors are given here 
to understand and for the ready reference of the students.

Fig. 1.1: Children participating in physical activities and excercise

Definitions of Physical Education
In ancient India, a sanskrit adage stated that “Sharir 
Servarth Sambhavo Dehe”. The National plan of physical 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   2 31-07-2020   15:24:30



Physical Education 3

education (1956) states that, “Physical education 
should aim at making the child physically, mentally and 
emotionally fit and developing personal and social qualities 
which will help to live happily with others and build a 
good citizen”. It further emphasises that the development 
of the total personality and achievement of worthy 
citizenship motivated for service should be the outcomes of 
physical education.

According to the Ministry of Education and National 
Planning for Physical Education and Recreation, “The aim of 
physical education must be to make every child physically, 
mentally and emotionally fit and also to develop in him 
personal and social qualities that will help to live happily 
with others. Physical education programme should also aim 
to build good citizens of the country.”

According to the Central Advisory Board of Physical 
Education and Recreation, “Physical education is the 
process of education through physical activities. It is the 
development of the total personality of the child to its fullness 
and perfection in body, mind and spirit.”

Sports and physical education are an integral part 
of the learning process, and need to be included in the 
evaluation of performance. A nation-wide infrastructure 
for physical education, sports and games are required 
in the educational field. The infrastructure consists of 
playfields, equipments, coaches and teachers of physical 
education. Available open spaces in urban areas can be 
used for playgrounds. Efforts should be made to establish 
sports institutions and hostels where specialised attention 
can be given to sports activities and sports-related studies, 
along with normal education. Appropriate encouragement 
should be given to those who have talent in sports 
and games. Due focus should be given on indigenous 
traditional games.

Fig. 1.2: Physical exercise

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   3 31-07-2020   15:24:31



4 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 1.1 Charles A. Bucher has defined Physical Education as 
•• Prepare a chart on the steps an “Integral part of total educational process, is a field of 

taken by the Government of endeavour which has its aim — the development of physically, 
India to promote games and mentally, emotionally and socially fit citizens through the 
sports in India and discuss medium of physical activities which have been selected with 
with your classmates. a view to realise these outcomes.”

•• Prepare a chart on the According to American Alliance for health, physical 
Importance of Physical education, recreation and dance, “Physical Education is 
Activities on health and education through physical activities which are selected and 
discuss in the class. carried as with regard to value in human growth, development 

•• Discuss Fit India Movements and behaviour”.
and its benefits. Finally, it can be concluded that the development of all 

personality traits like, physical, social, mental, emotional, 
and moral takes place through various programmes of 
physical education.

Aims and Objectives
If you are doing physical exercises or playing any game 
regularly, you must have realised their importance. The 
aim of physical education is to target the total development 
of human personality. In physical education, the final aim 
is to make every human being physically, mentally and 
emotionally fit and also to provide each kind of opportunity 
to them, so that they can develop such personal and social 
qualities which will help them to live happily with others and 
shape themselves as true citizens of the country. 

Efforts are needed to provide adequate facilities and 
ample time for the individuals and the groups to participate 
in situations that are physically wholesome, mentally 
stimulating and socially sound. Through physical education 
one can strive to achieve the following aims and objectives.

Motor Development
The objective of motor development refers to the 
neuromuscular relationship of nerve or nerve fibre to the one 
that connects the central nervous system with muscles. This 
in turn enables the movement of the body. To enhance the 
ability of the body to act, react and interact, it is necessary 
to exercise the muscles and nerves. In other words, physical 
development of a person is the foremost objective of physical 
education. Physical education is related to physical activities, 
which when performed, have an effect on various organ 
systems of our body. It leads to the improvement in size, 
shape, efficiency, etc., of various organs of these systems. 
An individual who is having good motor movements may 
perform daily routine work very effectively without undue 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   4 31-07-2020   15:24:31



Physical Education 5

fatigue and laziness and feels confident in life. It also promotes 
sound health which enables an individual to become a valuable 
asset for the society and nation.

Fig. 1.3: Children participating in physical activities and excercise

Motor development can be possible through participating 
in different kinds of physical activity programmes like, games, 
sports, yoga, dance, etc. 

Mental Development 
Mental development refers to the ability to think and solve 
problems effectively. Knowledge received by participating in 
physical activities about body movement, health, fitness, 
sanitation, nutrition, disease prevention and others 
may contribute to an individual’s mental development. 
A mentally developed person takes wise decisions at 
the right time and in a right spirit. Mental development 
objectives deal with a person’s ability to think correctly, 
act wisely and skillfully in all situations of life. Various 
activities conducted in physical education classes not 
only require physical strength but also need mental 
alertness, deep concentration, and precise movements. 
In this manner, physical education also sharpens the mind 
and makes it more efficient.

Emotional Development 
This refers to a psychological situation of body and mind. 
Emotion is a drive to do something. Emotion covers 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   5 31-07-2020   15:24:32



6 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 1.2 experiences, such as, fear, anger, joy, love, sorrow, etc. It 
Prepare a project on the status is usually a feeling which has specially become intense. 
of various facilities available in For example, joy means intense pleasure. A child needs to 
your district related to various develop confidence, a feeling of belongingness, and eliminate 
games and sports. Critically negative feelings through participating in games, sports, 
analyse how these can be shared 
effectively. yoga, etc.

Social Development
This objective of physical education refers to the feeling of 
belongingness, adjustment of group living, social poise, social 
relationships, and social adjustment. Physical activities 
provide such opportunities to the children to fulfil basic 
needs like, recognition, self-respect, belongingness, and 
love. When these needs are fulfilled, the individual becomes 
a well-adjusted social person. While participating in physical 
activities including games and sports, an individual acquires 
social qualities, such as, cooperation, friendship, courtesy, 
empathy,  team spirit, democratic living, sportspersonship, 
etc. These qualities are essential for social development. 

Moral Development 
Every game has a set of rules and regulations and it is the 
duty of each player to obey them. The players know that 
disobedience of any rule is a moral crime that can result in 
their expulsion from the team. Therefore, obedience of these 
rules becomes the moral duty of each player. Participation 
in games helps in moral development and equips them  to 
differentiate between right and wrong with honesty. Hence, 
physical education also plays an important role in  the moral 
development of a person.

Need and Importance of Physical Education 
in the Modern Society
The modern researches have proven that the views of Greek 
philosophers Aristotle and Socrates in considering athletics as 
complete education is correct. It has been scientifically observed 
that adequate exercise of limbs is essential for disciplining 
one’s mind in the right spirit. Regular exercises and playing 
games  help the  body and mind to deal with the  modern 
day silent killers, such as, stress, strain, worry, anxiety and 
tension. The need and importance of physical education may be 
understood in several ways which describes the different kinds 
of requirements for various sections of the society.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   6 31-07-2020   15:24:32



Physical Education 7

Health and Physical Education must continue to be a 
compulsory subject from the primary, to the secondary 
stages, and as an optional subject at the higher secondary 
stage. However, it needs to be given equal status with other 
subjects, a status that is not being given at present. In 
order to transact the curriculum effectively, it is essential 
to ensure that the minimum essential physical space and 
equipment are available in every school, and that doctors 
and medical personnel visit school regularly. 
It should be possible to organise the utilisation of school 
space, at the block level at least, for special sports 
programmes both before school hours and after school 
hours to enable children with special talents for sports 
to come here for special training and during vacation 
periods. It should also be possible to develop these sports 
facilities so that many more children can avail of these 
for leisure-time sports activities and engage with team 
games such as basketball, throwball, volleyball, and local 
forms of sports.
Source: The National Curriculum Framework 2005

The need and importance of physical education for every 
section of people in the modern society can be understood 
from the points given below —

•• Optimum development of child’s physical growth 
•• Intellectual development
•• Emotional development 
•• Social development
•• Personal development
•• Character building
•• Physical fitness
•• Development as a disciplined citizen of the country
•• Neuromuscular development
•• Cultural development
•• Developing leadership qualities
•• Healthy and safe environment
•• Development of national integration
•• Better international understanding
Sports and games play an important role in the 

development of human personality. They are no less 
important than food and fresh water. It is interesting to note 
that there are many nurseries and training centres for games 
in most of the developed countries. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   7 31-07-2020   15:24:32



8 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 1.3 Misconceptions about Physical Education 
•• Prepare a list of common and Sports

myths prevailing in your 
surroundings by discussing Lack of understanding about the importance of physical 
with your parents, education results into misconceptions and disbelief.
grandparents, and other There are a number of misconceptions related to physical 
community members. education. Some people do not agree that it is a part of the 

•• Compare with list given. educational process. The fact is that, skill, fitness, performance, 
•• Discuss with your classmates and health are parts of physical education. It addresses the 

“How to remove these educational and developmental values that are the results of 
myths?” participation in physical activities. The participation in these 

activities develops social or co-operative attitude, good character 
and a balanced personality. However, when one fails to recognise 
this holistic approach of physical education, it results in a 
number of misconceptions. People in the society are either less 
aware about the advantages of taking part in physical education 
activities or are left behind with the pace of modern educational 
system. Thus, it becomes  important for all of us to understand 
what we think and how the modern world is looked at by educated 
and disciplined people of the society. Some of the common myths 
associated with physical education are given below.

Physical Education 
•• is all about physical training only.
•• is only about the participation in games.
•• is about building body.
•• is performing drill. 
•• is play.
•• has poor social status.
•• has no job or career prospects.
•• leads to indiscipline.
•• is wastage of money only.
•• has rest periods hence, no physical or mental earning.
•• is taken-up by left out group only.

Terminology used in Physical Education

Game
It is often considered as an 
activity played by more than 
two people combined as a team. 
There are defined objective, time, 
space, rules, and limited pattern 
of behaviour, the outcome of 
which is to determine a winner 
or loser. Fig. 1.4: Children playing football

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   8 31-07-2020   15:24:32



Physical Education 9

Sport
Sport is a wider term which acts as an institution involving 
all physical activities, individual skills, governed by a set of 
rules and often taken competitively.

Sports Training
Planned and systematic process of preparation of sportsperson 
or athlete for better performance, which is based on scientific 
principles, is called sports training. It improves specific fitness 
and sports specific skills, techniques, and tactics.

Gymnastics
Gymnastics include different exercises, without apparatus, 
and with apparatus. These exercises involve arm, leg, 
hand and trunk movements as well as performing jumping 
movements, and maintaining balance. It constitutes agility 
exercises done on various kinds of gymnastic apparatus like, 
parallel bars, horizontal bar, beam, pommel horse, ring, etc.

Fig. 1.5: Players performing gymnastics

Physical Culture
In some of the countries, physical education is considered as 
‘physical culture’. The culture is synonymous to our social 
belief, custom, and religious way of treating the body as temple. 
It also includes the concept of making the body beautiful 
by developing shaped muscles. Weight-training devices, and 
sharp and high intensity exercises are some of the means, 
used for muscle training so that the body looks muscular 
and in good shape.

Drill
Drill includes different kind of body exercises for developing 
good posture of standing, walking, fighting, etc., and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   9 31-07-2020   15:24:33



10 Health and Physical Education - XI

disciplining the body and mind. In games and sports, drill is 
the process of repetition of activities done with beats, music, 
or verbal order.

Health Education
Health Education includes the knowledge about diseases, 
health, rest, sleep, sanitation, pollution and psychosomatic 
disorder. A healthy person is an asset for the society whereas 
an unhealthy person is a liability.

Recreation
Recreation includes playing, singing, camping, hiking, 
reading, gardening, dancing, and many more pleasure-giving 
activities. Through recreation one can regain the lost energy, 
vigour, and spirit. After hard work one can engage in different 
kinds of recreational activities for releasing mental stress 
and get rid of fatigue. 

Career Options in Physical Education, 
Sports and Allied Areas
There are many job opportunities and open career options with 
broader choices  in Physical Education. A sports career in India, 
which was considered less lucrative in the past, has now become 
one of the options for students. Sometimes the students take 
interest in this profession merely for adventure and a tension 
free life. Individuals, who demonstrate peak performance in 
sports and physical education, follow a set of mental processes 
that allow them to produce excellent results consistently. 
These performance strategies translate into a specific set 
of mental skills. By learning these skills, effectiveness and 
performance can be enhanced. There are key strategies that 
lead to high performance in the field of sports—through the 
training of mental practices, individuals can accelerate their 
development and improve their performance. Self confidence is 
one important key to success. For example, physical education 
programme helps to boost one’s self confidence. To make a 
career in physical education, one should start by setting 
modest goals that are meaningful but attainable. Some of the 
options given here are broad areas that are often selected by 
the students undergoing various physical education courses 
as a choice with higher success rate.

Teaching or Coaching
Career in sports has been mainly focused on teaching and 
coaching in schools, colleges, and universities. Teachers 
are involved in teaching and organising physical activity 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   10 31-07-2020   15:24:33



Physical Education 11

programmes based on  theory and practical syllabi of health 
and  physical education, extramural and preparation of teams. 
Coaches are potentially sportspersons or players with talent 
in fundamentals, techniques, and rules of competitive sports 
or games. Coaches are responsible for overall preparation, 
and performance of teams. Coaches are also employed in 
government run centres, sporting clubs, holiday resorts, 
etc., for special sports. Some may also be self-employed in 
their own sports training centres.

Health, Sports and other Related Careers
Nowadays, the interest of youth in health  and particularly 
fitness has been increasing. The demands for specialists 
therefore, in health-related career have also increased. The 
major career categories in health are —

Physical fitness instructor
These are better known as gym or aerobics instructors. They 
supervise people in games, fitness clubs, sports centre, health 
clubs, etc. They prepare the routine of exercise according to 
age, gender and level of fitness of the person. Instructors 
make sure that the equipment are correctly set up. They 
work in consultation with the dieticians, physiologists, 
psychologists, doctors, etc.

Dietician
They plan the diet for a player or a team so that they eat 
proper and balanced food according to their physical work. 
In the present time, dieticians are considered important part 
of modern spa, and beauty parlours and also in hospitals 
and health centres.

Sports Medicine Physician
The sports related injuries are different in nature. Sport 
Medicine Physician can give better treatment to sportsperson 
after understanding the seriousness of sports related 
injuries. A good sportsperson can become a better physician. 
It is the duty of the sports medicine physician to cure the 
sportsperson so as to enable him/her to come back in the 
mainstream. There is thus, a tremendous scope for this 
sports career.

Sports Administration Related Careers
An administrator in sports can be a Sports Director, Sports 
Officer, Head of Department, General Manager, Executive 
Director, Supervisor, etc. The areas that they take care of 
are related to finance, scheduling equipment, facilities, 
public relations, and many more. They also undertake the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   11 31-07-2020   15:24:33



12 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 1.4 responsibility of implementing curriculum, monitoring 
Collect some more information staff, office, managing sports information, scholarship and 
about careers in Health and promotion, supervision of coaches and various competitions, 
Physical Education. organising conferences, etc. An administrator must have 

leadership qualities, should be well organised, willing to 
accept responsibilities, hard working and honest.

Performance Related Careers
Performance related careers in sports are of two types, one 
is professional performers in sports, and second is sports 
officials. The sports performers play as an individual or in team 
for organisations on contract or on pay-roll basis either for 
a specified period, or otherwise. Sports officials like, referee, 
umpire, judges, etc., officiate the match or tournament on 
contract or on pay-roll basis either for a specified period or 
otherwise. Every sportsperson wants to be a professional 
performer but only a few succeed in earning a living. 
The dream of every sports person is to be a professional 
performer like Dhyan Chand, Milkha Singh, Sachin Tendulkar, 
Mary Kom, Vishwanathan Anand, Mahesh Bhupati, Sakshi 
Malik, etc. For officiating, no educational qualification or 
degree is required, only a written and practical examination 
conducted by the state and national sport organisation of a 
specific sport has to be cleared.

Communication Related Careers
A wide range of career opportunities are available in 
sports communication as variety in the means and 
methods of communication are the demands of the society. 
Sports communication includes sports writer, sports 
editor, sports publisher, sports photographer, painter/
artist, broadcaster, sports information director, sports 
statisticians, etc.

Sports Writers
There is a separate section devoted to sports in all the 
newspapers, magazines, periodicals, bulletins, etc.  For 
writing these sections, sports writers are required. The job 
of sports writer is to cover the stories related to the vast 
world of sports on the basis of performance, team selection, 
policies, management, results, and other related matters to 
write sports column.

Sports Publishers
Sports Publishers are responsible for all the publication 
units including the quality, content, sales and promotion 
of books, etc. As there are various textbooks, coaching 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   12 31-07-2020   15:24:33



Physical Education 13

books, sports magazines, audio-visual material, journals, 
periodicals, etc., so publication also has reputed value as a 
career in sports.

Photography
As the scope of photography in sports is not very vast, people 
may opt for it as a part-time/full-time career in sports. 
Individuals with artistic ability, skill and experience in painting 
and drawing sports events can choose this profession.

T.V. or Radio Reporters
Sports are a valuable section on broadcast and telecast. 
Sports events are broadcasted and telecasted to be heard 
on every radio-station and can be seen on T.V. channels 
respectively. Because of high demands of sports, provision 
of special T.V. sports channels are there. The duties of 
broadcasters are to present sports programmes on T.V. or 
radio live from the stadium or playfield. They also present 
commentary summaries, reviews and sports news on T.V. and 
radio. Sometimes they anchor special sports programmes, 
do interactions or take interviews of sports personalities. 

Sales and Management Related Careers
This profession includes sports marketing executives, sports 
events managers and sports competition organisation 
associated with sports equipment, material, etc. The ability 
to interact with customers and to convince them that the 
product or event is suitable to their needs, is the base for 
becoming a successful sports manager. Knowledge of the 
product and organisation of various types of tournament 
and championship are pre-requisite for these jobs. This job 
involves high responsibility and alertness, so long hours in 
the service are required.

Physical education also helps in opting for other careers 
such as defence, para-force, and police service, etc.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   13 31-07-2020   15:24:33



Assessment

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Define physical education and discuss the importance of 

physical education in daily life.
	 2.	 What are the main objectives of physical education? Explain 

any four in detail. 
	 3.	 What are the misconceptions about physical education and 

sports?
	 4.	 What are the career options in physical education?

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 Define recreation.
	 2.	 What do you understand by the term ‘Drill’?
	 3.	 Write the names of apparatus used in Gymnastics.
	 4.	 What are the differences between games and sports?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 Games include different teams where the number of players 

is______________.
	 2.	 In some of the countries physical education is considered 

as ____________________.
	 3.	 After hardwork, one can engage in any kind of_______________

activities for releasing mental stress and get rid of fatigue.
	 4.	 Drill includes different kinds of body______________for 

developing good posture of standing, walking and fighting, etc.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 The concept of physical education is new.
	 2.	 In modern times Physical Education is one of the most exciting 

and dynamic subjects in its history.
	 3.	 Charles A. Bucher has defined Physical Education as an 

“Integral part of total educational process’’.
	 4.	 Gymnastics includes different exercises, without apparatus 

and with apparatus.
	 5.	 Physical education does not promote emotional development 

of a person.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-1.indd   14 31-07-2020   15:24:33



##2##
Understanding Health

2
Health is commonly understood as a state of absence of 
disease. This definition of health is focused only on the ability 
of the body to function, that may be disrupted from time to 
time by diseases. However, this definition of health is partial 
and covers only the physical aspect. In this perspective, the 
meaning of health has been changing over a period of time. 
In 1948, the World Health Organization (WHO) defined it 
comprehensively as “a state of complete physical, mental 
and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease 
or infirmity.” Health is now referred to as a state of physical, 
mental, intellectual, emotional and social health and well-
being. It is the ability to adapt and manage physical, mental 
and social challenges throughout life. Moreover, it is also 
the ability of a person to handle stress, acquire skills, and 
maintain positive relationships. It is widely acknowledged 
that health is influenced by biological, socio-cultural, 
economic, and environmental forces. Access to basic needs 
like, food, safe drinking water supply, housing, sanitation, 
health services and availability of positive socio-cultural, 
economic, and environmental settings influence the health 
status of a population.

Health and its Dimensions
Health, indicates a sound body and a sound mind. It is 
multidimensional — the dimensions being physical, mental, 
emotional, social, spiritual and environmental. All these 
dimensions are interrelated with one another.

Physical Dimension
Physical dimension refers to the ability of a human body 
to function properly. It involves exercises, healthy habits, 
balanced diet, bone health, and body mass index. We 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   15 31-07-2020   15:25:11



16 Health and Physical Education - XI

can maintain a healthy body by taking proper nutrition, 
exercising, and avoiding harmful habits such as substance 
abuse. It is better to consume nutritious foods and beverages 
that enhance good health rather than those which impair it. 
Physical wellness is the ability to maintain the quality of life 
that allows one to get through daily activities without undue 
fatigue or physical stress. Optimal physical health consists 
of building physical strength, flexibility, coordinative ability, 
and endurance while taking safety precautions including 
medical self-care and appropriate use of a medical system, 
as well as protecting oneself from injuries and harm. It 
involves personal responsibility, disease prevention, and 
care for minor illnesses and also knowing when professional 
medical attention is needed. Being physically fit and feeling 
physically well often leads to the psychological benefits of 
enhanced self-esteem, self-control, determination and a 
sense of direction.

Mental Dimension
Mental health refers to the cognitive aspects of health that 
includes thinking, reasoning, remembering, imagining, and 
learning words. Cognitive aspect is related to the processes 
of perception, memory, judgment, and reasoning, as 
contrasted with emotional processes. It refers to the ability of 
individuals to use their brain and think, process information 
and act properly. It is our capacity to master new skills, 
embrace humour, and creativity. A sound mental health 
plays an important role in shaping our daily activities. It 
helps individuals in making a complete person. To stimulate 
our mental health, we can engage in various activities such 
as questioning critically, involving ourselves in creative, and 
problem solving activities. Mental health leads to an increase 
in self-esteem, and thereby leads to confidence in social 
situations. A sound mental health depends primarily on 
increased physical activities. Engaging in games and sports 
regularly keeps us mentally active.

How can we have good mental health?
•• Eat healthy food: There are strong links between what 

we eat and how we feel. A ‘healthy diet’ is one that has 
enough essential nutrient, and provides the right amount 
of calories to maintain a healthy weight.

•• Express your feelings: Whenever we are feeling stressed, 
then talking about our feelings helps us to stay in good 
mental health.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   16 31-07-2020   15:25:11



Understanding Health 17

•• Play games and sports you like: What do you love to 
play? Playing Hockey, Cricket, Chess or any other game 
or doing an activity you enjoy or you’re good at, boosts 
your self-esteem. It helps you to concentrate, sleep, look, 
and feel better. Enjoying through games helps in beating 
stress also.

•• Get enough sleep: Every day our body needs time to 
rest and heal. Sleep for about eight hours is must for all, 
especially for children.

•• Spend time with friends and family: Friends and family 
can make you feel cared for. They can offer different views 
to your problems, and the tension you are feeling. This 
helps in better understanding of the problem or situation 
and thus in solving the problems.

•• Ask for help: None of us is perfect in all aspects. We all 
have problems when things go wrong or get tired at times. 
If you feel that you cannot cope up with the situation, and 
things are getting too much, then do not hesitate to ask 
for help.

•• Do not consume tobacco products or alcohol: 
Tobacco and alcohol result in illness in proportion to the 
consumption. Learn to say ‘No’ to your friends in such 
situations.

Social Dimension
This dimension of health refers to the ability of individuals 
to interact with others in the socio-cultural environment. 
A sound social health helps us in maintaining healthy 
relationships with others. Good social health includes not 
only having positive relationships but behaving appropriately 
and maintaining socially acceptable standards. It focuses 
on creating and maintaining healthy, and supportive 
relationships with family, neighborhood, friends, peers, 
teachers, and community members. Good communication 
skills help in establishing sound relationships. These 
relationships impact a person’s life the most. 

Social health also affects the other dimensions of 
health in many ways. A bad social life, many a times, lead 
individuals to question their purpose in life or feel isolated 
and unwanted. Such feelings can de-motivate individuals 
from physical activity and push them towards depression.

Emotional Dimension
Emotional dimension of health is another important ability 
to cope, adjust and adapt to our environment. People with 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   17 31-07-2020   15:25:11



18 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 2.1 positive mindset tend to be more successful. It is a commonly 
•• List actions and activities to used statement that ‘individuals become the type of person 

make ‘greener’ lifestyle, at like the friends they have’. It means that the friends and 
home and at school. other people who live together in the immediate environment 

•• Review and find out how play a very important role in personality development and 
far you are able to achieve emotional wellness. Some of the techniques which help in 
the objective of becoming having stable emotional health include: reading inspirational 
‘greener’. books, setting goals, learning how to deal with setbacks, 

•• Motivate others to adopt 
life style which promote acquiring characteristics such as hope, enthusiasm, and 
greening the environment. positive thinking.

Spiritual Dimension
There are different belief systems that exist all around the 
world. The spiritual beliefs will help the individuals discover 
and pursue their own value and belief and a sense of overall 
purpose in life. Generally, people often find their purpose 
from a belief or faith system while others create their own 
school of worship. A person who has a purpose in life is said 
to be healthier than those who do not have it. 

Spiritual health easily affects emotional and mental health 
as having a purpose in life can help you to apply yourself 
to achieving goals. Having a purpose in life can also help 
people to maintain a proper perspective of life and overcome 
adversity. Often people who are spiritual, meet together 
regularly around their spiritual purpose, which helps to 
improve their social health also.

Environmental Dimension
Environmental health inspires us to live a lifestyle that is 
beneficial for our surroundings. It encourages us to live in 
harmony with the nature by taking action to protect it. Our 
environment consists of external and internal factors. Our 
surroundings such as our habitat, occupation, pollution 
levels at the places where we live and work constitute 
our external environment. A healthier planet leads to 
healthier inhabitants. The internal environment refers to 
an individual’s internal structure in the form of genetic 
composition, which is very crucial in determining the 
health and wellness of human beings. Other environmental 
factors which include our family, friends, neighbourhood, 
community, habitat, all have an impact on our health.

The core principle of environmental wellness is respect for 
nature and all the species living in it. Environmental wellness 
does not mandate you to join a movement or organisation, 
but it does encourage you to practise habits that promote 
a healthy environment. When you become environmentally 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   18 31-07-2020   15:25:11



Understanding Health 19

aware, you will be able to realise how your daily habits affect 
the environment. Improving environmental wellness is simple 
and results in a more balanced lifestyle.

Health Needs of Children, Adolescents and 
Differently Abled
Health of the children is a critical concern for all societies, 
since it contributes to their overall development. The age 
group category of children includes toddlers, infants, 
and kids in the age-group up to 9 years, adolescents in 
the age-group from 10 to 19 years, and differently abled 
belonging to both the age-groups. Health, nutrition, and 
education are important for the overall development of 
the children, so that they grow as empowered members 
of the society and responsible citizens of the nation. 
The criticality of health concerns of all the groups need 
multi-dimensional response, depending upon their specific 
age, and socio-economic and educational status of the 
parents.

Health Needs of Children
Childhood is the stage during which the foundation of healthy 
life is laid. The physical, mental and social health needs are 
significant for the overall development of the child. The basic 
health needs of the children belonging to pre-natal, post-
natal and childhood stages are related to food and nutrition, 
immunity, positive family and social environment. Children 
in India continue to lose their lives to vaccine preventable 
diseases, such as, measles, which remains the biggest killer. 
The major cause of mortality and morbidity among children 
is a group of disease conditions like, diarrhoea, pneumonia 
and fevers which occur due to lack of immediate treatment by 
the family and non-availability of adequate health services. 
Besides, poor living conditions and lack of response to basic 
needs of children are also responsible factors. Even those 
who survive these hurdles, by the time they reach school, 
they may be underweight, malnourished, and susceptible to 
multiple illnesses.

There is an urgent need to adopt a multi-pronged strategy 
to ensure adequate response to the health needs of children. 
Besides ensuring availability of quality health and nutrition 
services, reducing mortality rates, and improving access to 
education and skill development should be given priority. 
All children must undergo the entire course of vaccination 
and this process must continue. To attain these goals, 
it is essential to make the people aware about the urgent 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   19 31-07-2020   15:25:11



20 Health and Physical Education - XI

need of all the age-groups and ensure that these needs are 
responded well in time and health, and nutrition services 
are utilised. The process of governance must make sure that 
these services are availed by all including the marginalised 
sections of the society. 

Health Needs of Adolescents

Fig. 2.1: Snapshot of adolescent health in India
Adolescents constitute about one-fifth of India’s population. 
As you have already learnt, adolescence is a period of 
transition from childhood to adulthood and a critical period 
for the development of self-identity. The process of acquiring 
a sense of self-awareness is linked to physical, physiological, 
mental, and emotional changes. It is also a phase of learning to 
negotiate the social and psychological demands of being young 
adults. Responsible handling of issues like, independence, 
intimacy and peer group dependence are concerns that need 
to be recognised, and appropriate support be given to cope 
with them. Adolescents are confused about sudden changes 
taking place in their bodies and minds. As a result, they 
face many doubts regarding numerous concerns, and health 
related uses. Many adolescents experience tension, and 
stress and respond differently on different occasions. 

There are concerns about growing too tall or not gaining 
height, growth and development of body parts, and so on. 
Worrying about pimples on the face is a common problem 
during adolescence. 

Adolescence is also a time when there is a temptation to 
experiment, which leads them to indulge in various negative 
behaviours. The process of distancing from parents and 
dependence on peer group also lands them in confusing 
situations. No doubt the peer group provides positive impact 
but quite often it leads them to adopt negative behaviour. The 
most common is drug abuse. As a result, there are chances of 
their becoming addicted to smoking and various kinds of drugs. 
Initially, the young people take these for fun, relaxation, or 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   20 31-07-2020   15:25:12



Understanding Health 21

to get out of tension and stress. But later there are higher Activity 2.2
chances of one becoming addicted to these. Unfortunately, Discuss with your classmates 
the earlier one gets into the habit of substance misuse, the —how and why excessive use 
greater are the chances of addiction, and serious diseases of social networking site is 
like cancer, and heart diseases during adult age. depressing and self harming?

Major health needs and problems among adolescents 
include nutritional disorders (malnutrition as well as obesity), 
substance abuse, high risk sexual behaviour, stress, mental 
disorders, and injuries (including road traffic injuries, Do You Know?
suicides, and different types of violence). Many of these About 2.21 per cent of the total 
are precursors of communicable and non-communicable population of India is ‘disabled’. 
diseases (including mental disorders), and injuries, which The highest number of disabled 
inflict high morbidity, mortality, disability, and economic persons in India is from the 
burden on adolescents, their households, and health State of Uttar Pradesh. At all 

India level, 7.62 per cent of the 
systems. Moreover, the addiction to internet, especially to disabled persons belong to the 
social media, has been increasingly keeping them under age group of 0–6 years. Focus 
great stress, leading them to undergo depression and self- today is on inclusive education.
harm. They need help and guidance to pass over this period Source: Census 2011
smoothly. They need counseling and healthcare advice, as 
well as treatment.

Health Needs of the Differently Abled
You would have observed that the differently-abled children 
are often hidden in their homes. Usually this type of 
discrimination starts in the family. It exists at various 
levels such as, education centers, work places, and in 
healthcare facilities and so on. Due to the stigma associated 
with disabilities, the families also become the victims of 
discrimination. As a result, the differently-abled children 
face chronic ill health, socio-economic burden, and isolation. 

According to World Health Organisation, disability is an 
umbrella term, covering impairments, activity limitations, 
and participation restrictions. Disability is thus not just a 
health problem but is a complex phenomenon, reflecting the 
interaction between features of a person’s body and features 
of the society in which they live.

The National Policy for Persons with Disabilities (2006) 
recognises that the persons with disabilities are valuable 
human resources for the country. It seeks to create an 
environment that provides equal opportunities, protection of 
their rights and full participation in society. The 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development has also highlighted about the 
needs and issues of ‘Persons with disabilities’ and ‘Persons 
in vulnerable situation’.

Therefore, taking care of physical, social and emotional 
well-being of such a population is a major challenge. 
Many policies and welfare schemes have been planned in the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   21 31-07-2020   15:25:12



22 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 2.3 field of education and health to overcome various difficulties 
•• Prepare a chart on the faced by the differently-abled individuals and their families.

Disability Act 2016. The focus is on ‘inclusive development’ for the welfare of 
•• Observe your surroundings differently-abled persons which is an important milestone 

and analyse how far the act towards sustainable development.
has been implemented.

•• List the actions you can Health Status of Children in India at a Glance
take and share with your 
classmates. •• At all India level, the sex ratio in the age groups 0–6 years 

•• Collect information about and 0–14 years are 918 and 916 respectively whereas it 
various programmes and is 943 for all ages and also is not favourable to females in 
schemes for differently-abled many of the States and UTs.
individuals and share it in the •• As per Sample Registration System (SRS)-2016, there has 
morning assembly. been substantial reduction in the Infant Mortality Rate 

(IMR) at all India level from 46 in 2011 to 34 in 2016. 
Among the bigger States and UTs, IMR varies widely from 
10 in Kerala to 47 in Madhya Pradesh. The IMR for female 
has been reported at 36 against 33 for male.

•• Under-five Mortality Rate (U5MR) estimated at 39 for 2016 
at all India level varies significantly in rural (43) and urban 
areas (Data). Among the bigger States and UTs, U5MR 
varies from 11 in Kerala to 55 in Madhya Pradesh.

•• At all India level, 28 per cent of children had mild anaemia, 
29 per cent had moderate anaemia, and 2 per cent had 
severe anaemia in 2015–16.

•• National Family Health Survey (NFHS-4) (2015–16) shows 
that at all India level, 38 per cent of children under five 
years of age are stunted (too short height for their age) 
which is an improvement from 48 per cent in 2005–06. It 
is higher among children in rural areas (41%) than that of 
urban areas (31%).

•• Five states with higher prevalence of stunting in children 
under five years age are Bihar (48%), Uttar Pradesh (46%), 
Jharkhand (45%), and Meghalaya (44%), whereas it is 
lowest in Kerala and Goa (20% in each).

•• At all India level, 21 per cent of children under five years 
age are wasted. It varies in the range of 6 per cent in 
Mizoram to 29 per cent in Jharkhand.

•• The prevalence of anaemia among children in age group 
6–59 months is highest among children in Haryana (72%) 
and lowest in Mizoram (19%).

•• At all India level, 62 per cent of children of age 12–23 
months received all basic vaccinations at any time before 
the NFHS -4, and 54 per cent received all basic vaccinations 
by 12 months of age.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   22 31-07-2020   15:25:12



Understanding Health 23

•• National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data reveals that 
the rate of crime against children (below 18 years of age) 
has increased to 24 per lakh children in 2016 from 21.1 
in 2015.

•• Under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences 
Act, 2012 (POCSO) crimes reported are as high as 34.4 
per cent of the total crime against children.

Addressing the Health Needs of Children
Institutions, teachers and reviewers play an important role 
in addressing the health needs of children. These are 
discussed below.
Role of Schools
Schools play a vital role in promoting the health and safety of 
young people and helping them to establish lifelong healthy 
behaviours. It is easier and more effective to develop healthy 
behaviours during childhood than trying to change unhealthy 
behaviours during adulthood. Many health risks behaviours 
are often established during childhood or adolescence and 
continued into adulthood. The following are the leading 
causes of diseases, death, disability, and social problems:
•• Inadequate physical activity
•• Unhealthy diet
•• Substance misuse (Tobacco, alcohol and other drug use)
•• Stress
•• Behaviours that contribute to unintentional injury and 

violence
•• Risky behaviours that can result in HIV infection, other 

sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and unintended 
pregnancy.
Regular physical education classes can help children to 

develop a healthy lifestyle.
Role of Teachers
Teachers have a very important role to play during the period 
spent in schools. They need to understand and address the 
diverse needs of their students through innovative teaching 
methods, counseling and referral to specialists wherever 
required. They need to work closely with the parents and 
community on sensitive issues and the emerging challenges 
being faced by the children. The teacher can plan various need-
based health promotion programmes for the empowerment 
of children such as, engaging in games and sports, physical 
activities, curricular and extra-curricular activities, nutrition 
education programmes, and preventive measures for substance 
misuse.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   23 31-07-2020   15:25:12



24 Health and Physical Education - XI

Role of Adolescent-friendly Health Services
The children during adolescence are usually considered 
a healthy cohort. They generally do not have any medical 
problem. They just want to have some more information or 
knowledge about some of the concerns that may be troubling 
their mind. Often they do not get any proper answer for their 
concern and get frustrated and feel lost. They can easily be 
misled, and hence get into wrong habits and adopt risky 
behaviours.

Adolescents are often quite reluctant to share many of 
their problems with parents, family members and teachers. 
They feel scared, ashamed or shy to discuss their problems 
with them since they believe that these people will get upset 
and will not be sensitive to their concerns. That is why, 
we need to encourage them to speak about their personal 
concern to someone whom they trust.

One of the emerging health needs of the adolescents 
is accessibility and availability of health services for 
various health issues. The healthcare workers can play an 
important role in making the services adolescent-friendly 
and encouraging them to use the health services more often. 
These services are provided by trained healthcare workers in 
adolescent-friendly health centres. These centers are being 

Activity 2.4 established by the government in the form of adolescent-
Does your school provide friendly health clinics. The adolescents feel shy and are 
training to be a peer facilitator? 
If not, please discuss it with reluctant to use health services. Some of the reasons are lack 
your class teacher. Ask your of privacy or confidentiality, lack of patience and sensitivity 
school to take up the training of among the health workers, and also lack of friendly behaviour 
peer group educator/facilitator. from them.

Role of Peer Educator or Peer Facilitator
Training or providing education to some adolescents who 
can help, educate or counsel other adolescents is emerging 
as a powerful technique for addressing the health needs of 
the adolescents. Such adolescents are called as ‘Peer Group 
Facilitator/Educators’. They can help the adolescents to 
remove their shyness to talk to their parents, family members 
and teachers.

Training is given to the children of senior classes to 
understand and guide to the best of their ability to address 
the health needs of friends, peers, and other children in the 
community. But at the same time, one should be aware of 
one’s limitations while giving information regarding sensitive 
issues and problems. Refer them to teachers or adolescent 
friendly services for appropriate support. As peer facilitator, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   24 31-07-2020   15:25:12



Understanding Health 25

one can help the teacher in organising various activities Activity 2.5
related to adolescents’ issues and concerns. You have read about lifestyle 

diseases in your previous classes. 
To be a peer group educator/facilitator, you should Can you list some of these? Also 

discuss about their prevention.
•• be a good listener.
•• have knowledge about various health issues of the children 

during adolescence age.
•• be friendly, influential and acceptable to adolescent 

children.
•• be trusted and truthful.
•• use creative and innovative approach while dealing with 

problems.
•• be non-judgmental.
•• practice confidentiality.
•• be a good role model in the school and society.

Lifestyle and Wellness
Everyone wants to look good and healthy. Maintaining 
a healthy lifestyle requires commitment. Strong desire, 
dedication and motivation play an important role in 
accomplishing a healthy lifestyle.

We all make New Year’s resolution and set a goal to 
change some things in a more meaningful manner in our 
life. One aspect, which most of us think to modify in our life 
relates to our body weight, physical and mental health, or 
our personality. Many are able to stick to these goals, but 
many of us fail also. It is difficult but not impossible to make 
changes in lifestyle especially with regards to engaging in 
regular physical activities or games.

With respect to our health, how do we sustain such goals 
is the most difficult question. We need to work out many 
strategies to motivate us to continue keeping health goals 
in sight. So being regular with physical activities, games, or 
sports that you wish to play or restricting eating junk food on 
a weekly basis or on most of the days is the key to maintain 
good physical and mental health.

Healthy Lifestyle and Health Goals
A healthy lifestyle does not become part of our life in an 
instant. It is a series of choices we make every day consciously 
and continuously. Initially, the changes of opting a healthy 
lifestyle and undertaking wellness activities are difficult, but 
if we persist, it becomes a part of our new healthy behaviour. 
Therefore, it is important that healthy lifestyle activities are 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   25 31-07-2020   15:25:12



26 Health and Physical Education - XI

adopted as part of our life from early childhood and adolescent 
period itself. This helps to prevent or reverse the adverse 
effects of lifestyle disorders such as, poor eating habits and 
physical inactivity. In order to maintain health goals we can 
try the following strategies:

Set positive health goals: Having positive health goals keeps 
us motivated to follow goals with energy and enthusiasm. 
For example, a student may decide, ‘I will skip dinner daily’. 
This is a determination with a negative mind. This type of 
goal does not train our mind for healthy lifestyle. Instead, 
the goal could be, ‘I will eat healthy food’. This helps to make 
healthy food choices. Similarly, one can decide, “I will firmly 
say ‘NO’ to Tobacco use”. Such goals help us to reinforce 
positive behaviours in the long term.

Set realistic goals: You would agree that many times we 
set health goals but fail to achieve them. For example, we 
may decide to exercise at least five days a week. But we have 
not been able to do so for about two weeks now. Gradually 
we lose track of our goal and we feel that now it’s difficult 
to exercise. We slip into the attitude of either we follow it 
every day or none. This is because we give up as we have 
not been able to exercise for five days due to lack of time. In 
such situations, we should not feel guilty of failure. Rather 
we should re-visit and re-plan our goals related to regular 
physical activity or playing games, considering the real 
situations in our life.

Few Tips for Meeting Health Goals
Decide your health goal. Keep it easy for you to begin the 
act. Keep them ‘SMART’. Think what problems could come in 
your way and how you can overcome these problems.
S   -	 SPECIFIC: I will do jogging.
M   -	 MEASURABLE: For at least 30 minutes, daily or 
	 three/four days in a week.
A   -	 ACHIEVABLE: For five days in a week.
R   -	 RELEVANT: I will reduce my body weight.
T   -	 TIME BOUND: I will follow this schedule throughout 
	 the year.

Given below are some other aspects related to health.
Write in the table below as per the ‘SMART’ goal to remain 
healthy.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   26 31-07-2020   15:25:12



Understanding Health 27

Health Goals
My Smart Goals are Diet Physical Activity Any other
Specific
Measurable
Achievable
Relevant
Time-Bound
Weight

Efforts for Achieving Health Goals at 
International Level—Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) 1 2 3 4
The Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs) were related to basic development 

Promote Gender

issues. These were target-based, time Eradicate Extreme Achieve Universal Equality and Reduce
Poverty and Hunger Primary Education Empower Women Child Mortality

bound and have been among the most 
successful global goals. Among the list 5 6 7 8
of eight MDG goals, three were related 
to health. These goals stressed the Combat HIV/Aids, Ensure

Improve Maternal Malaria, and Other Environmental Global Partnership

importance of health challenges at the Health Diseases Sustainability for Development

global level. Fig. 2.2: Millenium development goals
The SDGs are also, known as ‘Transforming our world: 

the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development’. There are 17 
Global Goals having 169 targets. SDGs also carry forward 
the unfinished agenda of MDGs for continuity and to sustain 
the momentum generated. These also aim to address the 
challenges of inclusiveness, equity, and urbanisation.

Fig. 2.3: Global goals for sustainable development

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   27 31-07-2020   15:25:12



28 Health and Physical Education - XI

The third SDG—‘ensure healthy lives and promote well-
being for all at all ages’—is wide-ranging as compared to the 
health goals in MDGs that were limited to child and maternal 
mortality and communicable diseases. The most important 
feature of SDG 3 is universal health coverage which means 
to provide ‘access to good quality health services without 
financial hardship for people in need’.

The adolescents face challenges to their healthy 
development due to a variety of factors. Some of these include 
poverty, social discrimination, inadequate education, early 
marriage, and child-bearing. It is speculated that investments 
in adolescents will have an immediate, direct, and positive 
impact on India’s health goals.

Project on Sustainable Development
Prepare a project on any one SDG and focus on the following:
•• Collect information about the targets set by UN for 

that goal.

•• Describe what actions have been taken by our Government 
related to that goal?

•• How can you contribute towards achieving the goal?
•• You can make a poster related to the theme of this SDG. 

Place it in the classroom and discuss.

Contribution of Physical Education for 
Promoting Health and Well-being
Physical health and mental health are inseparable. Daily 
exercise is important for gaining, reducing, or maintaining 
weight. Physical activities are fundamental for energy 
balance, and weight control. 

These are important lifestyle related health determinants. 
Low levels of physical activity pose the greatest public health 
problems in India and many countries around the world.

Many lifestyle diseases today are because of lack of 
physical activities. Physical activity for a longer duration 
leads to deterioration of the essential body functions. A 
20–30 per cent increased risk in all-cause mortality was seen 
in people with insufficient physical activity as compared to 
those who were involved in at least 150 minutes of moderate-
intensity physical activity each week. (WHO, 2010)

Physical activity leads to maintenance or improvement 
in the functioning of the organs. It provides essential stimuli 
for most organs of the human body, in order to develop and 
maintain their structures and functions of life. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   28 31-07-2020   15:25:12



Understanding Health 29

Physical activity is a key determinant of energy, balance, 
and weight control. The beneficial effects of physical activity 
go beyond controlling excess body weight. It reduces the 
risk for cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, blood pressure, 
and cancer. It improves the level of high density lipo 
protein cholesterol, improves the control of blood glucose in 
overweight people, even without significant weight loss.

WHO recommendations about physical activities
for children and adolescents aged 5–17 years
•• Should do at least 60 minutes from moderate to vigorous-

intensity physical activity daily.

•• Physical activities for more than 60 minutes daily will 
provide additional health benefits.

•• Should include activities that strengthen music and bone, 
at least thrice in a week.

For age group 18–64 years
•• Should do at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity 

physical activity thoughout the week, or do at least 75 
minutes of vigorous-intensity physical activity thoughout 
the week, or an equivalent combination of moderate and 
vigorous-intensity activity.

•• For additional health benefits, adults should increase 
their moderate-intensity physical activity to 300 minutes 
per week, or equivalent.

•• Muscle-strengthening activities should be done involving 
major muscle groups on two or more days a week.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   29 31-07-2020   15:25:12



Assessment

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 What are the common health needs of adolescents?
	 2.	 List all the dimensions of health and explain the emotional 

and spiritual dimensions briefly. 
	 3.	 What are MDGs, and SDGs? How are these important for 

the world?
	 4.	 What are the benefits of engaging in regular physical activity 

to the adolescents and the young?
	 5.	 Explain the physical and mental dimensions of health.
	 6.	 How can we get good mental health? Explain.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 List some reasons due to which the adolescents do not utilise 

health services.
	 2.	 List important signs of stress and tension among the 

adolescents.
	 3.	 What are the causes of lifestyle diseases?
	 4.	 What are the benefits of setting positive health goals?
	 5.	 How much population of India is disabled currently?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 Health is commonly understood as a state of absence of 

___________ .
	 2.	 The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) helped in focusing 

global attention and resources towards basic ___________ 
issues.

	 3.	 Health indicates a sound ___________, and sound ___________ .
	 4.	 ___________ of health refers to the ability of individuals to 

interact with others in the socio-cultural environment.
	 5.	 Health of the children is a critical concern for all societies, 

since it contributes to their ___________ .
	 6.	 Schools play a vital role in promoting the health and safety of 

young people and helping them to establish lifelong ___________.
	 7.	 ________________ is a key determinant of energy expenditure, 

energy balance, and weight control.
	 8.	 The SDGs, known as ‘Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda 

for Sustainable Development’ is a set of ________________ 
Global Goals with ________________ targets between them.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   30 31-07-2020   15:25:12



Understanding Health 31

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 Health is influenced by biological, socio-cultural, economic, 

and environmental factors.
	 2.	 Lifestyle diseases are —Typhoid, Malaria, and Tuberculosis.
	 3.	 Mental health refers to the cognitive aspects of health that 

includes thinking, reasoning, remembering, imagining, and 
learning words.

	 4.	 Childhood is the stage during which the foundation of healthy 
life is laid.

	 5.	 Physical health and mental health are separable.
	 6.	 Not everyone wants to look good and healthy.

	V.	 Skill based Questions
	 1.	 Find out the status of anaemia among the boys and girls in 

your State. What schemes have been developed by your State 
and the Government of India to tackle anaemia?

	 2.	 You have read about healthy diet in previous classes. Make 
a diet chart for an adolescent boy in the age group of 14–17 
years.

	 3.	 Make a project on lifestyle diseases. What are the major 
lifestyle diseases? Discuss how one can prevent the lifestyle 
diseases.

	 4.	 Find out the desired minimum levels of physical activities for 
children, adolescents, and adults in different age groups.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-2.indd   31 31-07-2020   15:25:13



Physical and 
Physiological 

Aspects of Physical 
Education and 

S 3
ports

##3##
Physical and physiological aspects of physical education 
and sports include growth and development, heredity and 
environment, and differences between growth and development. 
Factors affecting growth and development, and physical and 
physiological changes occurring during developmental stages 
are also discussed in this chapter. Physiological aspects include 
activities like warming up, conditioning and cooling down, 
effects of exercises on muscular, digestive, circulatory, and 
respiratory systems. These  are also the  part of this chapter.

Growth and Development
The terms growth and development are used in various 
aspects of life. Growth can be explained as becoming bigger 
or larger. Growth is termed as a physical change, whereas 
development includes physical, social, and psychological 
changes. Development also means transformation or 
improvement. Growth is related to quantitative improvement. 
Development is related to quantitative as well as qualitative 
improvement.

Growth
Growth refers to the process through which the body 
increases in size and shape. It is a biological process. In 
other words, growth means increase in mass. From the time 
of conception, the process of growth starts in the mother’s 
womb. The fertilised egg continues to grow and after birth 
this process goes on till complete physical maturity is 
obtained. Growth is thus, a quantitative increase in size 
and shape. Physical growth refers to these changes in size 
and shape of different organs of the body, each of which 
normally proceeds at a different rate. Growth therefore, is a 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   32 31-07-2020   15:25:39



Physical and Physiological Aspects ... 33

tangible biological process in which the organism gains in 
terms of size, volume, height, and weight.

Development
Development is related with advancement and a progressive 
series of qualitative changes. Development processes have 
greater relationship with external factors than growth. Proper 
development cannot take place unless external factors such 
as nutrition, activity, and protection from diseases, and other 
socio-cultural influences are well ensured. More specifically 
development can be defined as the emerging and expanding 
of capabilities of the individual. Growth forms the basis for 
the development of functional capacities of the child. Without 
proper growth, probably the required level of development 
may not be achieved at a given stage. Acquisition of skills and 
knowledge also indicates developmental process. Although 
growth comes to end at some stage of life, development 
continues till death.

Table 1: Difference between Growth and Development

Growth Development
Growth is visible. Development can be observed.
Growth is quantitative. Development is quantitative as well as 

qualitative.
Growth comprises of height, Along with the physical changes, 
weight, size, and shape of body cognitive, social, and emotional 
and its organs. changes are also included.
It is due to cell division. It happens due to motor and mental 

processes and their interplay.
Growth is for limited period. Development is a life long process.
Growth can be measured It can be observed by matured 
objectively. behaviour.
Growth tells about one aspect of Development deals with all the aspects 
the personality and is limited in of personality and has a vast scope.
scope.
Growth can be measured and Development is more related to 
continues up to certain age of an qualitative aspect and difficult to 
individual. measure for instance, mental ability, 

academic achievement, etc.
The limits of the growth are set by Development is more affected by the 
the heredity of an individual. environment available to the person.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   33 31-07-2020   15:25:39



34 Health and Physical Education - XI

Factors Affecting Growth and Development
The following factors influence the growth and development 
of a living organism. 

Heredity
Heredity is a biological process that plays an important role 
in the transmission of physical and social attributes from 
parents to their children. Height, weight and structure 
of the body, colour of hair and eyes, intelligence, 
aptitudes, and instincts of the child are highly influenced by 
heredity.

The behaviour of a living organism is influenced by 
two factors — heredity and environment. The biological or 
psychological characteristics which are transmitted by the 
parents to their children are known by the name of heredity. 
It is a biological process of transmission of certain traits 
of appearance and behaviour of the parents towards their 
offsprings. Heredity traits are innate, they are present at birth. 
The essential characteristics inherited by all human beings 
are physical structure, reflexes, innate drives, intelligence, 
temperament, etc.

Environment 
Environment plays an important role in human life. 
Psychologically a person’s environment consists of the sum 
total of the stimulations (physical and psychological) which 
is received from the conception. There are three different 
types of environment, such as —
1.	 Physical: It consists of all outer physical surroundings. 

These are both animate and inanimate which have to 
be manipulated in order to provide food, clothing, and 
shelter. Geographical conditions such as weather, 
climate, and physical environment also have considerable 
impact on an individual child.

2.	 Social: It is constituted by the society, individuals, 
institutions, social laws, and customs that regulate 
human behaviour. It refers to the physical and social 
setting in which a child lives. It includes culture, 
education, human settlement, etc.

3.	 Psychological: It is rooted in an individual’s reaction with 
an object and situation. One’s love, affection, emotion, 
and feeling of friendship and brotherhood will strengthen 
human bond with one another.

Environment is the sum total of the surroundings in 
which an individual has to live. It is generally divided into 
two categories—natural and social. Natural environment 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   34 31-07-2020   15:25:39



Physical and Physiological Aspects ... 35

refers to all those things and forces on, and around the earth 
that are natural and influence a person. Social environment 
means the environment which one sees around oneself 
on acquiring consciousness in the society, i.e., languages, 
religions, customs, traditions, means of communication, 
means of luxury, family, school, social groups, etc.

Role of Heredity and Environment on Growth and 
Development

•• Heredity is responsible for all the inborn traits, in-
stincts, emotions, and physical traits.

•• Environment is responsible for the growth and develop-
ment of the mental and social traits.

•• The two forces heredity and environment are com-
plementary to each other like seed and soil, ship and 
wave, etc. 

So growth and development are regulated by the surrounding 
environment of a child, or where an individual lives.

Gender
Gender acts as an important factor in human growth and 
development. Boys in general are taller, heavier in comparison 
to the girls but girls demonstrate early physical growth during 
adolescence than boys. The body composition and structural 
growth of girls are different from boys.

Nutrition
Growth and development of the child depends on food 
habits and nutrition. The human body requires an 
adequate supply of calories for its normal growth and 
this requirement varies with phases of development. 
Malnutrition has an adverse effect on the structural and 
functional development of the child.

Exercise
Physical exercises have positive impact on growth and 
development of the children. The functional activities come 
in the form of exercises of the body. It means growth through 
use and atrophy (the reverse of growth) through disuse.

The growth of muscles from the normal functioning of 
the child is a matter of common knowledge. It is a fact that 
repeated physical activity builds the strength of the muscle. 
The increase in muscular strength is mainly due to better 
circulation and good stimulation supply of nutrients and 
oxygen to the muscles. Play and other physical activities 
provide for the growth and development of skeletal muscles. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   35 31-07-2020   15:25:40



36 Health and Physical Education - XI

Hormones
Hormones are chemical substances and play an important role 
in regulating the process of growth and development. There 
are many endocrine glands present inside our body. Endocrine 
glands are ductless glands and are situated in some specific 
parts of the body. These glands make internal secretions locally 
and produce one or more hormones.

Hormones are physiological substances having the 
power to increase or decrease the activity level of the body 
or certain organs of the body. For example, thyroid gland 
releases thyroxin hormone which influences the skeletal 
and muscular growth. In the absence of this hormone in 
appropriate proportion, growth and development is affected.

Similarly, the adrenal glands are situated very close to 
kidneys. These secrete adrenaline, which is responsible for 
strong and rapid heartbeat, release of stored sugar from liver 
and controls blood pressure. Gonads are repoductive glands, 
which secrete hormones that affect our growth and sexual 
behaviour.

Learning and Reinforcement
Learning is the most important and fundamental topic in 
the whole science of psychology. Development consists of 
maturation and learning. Learning includes much more 
than school learning. Learning goes to help the child in the 
physical, mental, emotional, intellectual, social, and attitudinal 
developments. All knowledge and skill, all good and bad habits, 
all acquaintances with people and things, all attitudes built up 
while dealing with people and things are learned.

Reinforcement is an important factor in learning. Exercise 
or activity is necessary for learning. It may be a motor activity, 
as in playing on a musical instrument, or it may be a sensory 
activity as in listening to a piece of music. Whatsoever, there 
must be activity in some form. ‘Learning by doing’, is an 
old psychological proverb. Now it is accepted that, activity 
should be repeated till we get the desired results. So the 
saying should be replaced as ‘learning by doing and getting 
results’.

Pollution 
According to studies, air pollution not only affects the 
respiratory organs but also has harmful effects on human 
growth. Indoor pollution or the pollution from housing 
conditions can result in ill health which can negatively 
impact human growth and development. For example, lead 
exposure from deteriorated lead-based paint in older housing 
can be very harmful. Lead is very harmful for children as 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   36 31-07-2020   15:25:40



Physical and Physiological Aspects ... 37

it simply gets immersed into the growing bodies of children 
and obstructs the normal development of brain and other 
organs and systems.

Socio-economic Status 
Socio-economic factors definitely have some effect. It has 
been seen that children from different socio-economic 
background vary in average body size at all ages. The families 
with high income are primarily more advanced. The most 
important reasons behind this are better nutrition, better 
facilities, regular meals, sleep, and exercise. Family size also 
influences the growth rate, as in big families with limited 
income, sometimes children do not get the proper nutrition 
and hence the growth is affected.

Physical and Physiological Changes During 
Developmental Stages

Early Childhood 
Early childhood is a time of tremendous growth across all 
the areas of development. Physically, between birth and age 
of three, a child typically doubles in height and quadruples 
in weight. A typical three-year-old might have mastered 
many skills, including sitting, walking, toilet training, using 
a spoon, scribbling, and sufficient hand-eye coordination to 
catch and throw anything. Between three and five years of age, 
children continue to grow rapidly and begin to develop fine-
motor skills. By the age of five, most children demonstrate 
fairly good control of pencils, crayons, and scissors. Gross 
motor accomplishments may include the ability to skip and 
balance on one foot. Physical growth slows down between 
five and eight years of age, while body proportions and 
motor skills become more refined. Physical changes in early 
childhood are accompanied by rapid changes in the child’s 
cognitive and language development.

Middle Childhood
Middle childhood has not been considered an important 
stage in human development as compared to early childhood. 
Physical development during middle childhood is less 
dramatic than in early childhood or adolescence. Growth is 
slow and steady until the onset of puberty, when individuals 
begin to develop at a much quicker pace. The age at which 
individuals enter puberty varies, but there is evidence of 
a visible trend—the age at which puberty begins has been 
decreasing over time. In some individuals, puberty may start 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   37 31-07-2020   15:25:40



38 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? as early as at age eight or nine. The onset of puberty differs 
About 2.21 per cent of the total across gender and begins earlier in females. The cognitive 
population of India is ‘disabled’. development of middle childhood is slow and steady. Middle 
The highest number of disabled childhood is a time when children can gain enthusiasm for 
persons in India is from the learning, and work for achievement can become a motivating 
State of Uttar Pradesh. At all factor as children work toward building competence and self-
India level, 7.62 per cent of the esteem.
disabled persons belong to the 
age group of 0–6 years. Focus Adolescence
today is on inclusive Education. The adolescent years are the second period of accelerated 
Source: Census 2011 growth. The age between 12 and 18 years is generally 

considered as ‘adolescence’. Individuals may gain a total of 
15–20 centimeters in height and as much as 8–10 kg in weight. 
The timing of this growth spurt is not highly predictable; it 
varies across both, individuals and gender. In general, females 
begin to develop earlier than males. Sexual maturation is 
one of the most significant developments during this time. 
Like physical development, there is significant variability in 
the age at which individuals attain sexual maturity. Females 
tend to mature at about age thirteen, and males mature at 
about age fifteen. Adolescence is also an important period for 
cognitive development.

Physiological Aspects of Activities
The body’s physiological responses to exercise occur in the 
musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, respiratory, endocrine, and 

immune systems. 
Types of Workout Different types of 

exercises will have 
different effects 

Sport
Warm-up

Conditioning Cool-down upon the muscles 
exercised. Before 

performing any exercise, or workout body has to be warmed 
up properly for the efficient and effective functioning of 
muscles.

Warm-up
Warming up is a short 
time activity carried 
out prior to any intense 
or skilled activity. It 
is important to warm 
up before exercising, 
which is usually done by including 10 to 40 minutes of light 
activities, such as, slow jog, calisthenics, and stretching. 
Players need warm-up as it increases body temperature and heart 
rate, provide stretching, stimulate the entire body and major 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   38 31-07-2020   15:25:40



Physical and Physiological Aspects ... 39

biomechanical functions, provide practice for basic movements, 
and finally prepare the player or athlete for rigorous athletic 
activity/training. Stretching results in increased blood flow and 
prevents injuries to the muscles, tendons, and ligaments. Proper 
warm-up exercises are not supposed to be done vigorously. 
A warm-up generally consists of a gradual increase in intensity 
of physical activity (a ‘pulse raiser’), joint mobility exercise, and 
stretching, followed by the main activity. Warming up brings the 
body to a condition at which it safely responds to nerve signals 
for quick and efficient action. The objectives of the warm-up 
are to increase heart rate, blood flow, internal temperature of 
the muscles, respiratory rate, perspiration, and decrease the 
viscosity of joint fluids.

A warm-up is intended to raise the body temperature and 
prepare a player physiologically and psychologically to compete 
in a game. Researchers have suggested that the optimum 
duration of the warm-up period, should be between 15 to 20 
minutes. This should consist of a gradual increase in intensity 
until the player is working at 70 per cent of maximal heart rate. 
A warm-up at this intensity has the effect of allowing an increase 
in the range of movement of the joints and improving aerobic 
performance. This means the player becomes more flexible and 
movement efficiency improves. A warm-up produces a 2 to 3 
degree rise in body temperature that can last for 45 minutes.

Fig. 3.1: General warm-up exercises

General Warm-up
It involves rhythmic movements using large muscle groups. 
The general warm-up should consist of a light physical activity 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   39 31-07-2020   15:25:41



40 Health and Physical Education - XI

like walking, jogging, stationary bike, skipping, or easy 
aerobics. It is also beneficial in improving neuromuscular 
coordination of muscles that results in developing better 
control on muscles. This warming up in turn increases the 
body temperature resulting in reduced viscosity in muscle 
fibres and thus helps in getting better results. Both the 
intensity and duration of the general warm-up (or how hard 
and how long), should be governed by the fitness level of the 
participating athlete.

Specific Warm-up
It consists of specific exercises which are matched to the 
main activity. In specific warm-up, some special sets of 
exercises need to be performed which have a direct relation 
with the activity to be carried out. In this part, the athletes 
are specifically preparing their body for the demands of their 
particular sport. During this part of the warm-up, more 
vigorous activity should be employed. Activities should reflect 
the type of movements and actions which will be required 
during the sporting event. The set of activities and exercises 
in specific warming up differ from sport to sport. These are 
especially designed to meet the requirement of different 
activities and sports. 

For example in weightlifting, the athlete first needs to 
perform some exercises with a bar for specific warm-up. 
Similarly a basketball player practices layup shots or free 
throws before the competition, this helps to improve their 
coordinating abilities. Different games have their own specific 
warm-up exercises. Some of them are described (along with 
the games they concern) as follows:
1.	 Basketball — shooting, dribbling, lay-up shots, free 

throws, shuttle run, dodging, etc.
2.	 Cricket — bowling, catching, batting, fielding, running, 

etc.
3.	 Lawn Tennis — wall practice, service practice, passing 

shots, knocking, etc.
4.	 Shot put — standing throws, putting the shot with both 

hands, gliding practice with or without shot, shifting the 
shot from left hand to right hand, and vice-versa.

5.	 Hockey — dribbling, rotation of stick, short passes, long 
hits, scoop, stopping the ball with stick, etc.

6.	 Weightlifting — warming up rowing, high pull, snatch 
squat, shoulder shrug, good morning exercise, etc. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   40 31-07-2020   15:25:41



Physical and Physiological Aspects ... 41

Fig. 3.2: Different types of warming up drills in basketball

Methods of Warming up
There are various methods of warming up for different games 
and sports, the most commonly used are by —
1.	 exercise
2.	 massage 
3.	 taking hot water bath
4.	 sipping some hot beverages.

Exercise
Most sets of warm-up exercises include four to five very 
simple movements. The exercises that are included in this 
method are walking, jogging, running, jumping, bending, 
stretching exercises, etc.

Massage
Massaging of muscles is a good method to gain muscle tone 
and is an effective means of warming up. It helps in the 
removal of lactic acid and recovery from fatigue and healing 
of minor injuries of muscles.

Hot Water Bath
This technique is very helpful in warming up and relaxation 
of muscles after competition. A hot water bath is helpful in 
raising body temperature which results in the activation of 
muscles by increasing blood circulation in them. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   41 31-07-2020   15:25:42



42 Health and Physical Education - XI

Hot Beverage
A small intake of tea, soup, coffee, or any other hot beverage 
stimulates the body functions and helps in preparing the 
body for competition. The drink should not be consumed in 
large quantities as it may cause discomfort.

Things to take into account when performing the warm-up:
•• Always start with a continuous slow run to prepare the 

body and increase temperature. Move all the parts of 
your body, from head to toes.

•• Do not get tired; don’t make too many repetitions of each 
movement and move the alternate parts of the body.

•• It has to be progressive, from low-intensity to high-
intensity exercises.

•• End up with some sprints or short, and fast races. It 
should last for 10 –15 minutes, and your heart rate 
should increase until 120 –140 beats/minute.

Sports Conditioning
Sports conditioning offers an edge over the competition. 
The purpose of sports conditioning is to complement current 
sports training. Sports conditioning is ideal for children 
who strive for greater performance in any sporting activity. 
It is meant to enhance an individual’s strength, balance, 
coordination, flexibility, speed, and power, which can be 
carried over into all the sports.

The conditioning programme is an important step in 
injury prevention. Proper training can reduce the incidence 
of injury in young athletes and also offers the teams a chance 
to grow strong together. Sports conditioning helps to prepare 
athletes for better application of their sport-specific skills. 
Athletes of all levels and abilities need a more sports-oriented 
training programme besides general fitness.

Sports conditioning should be directly related to the 
type of sport in which the individual participates. A good 
conditioning programme includes strength, power, speed, 
quickness, agility, movement, skills, deceleration, balance, 
reactivity, and anaerobic capacity.

The conditioning programme should be specific to the 
sport and should meet the individual needs of the athlete. 

Limber down or Cool down
Cool down is a session of light exercises that follows rigorous 
physical activities. The session will usually include gentle 
exercises, and stretching activities. Stretching is a major 
factor in the procedure of cooling down. Stretching allows 
the body muscles to build elasticity and repair from aerobic 
and anaerobic exercises.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   42 31-07-2020   15:25:42



Physical and Physiological Aspects ... 43

Faster Faster Reduction 
removal removal in the risk 
of lactic of carbon of muscle 

acid from dioxide from soreness
fast twitch muscle 

muscle fibre tissue

Effects of a 
cool down

Cooling down is an easy exercise, done after a more 
intense activity, to allow the body to gradually transition to a 
resting or near resting state.

The main aim of the cool down session is to promote 
recovery and return the body to a pre-exercise, or pre-workout 
level. During a strenuous workout, the body goes through a 
number of stressful processes. For example, muscle fibres, 
tendons and ligaments get damaged, and waste products 
build up within the body.

Effects of Cooling down
1.	 Helps heart rate and breathing to return towards resting 

levels gradually.
2.	 Helps avoid fainting or dizziness, which can result from 

blood pooling in the large muscles of the legs when a 
vigorous activity is stopped suddenly.

3.	 Helps to remove metabolites (intermediate substances 
formed during metabolism) from muscles, such as 
lactic acid.

4.	 Helps to prepare the muscles for the next exercise session, 
whether it’s the next day or in a few days’ time.

Effects of Exercise on various Body Systems
Effects of Exercise on Cardiovascular System
Cardiovascular is the system of heart, blood vessels, and 
blood. The effects of exercise on cardiovascular system are 
summarised as —
	 Heart rate: The number of beats or contractions of 

heart in one minute is called as heart rate. The number 
of contractions ranges from 60 to 80 beats/minute. 
However, 72 beats/minute is considered as the normal 
heart rate. During exercise, the heart rate increases and 
may range from 140 to 180 beats/minute depending 
on the intensity of exercise.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   43 31-07-2020   15:25:42



44 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? 	 Stroke volume: The amount of blood pumped out by 
There are two main types each ventricle in each heartbeat is known as stroke 
of muscle fibers; fast twitch volume. At rest, the stroke volume is around 70 ml/beat 
muscle fibre and slow twitch for male and 50 ml/beat for female, during exercise the 
muscle fibre. stroke volume increases.

	 Cardiac output: It is the amount of blood pumped 
Activity 3.1 out by each ventricle of the heart in one minute. 
Record the heart rate from It is the product of stroke volume and heart 
radial artery or carotid artery rate. Endurance training results in increased 
before and after completing 100 cardiac output through increased stroke volume. 
metre sprint. Cardiac output increases directly with increased 

exercise.
	 Cardiac output = Heart rate × Stroke volume

	At rest it is around 5 litre/minute; during exercise the 
increase may be about 4 to 5 fold.

	 Cardiac hypertrophy: Hypertrophy is the increase in 
the volume of an organ or tissue due to the enlargement 
of its component cells. Cardiac hypertrophy is referred 
to as ‘athlete’ heart, which may occur after 7–10 years 
of vigorous physical training.

	 Blood volume: The blood is a reddish fluid, 
alkaline in reaction and is salty in taste. The 
body of an adult contains about 5–6 litres of 
blood which weighs 1/3rd of the total body weight. 
Exercise produces the following effects.
•• The effect of exercise on blood volume depends on 

the type and intensity of exercise.
•• During endurance training, the resting blood volume 

increases approximately by 8 per cent.
•• Plasma volume in the blood increases by 12 per cent.
•• Increase in blood volume is known as hemodilution.
•• Increase in the number of blood vessels and their 

size too.
•• By continuous and endurance training, capillarisa-

tion takes place.
Effects of Exercise on Respiratory System
The mechanism of inspiration and expiration is known as 
respiration. It is controlled by medulla oblongata of the brain. 
It helps in adequate supply of O2 and elimination of CO2 from 
the body. The effects of exercise on respiratory system are 
summarised as follows:
	 Tidal volume: It is referred to as the volume of air 

inspired or expired per breath. During rest, it is around 
500 ml; during exercise it increases; during maximal 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   44 31-07-2020   15:25:42



Physical and Physiological Aspects ... 45

exercise, it increases 5 to 6 times above the resting 
values.

	 Respiratory rate (F): It is also known as breathing 
rate or breathing frequency. It is defined as the number 
of breaths per minute. At rest, it is 12–20 per minute, 
during exercise it increases to 2–3 times.

	 Minute ventilation or Pulmonary ventilation (PV): It 
is commonly referred to as the breathing process of lungs 
during inhalation and exhalation.
PV	 =	 Tidal volume × Respiratory rate
PV	 =	 (TV × RR)
During rest	 =	 8 litres/minute
(PV changes with body size, it is smaller in female and 
larger in male.)

	 During exercise: PV increases during exercising. The 
initial rise in the ventilation is due to the increased 
stimulation of the inspiratory centres caused by muscular 
activity. The second phase of gradual increase in the 
ventilation occurs due to an increase in the temperature, 
and chemical changes in the arterial blood produced by 
muscular activity.

	 Pulmonary diffusing capacity: The rate of diffusion of 
gas between the alveoli of the lungs and the blood of the 
lung capillaries is called pulmonary diffusing capacity. 
During exercise the pulmonary diffusing capacity for 
oxygen increases.

	 Hyperventilation: An increased breathing due to an 
increased tidal volume or increasing respiratory rate or 
both is referred to as hyperventilation.

	 Total lung capacity: The volume of air in the lungs at the 
end of maximal inspiration is termed as total lung capacity.
During exercise the total lung capacity slightly 
decreases.

	 Vital capacity: The maximal volume of air which is 
forcefully expired after maximal inspiration is called 
vital capacity.

Effects of Exercise on Muscular System
Muscle is a tissue which has the power of contraction. Skeletal 
muscles are the main muscles for physical activities and 
exercises. Several changes take place in the skeletal muscles 
depending upon the type of training which an individual is 
undergoing. The effects of exercise on muscular system are 
summarised as follows.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   45 31-07-2020   15:25:42



46 Health and Physical Education - XI

	 Muscular hypertrophy: Due to regular exercise, 
training muscles become enlarged. Muscle fibers, 
diameter and length increases. The total amount of 
protein, glycogen and enzymes are increased.

	 Aerobic changes: By training, the amount of myoglobin 
increases which helps for better supply of O2 to the 
working muscles of the body. By training, muscles 
produce energy by increased oxidation of glycogen. A 
trained muscle uses more fat to supply more energy.

	 Anaerobic changes: These are the changes which help 
in supply of energy in the absence of O2. 
•• Increased lactic acid tolerance
•• Change in blood flow of the muscles
•• Change in red and white fibres of the muscles

	 Training and capillary supply: Endurance training 
increases the capillary ratio (expressed as capillaries 
per fiber). Training increases capillary density as well.

	 Influence on performance: As muscles become 
stronger, they contract with less exertion during a 
maximum voluntary force. A greater perfusion occurs, 
and the exercise can be continued without involving the 
anaerobic metabolism. This would help in delaying the 
lactic acid accumulation and increase in the muscular 
force. Strength, flexibility and endurance are increased 
after the training.

Effects of exercise on Digestive System
There are many effects of exercise on the body that can 
positively influence digestive system functioning. Regular 
exercise makes our digestive system strong, speeding up 
metabolism and preventing constipation. The short term 
effects of exercise on the digestive system are —
	 Blood flow increases: Exercise can improve the blood 

flow. Circulation of blood in all the areas of body also 
includes the digestive track organs and enhance their 
functioning.

	 Speedup metabolism: Exercise can boost our 
metabolism. Exercise can slightly increase our resting 
metabolic rate (the amount of calories our body burns 
at rest). Metabolism is the process in which the food we 
consume is converted into energy that is needed by the 
body to survive.

	 Prevent constipation: Exercise helps in reducing 
constipation by decreasing the time taken by food to 
move through the large intestine, thus limiting the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   46 31-07-2020   15:25:42



Physical and Physiological Aspects ... 47

amount of water absorbed from the stool in to the 
body. Exercise accelerates our breathing and heart 
rate. This helps to stimulate the natural contraction 
of the intestinal muscles which prevent constipation 
naturally. 

	 Prevent digestive diseases: Regular exercise helps 
to prevent digestive diseases. Many diseases are 
associated with stomach and if we exercise regularly, 
that will strengthen our internal organs, such as liver, 
stomach, intestine, various glands, etc., and prevents 
us from digestive diseases.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   47 31-07-2020   15:25:42



Assessment

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 What is the difference between growth and development? 

Explain.
	 2.	 Define growth and development and explain the factors 

affecting growth and development.
	 3.	 Explain the effects of exercise on muscular system.
	 4.	 Enlist and explain the effects of exercise on respiratory system.
	 5.	 Explain physical and physiological changes that take place 

during different developmental stages.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 What is meant by cardiac output?
	 2.	 Write down the full form of MV.
	 3.	 What is Muscle Hypertrophy?
	 4.	 List the developmental stages of life.
	 5.	 What is general warm-up?
	 6.	 What is specific warm-up?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 Growth refers to the process through which body increases in 

____________ and ____________.
	 2.	 There are ____________ major factors which directly or indirectly 

influence the growth and development of a ____________.
	 3.	 Hormones play an important role in regulating the process of 

____________ and ____________.
	 4.	 An increased tidal volume, or increased respiratory rate, or 

both is referred to as ____________.
	 5.	 Heart rate ____________ during submaximal exercise and it is 

caused due to increase in ____________ activity.
	 6.	  ____________ with high velocity movement develops exploring 

strength or power.

	IV.	 Match the Following
	 1.	 Stroke Volume	 a.	 Lung
	 2.	 Residual Volume	 b.	 Muscles
	 3.	 Lactic Acid	 c.	 Heart
	 4.	 Snatch	 d.	 Basketball
	 5.	 Gliding	 e.	 Weight lifting

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-3.indd   48 31-07-2020   15:25:42



##4##
Individual Games

4
Games and sports are important parts of our lives. They 
are essential to enjoy overall health and well-being. Sports 
and games offer numerous advantages and are thus highly 
recommended for everyone irrespective of their age. Sports 
with individualistic approach characterised with graceful 
skills of players are individual sports. Do you like the idea of 
playing an individual sport and be responsible for your win or 
loss, success or failure? There are various sports that come 
under this category. This chapter will help you to enhance 
your knowledge about Athletics, Badminton, Gymnastics, 
Judo, Swimming, Table Tennis, and Wrestling.

Athletics
Running, jumping and throwing are natural and universal 
forms of human physical expression. Track and field events 
are the improved versions of all these. These are among the 
oldest of all sporting competitions. Athletics consist of track 
and field events. In the track events, competitions of races 
of different distances are conducted. The different track and 
field events have their roots in ancient human history.

History
Ancient Olympic Games are the first recorded examples of 
organised track and field events. In 776 B.C., in Olympia, 
Greece, only one event was contested which was known as 
the stadion footrace. The scope of the games expanded in 
later years. Further it included running competitions, but the 
introduction of the Ancient Olympic pentathlon marked a step 
towards track and field as it is recognised today. There were 
five events in pentathlon namely—discus throw, long jump, 
javelin throw, the stadion foot race, and wrestling.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   49 31-07-2020   15:26:11



50 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 4.1 Track and field events were also present at the Pan-
Athletics at the 1960 Summer Hellenic Games in Greece around 200 B.C. period and spread 
Paralympics consisted of 25 to Rome in Italy. Track and field events began developing 
events, 13 for men and 12 for in parts of Northern Europe in the middle ages. The stone 
women. Prepare the list of put and weight throw competitions popular among Celtic 
these events both for men and societies in Ireland and Scotland were predecessor to the 
women. modern shot put and hammer throw events. Pole vault is the 

last track and field events which evolved in the eighteenth 
century.

In the late 19th century, modern track and field 
competitions were separated from general sporting festivals 
and were first recorded. These competitions were typically 
organised by educational institutions, military organisations, 
and sports clubs. Competitive hurdling first came into being, 
with the advent of the steeplechase in England around 1850. 
The first national body for the sport of athletics, The Amateur 
Athletic Association (AAA) was established in England in 
1880. Under this grouping, track and field became the focus 
of the annual AAA Championships. The United States also 
began holding an annual national competition. The USA 
outdoor Track and Field Championship was held in 1868 by 
the New York Athletic Club.

The establishment of the modern Olympic Games at the 
end of the nineteenth century marked a new height for track 
and field events. The Olympic athletics programme comprised 
of track and field events including a marathon race.  These 
also contained many of the foremost sporting competitions of 
the 1896 Summer Olympics.

The Olympics also consolidated the use of metric 
measurements in international track and field events, both 
for race distances and for measuring jumps and throws. The 
athletics programme greatly expanded over the next decades 
and remained most prominent among the games. The 
Olympics were the elite competitions for track and field, and 
only amateur sportsmen at that time could compete. Track 
and field continues to be largely an amateur sport.

The International Amateur Athletic Federation (IAAF) was 
established in 1912, becoming the international governing 
body for track and field.

Indian History of Athletics
In the history of Indian Athletics, the decade of 1940’s to 
1950’s is important as a number of Athletics associations 
were started in this decade. In 1946, the Amateur Athletics 
Federation of India (AAFI) was established for the management 
of Indian Athletics. The entire scenario of Indian Athletics 
was changed by AAFI as it worked in collaboration with 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   50 31-07-2020   15:26:11



Individual Games 51

the other Athletics associations for improving sports and Activity 4.2
athletics. Indian Athletics went through many phases. Many Collect information about your 
track and field games were played in the grass. favourite athletes and share in 

At present synthetic track is used which has made the class.
things easier as there was no need for manual marking 
of tracks and associated definitions for throws and jumps 
in those tracks. Application of technology has helped the 
athletes and improved the status of the sport. 

India has so far produced a number of successful 
athletes in the international level who have a rich 
tradition of winning performances in the international 
tournaments.

Some of the most successful athletes in the early history 
of Indian Athletics are Milkha Singh, T.C. Yohannan, 
Gurbachan Singh, Sriram Singh, etc. Some of the notable 
Indian Athletes in the contemporary period include P.T. 
Usha, Anju Bobby George, Jyotirmoyee Sikdar, Saraswati 
Saha, Soma Biswas, etc.

Classification of Athletics Events
According to the nature of competitions, athletics events are 
classified into four types. These are—
	 Track Events: All running events come under track 

events.
	 Field Events: The jumping and throwing events are 

called field events.
	 Combined Events: There are some other unique events 

which are called as combined events. These are also 
organised in athletics. In fact, these are the combination 
of some track and field events, such as decathlon, 
heptathlon, etc.

	 Events conducted outside the stadium: These events 
are held outside the track, on roads or at natural places; 
for example, Marathon of 42.195 km and 20 and 50 km 
walk.

Classification of Track Events
Track events are classified into three categories. These are—

Table 1: Classification of Track Events

1. Short Distance 2. Middle 3. Long 
Races Distance Races Distance Races

100 m 800 m 3000 m 
steeplechase

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   51 31-07-2020   15:26:11



52 Health and Physical Education - XI

200 m 5000 m
400 m 10,000 m
110 m Hurdle Race 
(Men) 1500 m 20 km walking

100 m Hurdle Race 
(Women) Road Events
400 m Hurdle Race
4×100 m relay 50 km walking
4×400 m relay Marathon 

(42.195 m)

Classification of Field Events
Field events are classified into two categories — jumping 

Do You Know? events and throwing events. Further these are classified as 
•• Sebastian Coe from Great 

Britain was one of the world’s given below:
greatest athlete winner of Table 2: Classification of Field Events
four medals at Olympic 
Games, and had not taken Jumping Events Throwing Events
a single day rest between his 
training. Long Jump Shot Put

•• Steeplechase — A hurdle High Jump Discus Throw
race with water jumps came 
into existence in England Triple Jump Javelin Throw
around 1850. Pole Vault Hammer Throw

Classification of Combined Events
Combined events are those events which are characterised 
as mixed events from the track as well as field events. For 
men there are mixed events called ‘Decathlon’ and comprised 
of 10 events to be completed within the span of two days. 
Combined track and field events for women are called 
‘Heptathlon’ and are divided into seven events. These mixed 
events are classified below.

Table 3: Classification of Combined Events

Decathlon (Men) Heptathlon (Women)
100 m 100 m
Long Jump High Jump
Shot Put 1st day Shot Put 1st day
High Jump

200 m
400 m

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   52 31-07-2020   15:26:11



Individual Games 53

110 m Hurdle
Long Jump Activity 4.3

Discus Throw Collect the information about 
Pole Vault 2nd day Javelin Throw 2nd day the events under ‘Decathlon’ 

and ‘Heptathlon’, which are to 
Javelin Throw

800 m be completed on the first day 
1500 m of the competition and on the 

second day of competition.
General Rules
These are some of the general rules which need to be followed 
by every athlete during the events. 

•• The athlete should run with shoes.
•• There should be a number on the chest and back of 

every athlete. No athlete can participate without the 
number. Only in the games of Pole Vault and High 
Jump, an athlete can bear one number.

•• If an athlete runs before the gun is fired, it is considered 
as a foul and is expelled from the event. Only in the 
combined events, the athlete is given a warning for first 
foul, but on the second foul, the athlete is expelled from 
the game.

•• The starter speaks in English at the time of start.
•• If any athlete obstructs the other athlete, then the 

referee can expel that athlete.
•• In the races up to 400 m, all the athletes have to finish 

them in the same lane allotted to them.
•• 800 m race starts in lanes but lanes are changed to 

first lane after the first curve.

Athletics Track
A track is formed by two straight lines and two curved lines. 
It is oval shaped. Track surface can be of soil, grass, or 
synthetic. In the national and international competitions, 
the synthetic tracks, which are also known as all-weather 
tracks are used. In all races up to and including 400 m, each 
athlete has a separate lane, with a width of 1.22 m to 1.25 m 
to be marked by lines 5 cm in width.

Methods of starting the Race
Each race is started with a starting gun. The main two types 
of start are—
	 Crouch Start: This type of start is essential for sprint 

races. Starting block is used in this start, so the athlete 
can better use their reaction, speed, and explosive power.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   53 31-07-2020   15:26:11



54 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know?
•• Starting line in the track 	 Standing Start: This kind of start is used for middle 

events is included and the distance, and long distance races.
Finish line is excluded. Line 
on the right hand side of the 
lane is included in the width 
of each lane.

•• No check marks are permit-
ted in the track except for 
relays.

Fig. 4.1: Standard athletics track 400 meters

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   54 31-07-2020   15:26:12

Start 
10,000m Start
3000m 3000m
5000m Steeple Chase Start 

1500m
Start 
200m

Start 
200m

Long Jump
Discus & High 
throw Triple Jump Jump

Javelin Throw

Steeple 
Chase

Start 
400m

Shotput Hammer 400m H
Start 400m 4×100mPole vault 800m

4×100m
4×100m

Start 
800m

Start Start Finish 
110m 100m Line

100m H



Individual Games 55

Types of Crouch Start
The crouch start is further divided into three types.
Bunch or Bullet Start
In such a start, the distance from the starting line to the 
block is between 16 to 19 inches. The distance between both 
the blocks (front leg and rear leg) may be 8 to 11 inches. The 
athlete sets the body in crouching position in such a way 
that the rear toe and the heal of front foot should be in a 
straight line. The toes should be behind the starting line like 
a bridge but in the line of big toe. In the set position, the hips 
should be slightly lifted up and the arms should be straight. 
This last position in the bunch start is a little unstable which 
helps the athlete in leaving the block quickly.
Medium Start
The distance of the blocks from the starting line is 15 to 18 
inches. The distance between both the blocks (front leg and 
rear leg) may be 15 to 20 inches. The knee of rear leg and the 
arch of front foot should be in a straight line. The shoulders 
and hips are almost at the same height.
Elongated start
The distance of the blocks from the starting line is 11 to 14 
inches. The distance between both the blocks (front leg and 
rear leg) may be 25 to 29 inches. The rear knee is placed 
near the front heal. In the crouch start, the distance between 
the blocks depends upon the length of the leg, breadth of 
the hip, length of torso, strength of arms and time reaction, 
etc. Medium start is considered as better than the other two 
starts. Most of the athletes, therefore, use this type of start.

The distance between the blocks (front and rear leg) varies 
and depends on the height of the athlete.

Fig. 4.2: Types of crouch start

Starting block
An athlete uses starting block in track events for all the sprinting 
ability to get a good start. The starting block helps the athlete to 
give support during the start of race to expel the body forward. 
Starting block needs to be kept in right angle according to 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   55 31-07-2020   15:26:12



56 Health and Physical Education - XI

the height of the athlete. A starting block needs to be strong 
and adjustable.

Before starting, the athlete should be calm and composed. 
The athlete should wait for the commands while standing 
near the assembly line.
On Your Marks
On the command ‘On your marks’, the athlete will move 
towards the starting line and will take position at the starting 

Fig. 4.3: Starting block block. The head is kept in resting position. In this position, 
the hand will be placed parallel to but behind the starting 
line and according to the width of the shoulders. The weight 
of the body is distributed on the rear knee and hands. In 
the starting position, the shoulders can be moved ahead 
of starting line. The neck should be in resting position but 
the concentration of athlete should be towards the next 
command.

Fig. 4.4: Both side views of the ‘on your marks’ position

Set
Athlete keeps the back a 
little above the shoulder. 
The weight of the body 
is equally distributed 
over the front foot and 
hands. This last position 
is usually unstable 
and tense which helps 
in leaving the block 
easily. Head should be 
in resting position and 
the grip on the block 
should be strong. The 
athlete should be alert Fig. 4.5: ‘Set’ position

enough to listen to the 
next command.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   56 31-07-2020   15:26:13



Individual Games 57

Gun shot
Soon after the gun shot, the athlete has to leave the block as 
quickly as possible. This helps in a good start. The athlete 
should lift his body gradually after taking a start.

Types of Finishing
The finishing of all the races is very important. A little 
difference can alter the athlete’s ranking. The following 
techniques during training process need to be learned to 
finish the race.
Lunging forward
In this technique, the athlete lunges the body forward just 
before the finishing line. The athlete needs to spread arms 
backward in order to expand the chest forward. While 
spreading his arms the athlete needs to balance his body.
Shoulder shrug
In this technique, the athlete needs to bend shoulders 
towards the finishing line. The body weight is carried forward 
while maintaining the balance of the body. While shrugging 
the shoulders, the athlete needs to bend his head as well as 
upper body towards the finishing line.
Run through
This technique is usually adopted by new athletes. The 
athlete runs through the finishing line after completing the 
race. The athlete should not reduce the pace before finishing.

Fig. 4.6: Techniques of finishing the race
Relay Races
Relay races are team events. In this race, four runners complete 
a given distance. Each relay team needs four runners. Each 
runner runs the quarter of the running track, while holding 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   57 31-07-2020   15:26:13



58 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? a baton. Two runners will exchange the baton only in a given 
Steeple chase — A hurdle race exchange zone mark in track. If the baton falls in the exchange 
with water jumps came into zone, then only the athlete who has dropped it will lift it.
existence in England around Table 4: Types of Relay Races
1850.

Relay Races for Men and Women
4×100 meter
4×400 meter
Members of Relay team = 6
Running members = 4
Length of Baton 28–30 cm
Circumference of Baton 12–13 cm
Weight of Baton at least 50 gms
Baton exchange zone 20 m
Acceleration zone 10 m

Methods of baton exchange
There are three methods of baton exchange, which are—
Downward pass

Fig. 4.7: Method to give the baton from the bottom

In such a pass, the runner who is to run will move his hand 
back to take the baton with palms facing upwards. The 
thumbs will be towards the inner side and the palm will be 
upward. The athlete holding the baton, will hold the baton 
from one end and will place the other end of the baton in the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   58 31-07-2020   15:26:14



Individual Games 59

hands of the athlete who is about to run.
Upward pass
In such a pass, the athlete who is going to hold the baton 
will keep the hand in a ‘V’ shape, which will be used to take 
the baton near the hip, upside down. The athlete who is 
passing the baton will hold the baton in such a way, that 
it will get nearer to the other athlete. This pass is easier for 
the new runner.

Fig. 4.8: Method to give the baton from the upper side

Push pass
Push pass is exactly similar to the downward pass at the 
change over box. The athlete, who is holding the baton, 
runs while aiming at the elbow of the other athlete with 
the baton. The other athlete takes the baton with his arm 
moving backward.

Fig. 4.9: Method to give push pass

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   59 31-07-2020   15:26:15



60 Health and Physical Education - XI

Jumping Events
Jumping Events consist of four events. However, only two 
(Long jump and High jump) are discussed below. 

•• Long Jump
•• High Jump 
•• Triple Jump
•• Pole Vault

Long Jump
Long jump is considered as the main field event. In this 
event, the athlete has to jump from the takeoff board to 
the jumping pit. The entire group of athletes will get three 
jumps to qualify for the final phase of the competition. 
Athletes should have speed, power and flexibility for it. 
Eight qualified jumpers are selected for the final phase 
of the competition. Three more chances are given to the 
selected eight jumpers for getting final ranking. 

Table 5: Information about Long Jump

Length of runway 40 m – 45 m
Width of runway 1.22 m + 0.01 m
Length of take-off board 1.22 m + 0.01 m
Width of take-off board 20 cm
Thickness of take-off board 10 cm
Distance of the last edge of pit from Minimum 10 m
take-off board
Width of pit 2.75 m – 3.00 m
Distance of take-off board from the pit 1.00 m – 3.00 m
Width of plasticine indicator 10 cm
Degree of plasticine indicator towards 45°
runway

1–3m

Take–off Board
Length of Take–off Board 20cm wide

1.22m + 0.01m

Landing Pit

Runway 40m–45m

7–9m
Fig. 4.10: Long jump ground

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   60 31-07-2020   15:26:15

1.22m+0.01m

20 cm
10 cm

2.75–3.00m



Individual Games 61

Methods of Long Jump
Athletes usually use the following methods for long jump—
1.	 Sail Technique
2.	 Hang Technique
3.	 Hitch-kick Technique
Phases of Long Jump
There are the four phases in long jump.
	 Runway: The athlete attains his maximum speed by 

running on the runway so that he can reach the take 
off board with full speed and also to get the maximum 
momentum.

Fig. 4.11: The hang technique

	 Take-off: The athlete takes-off with his strong foot by 
pushing it against the take-off board. The athlete raises 
both the hands up and as a result his entire body is 
raised up. The front leg is lifted upwards and the knee is 
bent.

	 Flight: When the body of the athlete is in the air after 
the take-off, it is known as flight. During flight position, 
the athlete uses various techniques like hang method or 
hitch-kick technique. The momentum gained during the 
runway helps the body to move forward in the air. 

	 Landing: Both feet of the athlete simultaneously touch 
the ground while landing. During landing, the legs should 
be kept straight. Both hands should be raised and taken 
towards the feet and the neck should be bent forward. 
This posture helps in gaining some more distance in the 
air and the body gets balanced while landing.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   61 31-07-2020   15:26:16



62 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fig. 4.12: Hitch-kick technique

High Jump
This is also one of the major field events. In this, the athlete 
crosses the crossbar with a jump. Activeness and flexibility 
are important for the athlete. 

Table 6: Information about High Jump

Minimum length of runway 15 m

Size of landing area 6 m×4 m

Height of landing pit 0.60 m – 0.70 m
Distance between two poles 4.00 m – 4.04 m

Length of crossbar 4.00 m (±2cm)

Weight of crossbar 2 kg
Diameter of crossbar 29 mm – 31 mm
Length of rectangular edges of crossbar 15 cm – 20 cm
Width of edges of crossbar 30 mm – 35 mm
Gap between the edges of crossbar and 10 mm
poles

Techniques of High Jump
The most popular technique of high jump is Fosbury Flop. 
However some other techniques are also used. Which are—
	 Scissor Jump: To jump over the crossbar with alternate 

legs and to land on the feet is called scissor jump.
	 Western roll : Rolling over the crossbar and landing on 

the back is known as  western roll.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   62 31-07-2020   15:26:16



Individual Games 63

	 Straddle Technique: In this technique, the legs are 
taken alternately over the crossbar and the body is rolled 
near the bar.

	 Fosbury Flop: It is a new technique. In this, the bar is 
crossed by back after bending the body. The landing is 
done on the shoulders.

Fig. 4.13: Fosbury flop

General Rules
Certain general rules of  high jump are given below.

•• Jumper needs—to jump on one foot only.
•• It will be a foul, if an athlete—

▪▪ shakes the bar from the support.
▪▪ touches the ground with any part of his body before 

clearing the poles.
•• An athlete can jump from any height. Consecutive 

three failures from a particular height will disqualify 
the athlete.

•• Poles should not be moved during the competition.
•• If there are more than three athletes, the time fixed for 

each jump is one minute. If two to three athletes are 
there in the competition, time of 1.30 minutes is given. 
Whereas a time of 3 minutes is given to a single athlete.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   63 31-07-2020   15:26:17



64 Health and Physical Education - XI

•• Athlete can mark the runway according to the wish, but 
can use only the adhesive tape given by the organisers.

Fig. 4.14: Complete action sequence of fosbury flop

Throwing Events
The following four events are not included in the throwing 
events, but only two (Shot put and Discus) are explained in 
this book. 

•• Shot put
•• Discus

Shot put
Table 7: Information about Shot Put

Diameter of the shot put 2.135 m (±5 mm)
circle
Extended lines on both 75 cm
sides of the circle
Length of stop board 1.21 m (±0.01 m)
Width of stop board 11.2 cm – 30 cm
Height of stop board 10 cm (±0.2 cm)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   64 31-07-2020   15:26:18



Individual Games 65

Weight of shot 7.260 kg (for men), 4.00 kg (for 
women)

Diameter of shot 110 mm – 130 mm (men) 95 
mm – 110 mm (women)

The extended lines on both 75 cm
sides of the circle
Angle of the throwing sector 34.92°
within the circle

Shot put is one of the main throwing events. The athlete 
who throws the shot is called as shot putter. The athlete 
should have qualities like power, flexibility and speed to 
throw the shot.
Methods of Shot put
The following are the methods of shot put.
1.	 Gliding Technique

a)	 Grip: The shot is held at the base of the fingers, not 
the palm. Fingers are slightly spread apart with the 
thumb for support. The hand will be bent back in a 
cocked position when holding the shot.

b)	 Shot placement: The shot is placed below the ear. It 
needs to be placed near the jaw bone and over the 
collar bone.

c)	 Standing Position: The shot putter places the right 
foot on the half way circle line and the left foot along 
the back line (towards the direction of throw) of the 
circle.

d)	 Gliding Phase: Keep the right foot exactly straight 
and the toe of the left foot touching on the ground 
just in front of the stop board. The left foot will 
rapidly move forward while bending at the knee to 
take thrust from the hip joint. The right foot will be 
dragged from the ground. 

e)	 Final Phase: The last phase of the putting shot will 
be associated with the turn of body and changing of 
rear left foot to right for balancing the body weight. 
The hips will be carried forward. This turn is most 
vital for the shot putter as it has to be combined with 
the throwing of arms to put the shot for distance. 
The whole body weight will be maintained on right 
foot after the release of shot.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   65 31-07-2020   15:26:18



66 Health and Physical Education - XI

Centre Line
5cm

34.92º

1.20m-1.22m

75cm Min.

90º

5cm 2.135m
+5mm

Fig. 4.15: Layout of shot put sector

Fig. 4.16: Gliding technique for throwing shot

2.	 Rotation Technique for Throwing Shot
a)	 Initial Position: In the initial position, the athlete will 

stand with the back towards the direction of putting 
the shot. The left foot will be on central line and the 
right foot will be just behind. The right foot will be 5–8 
cm behind the iron rim to avoid foul during rotation 
of the body.

b)	 Rotation: The weight of the body will be on the right 
foot. Rotation will start after taking just one swing 
from the starting position. In this position, the left 
arm will be kept parallel to the ground on left side. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   66 31-07-2020   15:26:20

White Line



Individual Games 67

The right foot will be brought over the left foot while 
leaning the shoulder when the shot reaches the 
middle. Both the shoulders will rotate after leaning 
and laying the entire body weight on the toes. The 
shoulder and the trunk will fully rotate towards 
the right and the body weight will also shift on the 
left foot.

Discus Throw
Discus throw is an old and popular event. The athlete should 
have power, elasticity, speed and balance for discus throw.

Table 8: Information about Discus Throw
Weight of discus 2 kg (men), 1 kg (women)
Diameter of discus 219 mm – 221 mm (men)

180 mm – 182 mm (women)
Thickness of the rim of discus 12 mm – 13 mm (6 mm at 

edge)
Diameter of circle 2.50 m
Extended lines on both sides 75 cm
of circle
Angle of throwing sector 34.92°

Centre Line

0
34.92

0
90

75cm wide
51cm

2.50m

Fig. 4.17: Layout of discus throw

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   67 31-07-2020   15:26:20

W
h
ite

L
in

e



68 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? Initial Stage of Discus Throw
The first national body of At First the athlete will stand in the circle near the ring with 
athletics ‘Amateur Athletic the back against the direction of throwing the discus. The 
Association, (AAA), was athlete will take one or two swings while rotating the right 
established in England. arm along with the body. In this position, the whole body 

weight will shift from one foot to another. The heels will lift 
upward. The upper part of the body should be bent towards 
right side, while the discus is on the right side. The circle 
will start from the lower part of the body, the left foot will be 
rotated leftward, and the body weight will rest on it. The right 
knee and right foot will also rotate.

In this position, the process of crossing the discus will 
start. First of all, the left foot will leave the ground. After Fig. 4.18: Technique of throwing discus

this, the left foot will take the position of throwing the 
discus. The right foot (bent at knee) will rotate from left to 
right in a semi-circle. Both the muscles will be in front of 
the shoulder while rotating and as a result, there will be a 
bend in the upper and lower portion of the body. The right 
arm holding the discus will be straight and above the head. 
The left arm will be in front of the chest and bent at the 
elbow. The head will remain straight.
Methods of Discus Throw
A Discus is thrown by three methods.
1.	 The athlete keeps the right foot at the centre line and left 

foot 10 cm behind the circle.
2.	 In the second method the athletes keep the centre line 

between their feet.
3.	 In the third method, the athletes keep their left foot on 

the centre line.
Throwing: Both the feet will be straight at the knees while 
rotating at the time of throwing. The shoulder muscles will 
move forward. The shoulders and trunk will stop rotating. 
Whole of the body’s weight will be on both the toes and feet 
will be straight. The left foot will come back at the end but 
the right foot will bend from the knee after going forward. 
The upper part of the body will be bent forward. It is done to 
balance the body.
Last Step: Both the feet will be on the ground, the waist 
will be bent backward in rotating position, left foot will be 
in straight line and right foot will be bent at knee. The right 
knee will be rotating to the left side. The left arm will open 
upward. The right arm will be brought forward and upward 
while keeping away from the body.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   68 31-07-2020   15:26:20



Individual Games 69

Initial Stage of Discus Throw
At First the athlete will stand in the circle near the ring with 
the back against the direction of throwing the discus. The 
athlete will take one or two swings while rotating the right 
arm along with the body. In this position, the whole body 
weight will shift from one foot to another. The heels will lift 
upward. The upper part of the body should be bent towards 
right side, while the discus is on the right side. The circle 
will start from the lower part of the body, the left foot will be 
rotated leftward, and the body weight will rest on it. The right 
knee and right foot will also rotate.

In this position, the process of crossing the discus will 
start. First of all, the left foot will leave the ground. After Fig. 4.18: Technique of throwing discus

this, the left foot will take the position of throwing the Types of Sports Awards
discus. The right foot (bent at knee) will rotate from left to There are many awards to honor the outstanding coaches Do You Know?

Deepa Malik is the lady 
right in a semi-circle. Both the muscles will be in front of and sportspersons. Government of India honors its coaches, Para-athlete who received 
the shoulder while rotating and as a result, there will be a and sportspersons with the following awards: Arjuna Award in the year 2012 
bend in the upper and lower portion of the body. The right 1.	 Dronacharya Award for her excellent performance.
arm holding the discus will be straight and above the head. 2.	 Arjuna Award
The left arm will be in front of the chest and bent at the 3.	 Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award Activity 4.4
elbow. The head will remain straight. 4.	 Dhyan Chand Award Make a list of winners of 
Methods of Discus Throw Dronacharya Award for the last 

A Discus is thrown by three methods. Dronacharya Award five years and share with other 
students.

1.	 The athlete keeps the right foot at the centre line and left Government instituted Dronacharya Award to recognise 
foot 10 cm behind the circle. the efforts of coaches and trainers who dedicate their lives 

for enhancing the performance of athletes and raising the 
2.	 In the second method the athletes keep the centre line standard of games. The Dronacharya Award was first given 

between their feet. in 1985. Every year, Dronacharya award is provided to expert 
3.	 In the third method, the athletes keep their left foot on coaches for their consistent outstanding performance. The 

the centre line. cash prize associated with Dronacharya Award is ` 5 lakhs. It 
Throwing: Both the feet will be straight at the knees while also includes a bronze statue of Guru Dronacharya (the ancient 
rotating at the time of throwing. The shoulder muscles will Indian Physical and weapon trainer in the mythological era of 
move forward. The shoulders and trunk will stop rotating. Mahabharata), a tie, a blazer, a scroll and a suit.
Whole of the body’s weight will be on both the toes and feet Eligibility for Dronacharya Award
will be straight. The left foot will come back at the end but The award is open to coaches who have trained an individual 
the right foot will bend from the knee after going forward. or a team for at least two years with consistent outstanding 
The upper part of the body will be bent forward. It is done to performance at:
balance the body. 1.	 Global Olympic events 
Last Step: Both the feet will be on the ground, the waist 2.	 Sports disciplines recognised by the government
will be bent backward in rotating position, left foot will be 
in straight line and right foot will be bent at knee. The right 3.	 Indigenous sports recognised by the government 
knee will be rotating to the left side. The left arm will open Dronacharya Award Winners
upward. The right arm will be brought forward and upward Some of the well known coaches of athletics who received 
while keeping away from the body. Dronacharya Award in India are — O.M. Nambiar (1985), 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   69 31-07-2020   15:26:21



70 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 4.5 Ilyas Babar (1994), Karan Singh (1995), Joginder Singh Saini 
Collect information about (1997), Hargobind Singh Sandhu (1998), Kuntal Roy, R.D. 
the medal winners of Singh (2006), A.K. Kutty (2010), Ramphal (2011),  Mahavir 
Paralympics Games in any Singh Phogat (Wrestling, 2016), and Sukhdev Singh Pannu 
two athletic events who (Athletics, 2008).
have received Arjuna Award 
and prepare a chart on their Arjuna Award
achievements to share on the The Arjuna Award was instituted in 1961 as the highest 
school notice board. national recognition for outstanding performance in Sports 
Activity 4.6 and Games in the Olympics, Asian Games, Commonwealth 
Collect information about Games, World Cup, World Championships. As per the revised 
the Arjuna award and Dhyan scheme, from April 2002, the objective of Arjuna Awards is 
Chand award winners, to recognise outstanding performance of sports persons at 
Prepare a chart on their international level.  The winners are decided by a Selection 
achievements to share on the Committee. The award carries a cash prize of `5 lakh, a 
school notice board. bronze statuette of Arjuna, and a scroll. The nominations 

for the award are invited by the Ministry of Youth Affairs 
and Sports from all recognised National Sports Federations 
recognised by the Government of India. 
Arjuna Award Winners in Athletics
Some of the well known athletes who received Arjuna Award 
in India are Gurbachan Singh Randhawa (1961), Ajmer 
Singh, (1966), Vijay Singh Chauhan (1972), Sriram Singh 
(1973), T.C. Yohannan, (1974), Hari Chand, (1975), Sabir Ali 
(1981), P.T. Usha (1983), Shiny Abraham (1984), Anju Bobby 
George, (2002). Hima Das, Neeraj Chopra (2018).

Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award
The Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna award is India’s highest honour 
given for achievement in sports. The words Khel Ratna in 
Hindi literally mean “sports gem” in English. It carries a 
medal, a scroll of honour and a substantial cash component 
of ` 750,000. The award was instituted in the year 1991–92 
for supreme accolade in the field of sports in India. The first 
player to receive the Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna award was 
Anand Viswanathan, World Chess Champion.
Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award Winners in Athletics
Some of the winners of Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna award are 
Jyotirmoyee Sikdar (1998–99), K.M. Beenamol (2002–03), 
Anju Bobby George (2003–04).

Dhyan Chand Award Winners in Athletics
Dhyan Chand Award is given for lifetime achievement in 
sports. The award is named after Dhyan Chand, an Indian 
field hockey player who scored more than 1000 goals during 
his career from 1926 to 1948. Bobby Aloysius received the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   70 31-07-2020   15:26:21



Individual Games 71

Dhyan Chand award for his lifetime contribution towards 
sports from the Government of India. Activity 4.7

Do you have indoor badminton 

B hall in your school or nearby? if 
adminton yes, collect the information about 

Badminton, one of the world’s fastest racket sports is a popular the game and compare with the 
school sport for both boys and girls. It is suitable for children information given in your book.
of all ages and abilities. Badminton activities develop all-round 
physical skills important for school age children including eye-
hand coordination, catching and throwing, stability and balance, Activity 4.8
speed and agility — the ability to quickly change direction, Collect information about 
jumping and landing skills, and also learn decision-making the Olympic Medalists and 
and tactical skills. Badminton was earlier known as Poona or All England winners of your 
Poonah when British Army officers started playing the game at country in badminton.
Pune in 1860. The name Badminton derives from the Duke of 
Beaufort’s Badminton House in Gloucestershire. International 
Badminton Federation (IBF) is the international governing body 
for Badminton and was established in 1934. The new name 
Badminton World Federation (BWF) was adopted in 2006. 
Thomas Cup, a Men’s Team World Badminton Championship, 
was first held in 1948, and Uber Cup, a Women’s Team World 
Badminton Championship, was first held in 1956. Sudiraman 
Cup, a World Mixed Team Badminton Championship, was 
first held in 1989. Individual World Badminton Championship 
started in 1956. Badminton was a demonstration event in the 
1972 Munich Olympic Games and an exhibition sport in the 
1988 Summer Olympics. It became an official Summer Olympic 
sport at the Barcelona Olympics in 1992.

Types of Events
•• Men’s and Women’s Singles, Doubles, Mixed Doubles 
•• Junior Boy’s and Girl’s (Under 17 and 19) Singles, 

Doubles, Mixed Doubles
•• Sub Junior Boy’s and Girl’s (Under 13 and 15) Singles, 

Doubles, Mixed Doubles

Measurement of Badminton Court and Specification 
of Equipment

•• Badminton is an indoor game. It requires a racket, a 
net, two posts and a shuttlecock.

Court Measurements
Badminton court is rectangular, 13.40 × 6.10 metre (5.18 metre 
for singles) with 4 cm wide white or yellow lines. The height 
of the ceiling from the court for International competitions 
shall be 12 metre. There shall be at least 2 metre clear space 
surrounding the court. The posts shall be 1.55 metre in height 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   71 31-07-2020   15:26:21



72 Health and Physical Education - XI

from the surface of the court and placed on the doubles’ side 
lines. Net shall be of dark colour with its height 1.524 metre at 
the centre. It is 76 cm in depth and at least 6.10 metre in width. 
The shuttle shall have 16 feathers fixed in the base and weigh 
from 4.74 to 5.50 grams. The racket shall not exceed 680 mm in 
overall length and 230 mm in overall width.

SIDE LINE FOR DOUBLES 40mm
420mm

SIDE LINE FOR SINGLES 40mm
LEFT  RIGHT

SERVICE  SERVICE  
COURT COURT 2.53m

CENTER LINE CENTER LINE
40mm

RIGHT LEFT  
SERVICE  SERVICE  2.53m
COURT COURT

SIDE LINE FOR SINGLES
SIDE LINE FOR DOUBLES 40mm

420mm
40mm

Singles Play Area

13.400m
Fig. 4.19: Badminton court

How to play Badminton
For playing Badminton, the following process is followed:

•• The toss is conducted before the play starts.
Fig. 4.20: Badminton racket •• The side which wins the toss can choose either to serve 

and shuttle or receive first and at which side of the court to play.
•• To start the game, the server delivers the service by 

hitting the shuttle with the racket below the waist in 
the diagonally opposite service courts.

•• During the service, it is considered as a ‘fault’:
▪▪ if the shuttle is caught on the net and remains 

suspended on its top if or
▪▪ after passing over the net, the shuttle is caught in 

the net; or 
▪▪ if the served shuttle is hit by the receiver’s partner. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   72 31-07-2020   15:26:22

SHORT SERVICE LINE

LONG SERVICE LINE FOR DOUBLES
ALSO LONG SERVICE LINE 

FOR SINGLES
BACK BOUNDARY LINE

40mm
720mm
40mm

3.880m

40mm

1.950m

NET
POST POST

1.950m

40mm SHORT SERVICE LINE

3.880m

LONG SERVICE LINE FOR DOUBLES
40mm

720mm ALSO LONG SERVICE LINE 
40mm FOR SINGLES

BACK BOUNDARY LINE
6.100m



Individual Games 73

•• It shall be a ‘fault’ during play if;
▪▪ the shuttle lands outside the boundaries of the 

court, or 
▪▪ it fails to pass over the net, or 
▪▪ it touches the ceiling or side walls, or 
▪▪ it touches the player or the dress of a player.

Fig. 4.21: Singles game

Singles 
•• At the beginning of the game (0–0)
•• When the server’s score is even, the server serves from 

the right service court.
•• When the server’s score is odd, the server serves from 

the left service court.
•• If the server wins a rally, the server scores a point and 

then serves again from the alternate service court.
•• If the receiver wins a rally, the receiver scores a point 

and becomes the new server.
•• The player needs to serve from the appropriate service 

court — left if their score is odd, and right if the score 
is even.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   73 31-07-2020   15:26:22



74 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fig. 4.22: Doubles game
Do You Know?
During a game of badminton, Doubles 
a shuttlecock hit by the player 
may reach a speed of more than •• A side has only one ‘service’. 
2000 miles per hour. •• The service passes consecutively to each player.

•• At the beginning of the game and when the score is 
even, the server serves from the right service court. 
When it is odd, the server serves from the left court.

•• If the serving side wins a rally, the serving side scores 
a point and the same server serves again from the 
alternate service court. 

•• If the receiving side wins a rally, the receiving side 
scores a point. The receiving side becomes the new 
serving side. 

•• Players do not change their respective service courts 
until they win a point when their side is serving.

Scoring System 
•• A match consists of best of three games of 21 points each. 
•• Every time there is a serve, there is a point scored. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   74 31-07-2020   15:26:23



Individual Games 75

•• The side winning a rally adds a point to its score. 
•• At a score of 20 all, the side which gains two-points 

lead first wins that game. 
•• If the score reaches 29 all, the side scoring the 30th 

point, wins that game. 
•• The side winning a game serves first in the next game. 
•• When the leading score reaches 11 points, players have 

a 60 seconds interval. 
•• An interval of two minutes is allowed between each game. 
•• In the third game, players change ends when the 

leading score reaches 11 points. 

Fundamental Skills of Badminton

Basic Strokes
A wide range of strokes are used in badminton.
The services are—
(i)	 High Serve
(ii)	 Backhand Low Serve 
(iii)	 Backhand Flick Serve 
(iv)	 Forehand Low Serve
(v)	 Forehand Flick Serve

Fig. 4.23: Stance for backhand 
Forecourt Strokes or Net Strokes low and flick serve

It is played from an area between the net and the short 
service line. These are named as—

•• Backhand Net Shot 
•• Forehand Net Shot 
•• Backhand Net Lift 
•• Forehand Net Lift 
•• Backhand Net Kill
•• Forehand Net Kill

Midcourt Strokes
Played from the middle of the court, these are called—

•• Block 
•• Backhand Drive
•• Forehand Drive

Rear Court Strokes 
These are played from the back of the court.

•• Forehand Clear 
•• Forehand Smash

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   75 31-07-2020   15:26:23



76 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fig. 4.24: Position marked for various strokes

•• Forehand Drop Shot
•• Backhand Clear
•• Backhand Smash
•• Backhand Drop Shot

High Serve
•• High serve travels to the rear of the opponent’s service 

court, dropping vertically. 
•• It is used in singles to begin the rally, from a neutral/

defensive position. 
•• High serve is used in women’s singles and sometimes 

in men’s singles.
•• A sideways stance is used with the racket held in 

forehand grip.
•• The racket and shuttle are held in elevated position 

with weight on the rear leg.
•• Weight is continuously transferred forward towards the 

front foot and the shuttle is dropped to the side or in front. 
•• The racket is lowered with bent wrist and swung forward 

by accelerating the racket head to hit the shuttle in 
front and to the side of the body. 

•• The racket is carried through high and long in follow 
through.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   76 31-07-2020   15:26:24



Individual Games 77

Backhand Low Serve
•• Backhand Low Serve is used in doubles and men’s 

singles to start the rally from a defensive or neutral 
situation.

•• In backhand low serve, the shuttle skips the net and 
lands at the front of the opponent’s service court.

•• It is used to restrict the opponent’s opportunity to attack 
and create attacking opportunities for the serving side.

1. Backhand grip 2. Shuttle hold 3. Trajectory of the shuttle

4. Stance 5. Preparation 6. Execution of backhand low service
Fig. 4.25: Backhand low serve

•• The server stands with the racket, foot forward, close to 
the ‘T’ on the court.  

•• The racket is held in relaxed backhand grip in front of 
the body, with the shuttle placed on it. 

•• With the short backswing of the racket, its face is 
opened slightly. 

•• The racket is swung forward and the shuttle is pushed 
out of the hand.

•• Strike the shuttle out of the hand with a continued 
pushing action.

•• Quickly recover back by bringing the racket up, to 
return the service reply.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   77 31-07-2020   15:26:25



78 Health and Physical Education - XI

The main difference in high, low and flick service in 
badminton is the trajectory of the shuttlecock. Trajectory is 
the parabolic path followed by a shuttle when hit at a certain 
angle.

High Serve

Flick Serve

Low Serve
Do You Know?
•• The word Gymnastic is 

derived from the Greek 
word Gymnos meaning 
‘naked art’.

•• Modern Gymnastic is 
regulated by Federation Fig. 4.26: Trajectory of services

International de Gymnastique 
(FIG), which was founded in Gymnastics
1881, June 23.

•• Khushi Ram and Veer Singh History
represented India for the 
first time in Olympics held Gymnastics begun in ancient Greece about 2500 years ago. It 
at Helsinki in 1952. was used in training to keep people fit for sporting activities. 

In the Greek city of Athens, gymnastic tournaments were 
held, including tumbling, rope climbing, and other similar 
activities. Plato, Homer and Aristotle strongly advocated the 
strengthening qualities of gymnastics. The ‘Federation of 
International Gymnastics’ (FIG) was formed in Liege in 1881.

Gymnastics in India
Gymnastics Federation of India (GFI) was initiated in 1951. 
It was affiliated by the Indian Olympic Association (IOC) 
and Federation International de Gymnastics (FIG) in 1952. 
GFI is the founder member of Commonwealth Gymnastics 
Confederation (CGC) and Asian Gymnastics Union (AGU) since 
these bodies came into existence. The National Gymnastic 
Championship for men and women was organised in 1952 
and in 1962 respectively. The first national championship for 
sub junior girls and boys was organised in 1986 at Karnal in 
Haryana. Sports Aerobics was also organised under Gymnastics 
Federation of India from 1997 along with gymnastics.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   78 31-07-2020   15:26:25



Individual Games 79

Apparatus Do You Know?
You have already studied in previous classes about •• Nadia Comaneci was the 
gymnastics. In this game, different events are performed first female gymnast who 
on different apparatuses like Horizontal Bar, Parallel Bars, received perfect score in 
Rings, Vaulting Table, Pommel Horse and some other 1976 at Montreal Olympics.
apparatus specially for female participants like, un-even 
bars, balancing beam, etc. 

Gymnastics is performed by both men and women. Men have 
six apparatus and women have four apparatus on which they 
perform their routines. Their apparatuses are as follows:

Women’s apparatus
	 1. Vaulting Table		  2. Balancing Beam
	 3. Floor exercise		  4. Uneven Bars

Men’s apparatus
	 1. Vaulting table		  2. Horizontal Bar
	 3. Floor exercise		  4. Parallel bars 
	 5. Roman Rings		  6. Pommel Horse

Uneven Bars

m
240 cm 0 c

 to
 18

130

170 cm
250 cm

20 cm
550 cm 400 cm

Fig. 4.27: Uneven bars

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   79 31-07-2020   15:26:26



80 Health and Physical Education - XI

Specifications
•• Height: Upper bar — 2.50 m (8.2 ft), Lower bar — 1.70 

m (5.6 ft)
•• Diameter of the bar: 4 cm (1.6 in)
•• Length of the bars: 2.10 m (7.9 ft)
•• Diagonal distance between the two bars: 1.30 m 

(4.3 ft)–1.90 m (6.2 ft) (adjustable)

Horizontal Bars
240 cm

280 cm 280 cm

300 cm
500 cm 400 cm 20 cm

Fig. 4.28: Horizontal bars
Specifications

•• Height: 2.80 m (109 in), including about 30 cm (12 in) 
landing mats

•• Length: 2.40 m (94 in)
•• Diameter of the bar: 2.8 cm (1.1 in)

Pommel Horse
40-45 cm 35 cm

12 cm
28 cm

115 cm 115 cm

10 cm

160 cm

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   80 31-07-2020   15:26:26



Individual Games 81

Fig. 4.29: Pommel horse

Specifications 
•• Height from top surface to floor: 1.15 m (3.77 ft) ± 1 cm 

(0.39 in)
•• Length at top: 1.60 m (5.2 ft) ± 1 cm (0.39 in)
•• Length at bottom: 1.55 m (5.09 ft) ± 1 cm (0.39 in)
•• Width at top: 35 cm (14 in) ± 1 cm (0.39 in)
•• Width at bottom: 30 cm (12 in) ± 1 cm (0.39 in)
•• Height of the pommels: 12 cm (4.7 in) ± 0.5 cm (0.20 in)
•• Distance between the pommels: 40 cm (16 in) – 45 cm 

(18 in)(adjustable)

Roman Rings

Min 120 cm

Min 280 cm

Min 260 cm
400 cm 18 cm

550 cm

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   81 31-07-2020   15:26:27

70 cm

300 cm

280 cm

50 cm

280 cm



82 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fig. 4.30: Roman rings

Specifications 
•• Inner diameter: 18 cm (7.1 in) ± 0.1 cm (0.039 in) 
•• Diameter of profile: 2.8 cm (1.1 in) ± 0.1 cm (0.039 in) 
•• Distance from the point of attachment to lower inner 

side of the rings: 3 m (9.8 ft) ± 1 cm (0.39 in) 
•• Distance between the two points of attachment: 50 cm 

(1.6 ft) ± 0.5 cm (0.20 in)

Vaulting Table (Men and Women)

95 cm

120 cm

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   82 31-07-2020   15:26:28

135 cm

125 cm

75/85 cm



Individual Games 83

Fig. 4.31: Vaulting table

Specifications 
•• Length: 1.20 m (3.9 ft) ± 1 cm (0.39 in)
•• Width: 90 cm (3.0 ft) ± 1 cm (0.39 in)
•• Height

▪▪ Men: 1.35 m (4.43 ft) ± 1 cm (0.39 in)
▪▪ Women: 1.25 m (4.10 ft) ± 1 cm (0.39 in) 

•• Run up area
▪▪ Length: 3.5 m (11.5 ft) ± 10 cm (3.9 in)
▪▪ Width: 1 m (3.3 ft) ± 1 cm (0.39 in)

Balancing Beam

500 cm 13 cm

16 cm 10 cm

500 cm maximum

Fig. 4.32: Balancing beam

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   83 31-07-2020   15:26:28

125 cm

125 cm



84 Health and Physical Education - XI

Specifications
•• Height: 1.25 cm (4.10 ft) 
•• Length: 5 cm (16 ft)
•• Width: 10 cm (3.9 in)

Floor

14 m

Floor

Fig. 4.33: Floor

Specifications 
•• Performance area: 12 m (39 ft) × 12 m (39 ft) ± 3 cm 

(1.2 in)
•• Diagonals: 1.697 m ± 5 cm (2.0 in)
•• Border: 1 m (3.3 ft)
•• Safety zone: 2 cm (6.6 ft) 

Parallel Bar

Min 350 cm
60 cm 60 cm 42 cm 52 cm

48 cm 48 cm
Fig. 4.34: Parallel bar

Specifications 
•• Bar length: 3.50 m (11.5 ft) ± 1 cm (0.39 in) 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   84 31-07-2020   15:26:30

200 cm

12 m



Individual Games 85

•• Bar rounded profile: 5 cm (2.0 in) ± 1 mm (0.039 in) 
vertical by 4 cm (1.6 in) ± 1 mm (0.039 in) horizontal. 

•• Bar width: 4 cm (1.6 in) ± 1 mm (0.039 in) 
•• Height of bar from floor: 2 m (6.6 ft) ± 1 cm (0.39 in) 
•• Distance between bars: 42 cm (17 in) – 52 cm (20 in) 

(adjustable) 

Advanced skills on apparatus
Cartwheel on Balancing Beam

Fig. 4.35: Cartwheel on balancing beam

•• Stand erect keeping feet slightly apart.
•• With a momentary swing, raise the front leg close to the 

chest, and arms by the side of the head, step out.
•• Place one leg ahead of the rear leg and shift the body 

weight on the supporting leg.
•• Turn shoulder on the side and place alternate arms on 

the beam at sideways.
•• Swing and raise the rear leg first.
•• Move the supporting leg to the direction of the cartwheel.
•• Turn the trunk up to 130 –135 degree angle, keeping 

legs straddle as much as possible.
•• Push off the left arm and place the right leg on the 

beam surface and vice versa.
•• Keep the head in between arms throughout the 

cartwheel.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   85 31-07-2020   15:26:31



86 Health and Physical Education - XI

Back Handspring or Flic Flac on Balancing Beam

Fig. 4.36: Back handspring or flic flac on balancing beam

•• Keep the feet together in balanced position.
•• Push off from the toes and take off the body up-

backward with swinging  arms sharp by the side of the 
head.

•• As the body moves in the air, extend chest as well as 
pull the upper body from the hip region with the arms 
inside towards the beam.

•• Extend the head and spot the place of contact.
•• Place arms slightly on the beam. 
•• Now, snap down sharply by bending from the hip and 

simultaneously push off the arms from the beam.
•• Land on the beam keeping knees together and hips tight.

KIP Technique on Uneven Bars

Fig. 4.37: KIP on uneven bars

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   86 31-07-2020   15:26:33



Individual Games 87

•• Stand in front of the low bar. Do You Know?
•• Now jump and grasp the bar with over hand grip by In Rio Olympics 2016, Dipa 

extending the arms forward. Karmakar — ‘The Golden Girl’ 
•• Lead the feet in forward swing and perform a smooth became the first Indian girl 

glide under the bar. to qualify for the Gymnastics 
•• At the end of the glide, extend hips while forcing the and was one amongst the five 

gymnasts who successfully did 
shoulders a little forward. the Produnova at international 

•• Now quickly draw the feet on the bar and then extend level, which is the most difficult 
the hips. vault. Deepa Karmakar won the 

•• During the action, press down the bar, raise the legs to 4th position in Olympics.
the hips, during the rear-ward swing.

•• From this support position, execute a strong beat up action.
•• Raise the body from the bar, pushing the shoulder over 

the arm.
•• At the end, flexed from the hips, place the sole of both 

feet on the bar by the side of the grip.
•• Circle forward by leading the upper body and shoulders.
•• Straighten legs and arms throughout the circle. 
•• As the circle passes through the line of the bar, raise 

shoulders and hips, while bending the knees slightly.
•• Rotate the grip as body moves down to the upward.

Forward Scissor on Pommel horse

Fig. 4.38: Cartwheel on balancing beam

Pommel horse skill needs coordinated and synchronised 
movements, with continuous and simultaneous change of 
hands and legs.

Evaluation Procedure for the above Elements 
(Movements): There are four elements on the floor exercises 
and two elements each on all the other apparatuses given in 
this chapter. The evaluation of these elements will be done 
based on the following points.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   87 31-07-2020   15:26:33



88 Health and Physical Education - XI

(i)	 Value of each element =5.00 points (each element will 
be evaluated out of 5.00 points)

(ii)	 Value of four elements on floor exercises = 20.00 points 
(four elements ×5.00 points each =20.00)

(iii)	 Value of two elements on pommel horse =10.00 (two 
elements ×5.00 points each =10.00)

(iv)	 Value of two elements on rings =10.00 points
(v)	 Value of two elements on vaulting table =10.00 points
(vi)	 Value of two elements on parallel bars =10.00 points
(vii)	 Value of two elements on horizontal bars =10.00 points
(viii)	 Value of two elements on balancing beam =10.00 points
(ix)	 Value of two elements on uneven bars =10.00 points

The total value for the boys’ section comes to 70.00 points 
Do You Know? (i.e., 20.00 for floor and 50.00 for rest of the five apparatuses). 
•• The word judo is literally The total value for the girls’ section comes to 50.00 

explained by ‘Ju’ which points (i.e., 20.00 for floor and 30.00 for rest of the three 
means gentle and ‘Do’ apparatuses). 
that means path. Thus 
this game is considered 
as a gentle path of self- Judo
defense.

•• Judo was first officially History
taught at the Kōdōkan Judo is considered to have originated from Japan. Jigoro 
Judo Institute in Japan Kano invented this game in 1882, and he is considered as 
in 1882. the founder father of Judo. It is believed that Judo is the 

comprehensive form of another ancient self-defence form 
‘Ju Jutsu’. Judo is an art of self-defence and is considered 
gentle a way of attack with the help of one’s own body. 
Judo is an ideal form of physical exercise and self-defence. 
Judo became a system of self-defence in Japan involving 
throwing, hitting, kicking, choking, bending and pinning an 
opponent. Jigoro Kano reviewed all the principles of attack 
and defence and correctly applied these to the game. Judo 
in male category was introduced in Tokyo Olympic Games in 
1964. Judo in women category was added in the Barcelona 
Olympic, 1992.

Emergence of Judo in India
Judo was introduced through the Judo training centre at 
Visva Bharati University started by Rabindranath Tagore 
in 1905. It is believed that on the suggestion of Okakura 
Kakuzo (master of Judo in Japan), Rabindranath Tagore 
called a Judo expert from Japan to India in 1905.

Judo Federation of India (JFI) was formed in India in 1965 
and thus attained steady growth. Worldwide, Judo is governed 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   88 31-07-2020   15:26:33



Individual Games 89

by the IJF (International Judo Federation). The year 1966 
witnessed the first National Judo Championship in Hyderabad.

Judo was included in the Asian Games in 1986 at Seoul 
and India got its much needed break in Seoul Asian Games, 
where Indians bagged four bronze medals. It was a milestone 
for team India and since then, India has been performing 
continuously at international Judo events. Several Indian 
Judoka (a person who practises or is an expert in Judo) 
qualified for the Olympic Games. Several of them received 
the prestigious Arjuna Award for their performances. In the 
2010 Judo World Cup in Tashkent, Thoudam Kalpana Devi 
of Manipur became the first Indian to be included among the 
top-three positions in the World Cup.

Basic Techniques
A few basic techniques of Judo given below with the original 
terminology and their English version.
	 1.	Tachi-Waza — Standing techniques
	 2.	Koshi-Waza — Hip techniques
	 3.	Ashi-Waza — Leg techniques
	 4.	Te-Waza — Hand techniques
	 5.	Osae-komi-Waza — Ground techniques (Holds)
	 6.	 Kensetsu-Waza — Arm lock techniques 
	 7.	Shime-Waza — Choking techniques

Basic rules
(i)	 During international competitions, each match lasts 

for four minutes, and points and penalties are awarded 
by the match referee assisted by the judges. 

(ii)	 The main objective of the player is to score an ‘Ippon’ 
(winning point) before the time runs out. Once a player 
scores an Ippon or is given a ‘Hansoku-make’ (severe 
penalty), the match ends immediately. Otherwise, the 
winner of the match is determined by the scored points.

(iii)	 If the points are equal, then the winner is declared on 
the basis of the least number of penalty points known 
as ‘Shido’, means minor penalties.

	 (iv)	 Judoka are not allowed to employ any of the outlawed 
techniques, attacking joints other than the elbows, 
punching or kicking, touching the opponent’s face, or 
intentionally injuring the opponent in any way.  

	 (v)	 In a judo bout, Judoka can achieve two types of scores 
(Ippon and waza-ari). 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   89 31-07-2020   15:26:34



90 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? 	 (vi)	 Ippon is the best, as it results in immediate victory. 
•• Yasuhiro Yamashita is a Ippon can be achieved by throwing an opponent in 

legend of world Judo. such a way as to make them land on their back. 
•• Judogi is the formal Japanese 	(vii)	 Ippon can also be achieved by trapping an opponent in 

name for the traditional an armhold or stranglehold to the extent that it forces 
uniform used for Judo the opponent to surrender or immobilising an opponent 
practice and competition. on the floor for at least 20 seconds.

	(viii)	 The next best score is waza-ari, which is awarded for 
lesser throws than those required for scoring ippon, 
and for immobilising the opponent for less than the 
time required to score ippon, i.e., 10 seconds.

	 (ix)	 There are two types of penalties awarded in judo — shido 
and hansoku-make. Awarding hansoku-make to a 
judoka automatically gives the match to the opponent. 
Hansoku-make is given for major rule breaches or 
for the accumulation of three shidos. The third shido 
becomes hansoku-make (disqualified).

Specifications of Dress and Belts
Table 9: Judogi (Judo Dress) and Obi (Belt)

(Blue and White)

Rank Senior Junior
Sixth kyu
(beginner)

Light Blue Light Blue
Fifth kyu

Fourth kyu
White White

Third kyu
Second kyu
First kyu Brown Purple

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   90 31-07-2020   15:26:34



Individual Games 91

First dan
Second dan
Third dan

Fourth dan Black
Fifth dan
Sixth dan

Seventh dan
Eighth dan

Red and White
or

Black
Ninth dan
Tenth dan

Eleventh dan

Red or Black

Golden Score
In case there is no score(s) or scores are equal, the contest will 
continue till golden score. Any score or penalties from regular 
time will remain on the scoreboard and will be extended into 
the golden score overtime period. The decision in the golden 
score is made by the deference or score or hansoku-make.

Measurements of Contest Area in Judo
A traditional Judo match takes place on tatami mats 
measuring 14×14 meters or 16×16 meters, with a combat 
area of 9×9 meters or 10×10 meters marked out within 
it. Players must wear the designated uniform with an 
appropriate knotted belt. The Judo player/athletes who are 
called Judoka, must bow before stepping onto the mat, and 
must bow to each other before and after the competition.

Competition area
The competition area is a minimum of 14m×14m and is 
divided into two zones. The inner zone called the contest area 
is a minimum of 8m×8m to a maximum of 10m×10m. The 
outer zone is the safety area and is a minimum of 3m wide. 
The contesting area is of different colour to the safety area.

When using two or more adjoining competition areas, the 
common or shared safety area is 4m. A free zone, a minimum of 
50 cm, must be maintained around the entire competition area.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   91 31-07-2020   15:26:34



92 Health and Physical Education - XI

14–16 metres

8–10m

Contest 
Area Blue Competitor

Referee

White Competitor

Safety area
3m

Fig. 4.39: Competetion area of judo

Tatamis
The competition area is covered by a tatamis or similar material. 
The tatamis is made of pressed foam and is 1m×2m or 1m×1m.

Platform
The platform is optional and is made up of solid wood. It 
measures approximately 18m×18m. When using a platform, 
it is recommended that the safety area is a minimum of 4m 
wide around the competition area.

Judogi (Uniforms)
Judoka must wear the appropriate Gi (uniform). Judogi is no 
more than 5 cm above the ankle and wrist and is tied with 
the correct style of knotted belt.

Referees and Judges
Contest occurs under the supervision of a referee and two 
judges. The referee stands inside the contest area, and the 
two judges sit at the outer corner of the contest area, diagonal 
to each corner.

Contestants
The name of the blue uniform contestant is called first, 
followed by the name of the white uniform contestant. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   92 31-07-2020   15:26:34

14–16 metres

Timers Scorers Score 
Board



Individual Games 93

The contest begins with the blue contestant stands on 
the right side of the referee while the white contestant 
stands on the left. The referee starts the bouts by saying 
Hajime (start). The referee stops the bouts temporarily by 
saying Mate. 

Commonly used terms in Judo
1.	 Hajime — Start
2.	 Sore-mate — time up
3.	 Mate — temporarily  stop a contest
4.	 Osae-komi — pinned the opponent
5.	 Toketa — if the pinned opponent successfully breaks the 

pin (breaking the hold)
6.	 Kuzushi — breaking the balance of the opponent

Important Tournaments
1.	 National School Games
2.	 CBSE School National Competition
3.	 Federation Cup
4.	 International Competitions like, Asian Games, 

Commonwealth Games, and Olympics.

Judo weight categories
The following weight categories are classified for the purpose 
of competition.

Table 10: Judo Weight Categories List

U-19 Boys U-19 Girls
Below 40 kg Below 36 kg
Below 45 kg Below 40 kg
Below 50 kg Below 44 kg
Below 55 kg Below 48 kg
Below 60 kg Below 52 kg
Below 66 kg Below 57 kg
Below 73 kg Below 63 kg
Below 81 kg Below 70 kg
Below 90 kg Below 70 kg
Below 90 kg ---

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   93 13-08-2020   15:35:43



94 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? Swimming
In the 1912 Olympic games, 
Fanny Durack of Australia History
became the first Female 
Olympic Swimming Gold In the early 1800s, swimming emerged as a competitive sport 
Medalist in 100 m Free Style. in England. The first indoor swimming pool, St George’s 

Baths, was opened for public use in the year 1828. The first 
national governing body, the Amateur Swimming Association, 
was formed in the year 1880.

The Olympic Games were held in 1896 in Athens, which 
was a male-only competition. Six events were planned for the 
swimming competition, but only four events were actually 
contested — 100 m, 500 m, and 1200 m freestyle and 100 m 
for sailors. The first gold medal was won by Alfréd Hajós of 
Hungary in the 100 m freestyle.

In 1908, the world swimming body ‘Federation 
Internationale de Natation’ (FINA) was formed.

Women were first allowed to take part in swimming 
competitions in the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm 
competing in freestyle races. In the 1912 games, Harry 
Hebner of the United States won the 100 m backstroke.

History of Swimming in India
In the year 1948, the Swimming Federation of India (SFI) was 
formed. Since then this body is looking after the promotion 
and administration of aquatic sports in India. The SFI is 
affiliated to FINA, the world governing body for the sport. 

Few not able Indian swimmers are Sachin Nag, Sufyan 
Shaikh, Khajan Singh, Nisha Milled, Sikha Tandon, and 
Sandeep Sejwal.

Table 11: Dimensions of Swimming Pool

Physical Property Specified Value
Length 50 m
Width 25 m
Depth 2.0 m (6 ft 7 in) minimum, 3.0m (9 

ft 10 in)
Number of lanes 10
Lane width 2.5 m (8 ft 2 in)
Water temperature 25 – 28°C (77– 82°F)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   94 31-07-2020   15:26:35



Individual Games 95

50m
50m 15m

Starting Platform
Lane Rope Lane Markings 5m

Lane 1

Lane 2

Lane 3

Lane 4

Lane 5

Lane 6

Lane 7

Lane 8

Lane 9

Lane 10

Backstroke Turn indicator
False Start Rope Backstroke Turn indicator

Fig. 4.40: Aerial view of swimming pool

Starting Platforms 
Starting platforms shall be firm and give no springing effect. 
The height of the platform above the water surface shall 
be from 0.5 metre to 0.75 metre. The surface area shall be 
at least 0.5 metre×0.5 metre and covered with a non-slip 
material. Maximum slope shall not be more than 10 degrees. 

0.

0.5m/1.6ft
5m/1.6ft

0
10 max

0.5-0.75m/
1.6-2.5ft

above Water

0.3-0.6m/
1-2ft
above Water

Fig. 4.41: Starting platforms

Teaching swimming in early stages
Teaching swimming sounds like a task for those who know 
how to swim. But if you are not careful, you can scare people 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   95 31-07-2020   15:26:36

25m
2.5m



96 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 4.9 away from the water for a good amount of years. So, how you 
Make a list of the Olympic teach swimming is very important. If swimming is not taught 
events of swimming. properly and correctly, children can develop a phobia.

Role of the Teacher
1.	 Cheerful attitude
2.	 Understand individual differences
3.	 Offer plenty of encouragement
4.	 Recognise the fear of the student
5.	 Develop self-confidence in students 
6.	 Praise students
7.	 Have patience

The beginning
Assemble the class at pool side at a given point of time. First, 
orient the children with pool surroundings and swimming 
environment by taking them around the pool, showing 
various equipment, changing rooms, different depths of 
the pool, specially the limits of shallow water. Also brief the 
safety, health and hygiene rules which are to be followed by 
all at the pool. Engage them in talks and bring them closer to 
the pool. Make them sit on the deck around the shallow end 
with feet hanging and swinging in the water, making waves. 
Also encourage them to lean forward and touch the water 
with hands.

Entry into the pool
Organise a partner system (spotter system), one acting as a 
spotter for the other. If required, air tubes and arm bands 
may be used. Various methods of safe entry may be used, 
i.e., walking down the steps if provided at the shallow end 
facing the pool side, sit on the pool side, grip the railing with 
the other hand, try the same method by facing pool side and 
jump towards the teacher/partner already into the water to 
support.

Movement at the shallow end
Encourage the children to move along the wall, rail or scum 
gutter immediately on entering the water. Take support 
with one hand and paddle with the support of rail or wall 
and paddle with both hands while walking at the shallow 
end. Later, introduce hopping and let them sink down up to 
shoulder level.

Breathing with the mouth may be introduced by blowing 
into the water taken in both hands or by putting the face on 
the surface in standing position with feet apart.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   96 31-07-2020   15:26:36



Individual Games 97

Getting the feet off the bottom
Walking across the pool with shoulders submerged and arms 
at stretch for support and holding kick boards with both hands. 
Gradually increase the speed and lean forward until the feet 
rise from the bottom. Students stand back towards the wall in 
forward leaning position, approximately 2 meters away, arms 
stretched forward on the surface and shoulder submerged. 
From this position, they lean forward on the water, push off 
with the feet and glide towards a wall, rail or scum gutter.

Floating
Remember that it is much easier to float on the surface by 
keeping the body relaxed than by thrashing about with arms 
and legs. After having left the bottom with support, the child 
should now be ready to float without any support or help. 
Types of Floats
There are many techniques of floating, such as—
1.	 Tuck float 
2.	 Jellyfish float 
3.	 Prone float 
4.	 Star float
5.	 Supine float

Pushing off, gliding and standing up again 
The beginners should now gain confidence, as swimming is 
based on the principle of gliding across the surface of the 
water. Stand with your back to the side walls of the pool and 
close up against it, leave the shoulders into the water keeping 
the head above the surface, now place the foot against the 
wall, take a deep breath, lower the face into the water and 
kick the wall with the raised foot.

Lift the other leg so that both the legs end up straight and 
pointed behind. The body will stretch on the surface and now 
glide towards the partner who is standing 4 – 5 meters away. 
The partner now holds the out stretched hand, lowers the 
hips, pulls the knees under the body, thrust them down to 
the bottom placing a little apart, and the beginner stands up 
on the floor raising the head and shoulders. 

Practice gliding further with a float held in extended 
hands. It enables the beginner to stay on the surface and 
make him ready to learn the stroke. 

Which Stroke First?
There are no set rules regarding the order in which swimming 
strokes should be taught to the beginners. There are various 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   97 31-07-2020   15:26:36



98 Health and Physical Education - XI

schools of thought about the stroke best suited to the 
beginners. Some suggest back stroke for beginners.

Whatever the merits of any stroke may be, a multiple 
stroke approach in the early stages may be preferred 
whereby the learner is given an experience of all the strokes 
and later the learner allowed to make up one’s own mind. 
The butterfly stroke, however, may be introduced at a later 
stage as it requires a high degree of swimming proficiency, 
strength and co-ordination.

Fundamental rules and regulations
Following rules should be followed by the competitors while 
swimming in a race.

(i)	 A swimmer shall swim the course alone and cover the 
whole distance to qualify.

(ii)	 A swimmer must finish the race in the same lane in 
which he started.

(iii)	 In all the events, a swimmer while turning, shall make 
physical contact with the end of the pool. The turn 
must be made from the wall, and it is not permissible 
to take a stride or step from the bottom of the pool.

(iv)	 Standing on the bottom during freestyle events or 
during the freestyle portion of medley events shall not 
disqualify a swimmer, but he shall not walk.

(v)	 Pulling on the lane rope is not allowed.
(vi)	 Obstructing another swimmer by swimming across 

another lane or interfering the other shall disqualify 
the offender. Should the foul be intentional, the referee 
shall report the matter to the member promoting the 
race and to the swimmer so offending.

(vii)	 No swimmer shall be permitted to use or wear any device 
that may aid speed, buoyancy or endurance during a 
competition (webbed gloves, fins, etc.). Goggles may 
be worn.

(viii)	 Any swimmer not participating in a race shall be 
disqualified, if they enter the water, in which an event 
is being conducted before the preceding team-mate 
touches the wall.

(ix)	 There shall be four swimmers in each relay team.
(x)	 In relay events, the team of swimmers whose feet lose 

touch with the starting platform before the preceding 
team-mate touches the wall, shall be disqualified.

(xi)	 Any relay team shall be disqualified from a race if a 
team member, other than the swimmer supposed to 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   98 31-07-2020   15:26:36



Individual Games 99

swim that length, enters the water when the race is 
being conducted, before swimmers of all the teams 
have finished the race being conducted.

(xii)	 The member of a relay team and their order of competing 
must be nominated before the race. Any relay team 
member may compete in the race only once.

		   The composition of a relay team may be changed 
between the heats and finals of the event, provided that it 
is made up from the list of swimmers properly entered by 
a member of that event. Failure to swim in the order listed, 
will result in disqualification. Substitutions may be made 
only in the case of a documented medical emergency.

(xiii)	 Any swimmer having finished his race, or his distance 
in a relay event, must leave the pool as soon as possible 
without obstructing any other swimmer who has not yet 
finished his race. Otherwise the swimmer committing 
the fault or his relay team shall be disqualified.

(xiv)	 Should a foul endanger the chances of success of a 
swimmer, the referees shall have the power to allow 
him to compete in the next heat or, should the foul 
occur in a final event or in the last heat, he/she may 
order it to re-swim.

(xv)	 No pace-making shall be permitted, nor may any device 
be used which has that effect.

Swimwear
The swimwear includes swimsuit, cap and goggles, which 
shall be in good moral state and suitable for the individual 
sports disciplines and should not carry any symbol which 
may be considered offensive. The swimsuits shall be non-
transparent. It is permissible to wear two caps.

Table 12: Events Conducted in the  
World Championships in 50 m pool

Events Men Women
Freestyle 50m, 100m, 200m, 50m, 100m, 

400m, 800m, 200m, 400m, 
1500m 800m, 1500m

Backstroke 50m, 100m, 200m 50m, 100m, 200m
Butterfly 50m, 100m, 200m 50m, 100m, 200m
Ind. Medley 200m, 400m 200m, 400m
Relays Freestyle 4×100m, 4×200m 4×100m, 4×200m

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   99 31-07-2020   15:26:36



100 Health and Physical Education - XI

Medley 4×100m 4×100m

Mixed Relays 4×100 Freestyle and 4×100m Medley

Fundamental Techniques
Techniques in swimming are classified into three main 
categories —
1.	 Strokes
2.	 Starts 
3.	 Turn

Strokes
In swimming, there are four strokes used in the competition 
all over the world.
1.	 Front Crawl or Freestyle
2.	 Back Crawl
3.	 Breast 
4.	 Butterfly
Teaching stages of front crawl stroke

Fig. 4.42: Front crawl stroke

1.	 Body Position: The basic body position for teaching 
the front crawl stroke is streamlined prone position. 
The swimmer lies flat on his stomach with both arms 
stretched out in front, passing by the side of ears and 
the water level is at hair line. Both legs are extended to 
the back with toes pointed.

2.	 Arm Action: The arms are pulled alternately from 
front to back inside the above. While one arm is 
pulling/pushing, the other arm is recovering. The 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   100 31-07-2020   15:26:36



Individual Games 101

arm strokes provide most of the forward propulsion. 
The arm action is further divided into entry, catch, 
pull, push, release, initial and final recovery.

3.	 Leg Action: The leg movements in front crawl is 
called the flutter kick. The legs move alternatively 
up and down. The leg movement originates from the 
hip joint. While one leg kicks downward, the other 
leg recovers upward. The knees are flexed with toes 
pointed during the downbeat and are kept straight 
with toes relaxed during the upbeat. Though, the 
leg action provides only a small amount of forward 
propulsion when combined with arm action, but it 
is essential to attain horizontal body position and 
reduce the body drag.

4.	 Lateral Breathing: Breathing in the front crawl stroke 
is done on the side, whichever side is convenient to the 
swimmer. The swimmer takes the breath through the 
mouth by turning the head to the side of the pushing 
arm, at the beginning of recovery. Soon the face goes 
back into the water and the swimmer breathes out more 
through the mouth and only a small portion through 
the nose. The mouth goes to the other side also while 
breathing out but does not come out of the water. The 
swimmer continues exhalation and goes back to the 
same side to inhale again. Usually the swimmers take 
breath every arm cycle.

5.	 Body Roll: The body of the front crawl stroke swimmer 
rotates around its long axis with every arm stroke so 
that the shoulder of the recovering arm is higher than 
the shoulder of the pulling/pushing arm. This helps the 
pulling arm to sink down and perform a deeper pull, and 
on the other hand, it facilitates a high elbow of the other 
arm.

Teaching stages of back crawl stroke

Fig. 4.43: Back crawl stroke

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   101 31-07-2020   15:26:36



102 Health and Physical Education - XI

1.	 Body Position: The basic body position for teaching the 
back crawl stroke is streamlined supine position. The 
swimmer lies flat on his back with both arms stretched 
back over head, passing by the side of ears. Face is out 
of the water and both legs are extended back with toes 
pointed. Hips are just below the water surface.

2.	 Arm Action: The arms are pulled alternately from 
back to front inside the water and recovers above the 
water with straight arm over the body. While one arm is 
pulling/pushing, the other arm is recovering. The arm 
strokes provide most of the forward propulsion. The arm 
action is further divided into various parts, such as, the 
entry, catch, pull, push, release, and recovery.

3.	 Leg Action: The legs move alternately up and down. 
The leg movement originates from the hip joint. While 
one leg kicks downward, the other leg recovers upward. 
The knees are flexed with toes pointed during the 
upbeat and are kept straight with toes relaxed during 
the downbeat.

4.	 Lateral Breathing: Breathing in backstroke is very easy, 
as the mouth and nose are usually above the water. The 
swimmer breathes once in every arm cycle.

Teaching stages of breast stroke

Fig. 4.44: Breast stroke

1.	 Practise the kick and its movements on dry land of 
the water. 

2.	 Practise the kick on the edge of the swimming pool in 
the water. 

3.	 Kick back with a board held to the chest in prone 
position. Try to keep the knees stable at the surface and 
draw both the feet to the buttocks by bending at the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   102 31-07-2020   15:26:37



Individual Games 103

knee, not at the hip. Allow the swimmer to let their feet 
work in a wide arc, if necessary, as the main aim is to get 
their feet turned out. Once the swimmer has their feet 
ready to kick back, it is advisable to get them to pause 
at this point and consciously turn their feet out before 
kicking back, and pause again while the legs are fully 
extended. 

4.	 Kick on front, holding the board on the back and with 
thumbs underneath and arms fully extended. Place the 
face in water and proceed to do three kicks and then 
breathe. Stretch and glide after each kick. Keep the head 
very stable with the eyes looking to the front at all times. 
Rocking movements of the head are best avoided as they 
affect the body position and the swimmer can lose track 
of where their arms and legs are. A stable head helps 
maintain a reference point. The breathing is performed 
by raising and lowering the head as one unit. 

5.	 Repeat Step 4 by doing two kicks and one round of 
breathing. 

6.	 One breath and one kick. Holding the board (as above) 
with eyes looking directly ahead and arms and legs 
fully extended. Ask the swimmer to lift their head and 
shoulders (by contracting their back muscles), then lift 
their feet, lower their head and shoulder, then kick and 
glide. Repeat this sequence over and over—stressing to 
the swimmer that the first movement in the sequence is 
raising of the head and shoulders.
a.	 The Pull: Swimmers have a lot of difficulty with 

learning the pull because they achieve very little 
propulsion. This causes difficulty in teaching the 
stroke as the swimmers modify the pull incorrectly, 
in order to gain propulsion. To avoid this temptation, 
the use of fins is employed to enable them to propel 
themselves while they develop the correct stroke 
mechanics. As the swimmers become more proficient, 
the fins are removed.

b.	 The Complete Stroke: By following the above 
progression, the swimmer has learned to kick and 
breathe, and pull and breathe with the correct 
timing. All that remains to do now is, to connect the 
two skills together and the timing should look after 
itself – as it has already been taught. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   103 31-07-2020   15:26:37



104 Health and Physical Education - XI

(i)	 Three kicks with arms extended and one pull. 
Breathe only on the full stroke. Glide after each 
kick and look straight ahead at all times. 

(ii)	 Two kicks with arms extended and one pull. Breathe 
only on the full stroke. Glide after each kick. 

(iii)	 Normal breast stroke with a long glide—
beginning the next stroke after exhalation has 
been completed. The above three skills are 
important for consolidating the stroke. Try to 
develop power in the pull and the kick whilst still 
holding a glide in the stroke. By doing this, you 
will develop speed and strength without running 
the risk of losing the timing. Only when the 
swimmer is swimming strongly and correctly, 
should the glide be reduced for faster swimming. 
Fast breast stroke swimming is achieved with 
minimum glide but with the maintenance of 
maximum arm and leg extension. Teaching 
breast stroke is an exercise of patience but if you 
follow the process outlined above, you will find 
it as an effective way for teaching breast stroke 
with good technique from the earliest stages.

Teaching stages of butterfly stroke

Fig. 4.45: Butterfly stroke

1.	 Body Position: The body must be horizontal and 
streamlined. The teacher/coach must make sure that 
the swimmer can push off the wall in a streamlined 
position initially on the surface and progress to dropping 
down under the water and pushing off under water while 
maintaining a streamlined body position. This takes time 
and must be worked on continually. Apart from teaching 
the swimmer the position needed for their body, it also 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   104 31-07-2020   15:26:38



Individual Games 105

develops the leg muscles needed for the push off in their 
turns and eventually the leg drive needed for their dives.

Body should be either in the prone position. Legs together, 
toes pointed, arms extended in front of the shoulders, head 
positioned between the arms, ears squashed between the 
arms, and one hand on top of the other. There should be no 
gap between the arms and the ears. The top hand must be 
locked over the bottom hand with, no gaps.
2.	 Dolphin Kick: The swimmers lie on the tummy, in a 

streamlined position and push the chest down into the 
water and let their bottoms rise and then vice versa, i.e., 
chest up and bottoms down. They can do this with the 
hands by the side, to begin. They continue the movement, 
trying to get to the other side of the pool.  They must 
do 3 – 4 movements without breathing and push the 
chin forwards to grab a quick breath and then the head 
returns to the streamlined position with the eyes looking 
towards the bottom. Once this has been established, try 
to extend the arms in front of the head in the streamlined 
position and perform the same movement while breathing 
at every fourth kick. Slowly build up the strength in the 
kick by doing short distances with short to moderate rest 
intervals. The goal is for a quick movement from the legs 
and this takes strength and practice. Goal should be to 
execute three kicks per second. All kicking practices can 
be done with and without fins.

Starts
All four competitive strokes are to be started in the 
competition by using a pair of techniques known as the start. 
The swimmer emphasises on the quickest technique which 
allows him a stinger push off from the starting position. The 
popular starting techniques are—
1.	 Grab start
2.	 Circular start 
3.	 Racing start
4.	 Conventional start
5.	 Track start
Teaching Stages of Start
For teaching the ‘start’ to the beginners, the following 
sequence is followed—
1.	 Position on the block
2.	 Take off

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   105 31-07-2020   15:26:38



106 Health and Physical Education - XI

3.	 Flight (position in the air)
4.	 Entry into the water (glide first stroke)

However, back stroke uses almost a uniform technique, 
which does not have any special name and is known as 
backstroke start.

Turns
During the race, the swimmer must take a turn from the 
end of the wall to complete the full distance of the race. The 
swimmers try to use such techniques which are quicker 
and gives strong push off from the wall within the 
permissible rules of the stroke. The various turns used by 
the swimmers are:
1.	 Simple
2.	 Throw away
3.	 Summersault
4.	 Flip
5.	 Roll over
6.	 Breast stroke
7.	 Butterfly
Teaching Stages of Turn
1.	 Approach to the wall
2.	 Turn or touch
3.	 Push off
4.	 Glide First

Table Tennis

History
Table tennis, also known as ‘Ping-Pong’, is a popular indoor 
recreational sport in India. The International Table Tennis 
Federation (ITTF) was founded in 1926. Table tennis made its 
Olympic debut at the 1988 Seoul Games. At present, there are 
226 member nations affiliated to International Table Tennis 
Federation. Table Tennis Federation of India is one of the 
founder members of ITTF and officially started playing table 
tennis with the establishment of Table Tennis Federation of 
India (TTFI) in 1926. Table tennis has been contested at the 
Asian Games since 1958. Table tennis competition has been 
in the Commonwealth Games as an optional sport since 2002. 
World Team Table Tennis Championships, which include 
men’s team and women’s team events, started in the year 
2000. World Table Tennis Championships have been held since 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   106 31-07-2020   15:26:38



Individual Games 107

1926, and biennially since 1957. Earlier the game was played 
up to 21 points, which was changed to 11 points effective from Do You Know?
September 2001. The change of rule made the game faster. Sharath Kamal is a famous 

Table Tennis player of India, 
The ITTF also changed the rule of five services by one player who was conferred Padma Shri 
at a time to two services effective from 2002. All the table by the Government of India.
tennis events since 2014 are now being played with a new poly 
material ball.

Facilities and Equipment Required
Table tennis is an indoor game requiring a racket, net, net 
posts, a table and a ball.

2.74 m

1
.5

2
5

m

76 cm

Fig. 4.46: Table of table tennis

•• Surface of the table shall be rectangular, 2.74 m long 
and 1.525 m wide, and shall lie in a horizontal plane 76 
cm above the floor.

•• The playing surface may be of any material and shall 
yield a uniform bounce of about 23 cm when a standard 
ball is dropped on to it from a height of 30 cm.

•• The playing surface shall be uniformly dark coloured 
and matt, but with a white side-line, 2 cm wide, along 
each 2.74 m edge and a white end line, 2 cm wide, 
along each 1.525 m edge.

•• For doubles, each court shall be divided into two equal 
half-courts by a white centre line, 3 mm wide, running 
parallel with the side lines; the centre line shall be 
regarded as a part of each right half-court.

•• The net shall be suspended by a cord attached at each 
end to an upright post 15.25 cm high, the outside limits 
of the post being 15.25 cm outside the side line.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   107 31-07-2020   15:26:38



108 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know?
Manav Thakkar of India secured 
top position in the junior world 
ranking of International Table 
Tennis Federation during the 
first month of 2018.

Activity 4.10
Check the Table Tennis tables of 
your school by bouncing a Table 
Tennis ball as per the rules.

Fig. 4.47: Net used in table tennis

•• The top of the net, along its whole length, shall be 15.25 
cm above the playing surface. 

Ball
•• The ball shall be spherical, with a diameter of 40 mm 

and weigh 2.7 g. 
•• It shall be made of celluloid or similar plastics material 

and shall be white or orange in colour.
Fig. 4.48:  

Table tennis ball Racket
•• Racket may be of any size, shape or weight, but the 

blade shall be flat and rigid.
•• At least 85 per cent of the blade by thickness shall be of 

natural wood; an adhesive layer within the blade may 
be reinforced with the fibrous material, but shall not be 
thicker than 7.5 per cent of the total thickness or 0.35 
mm, whichever is the smaller.

•• A side of the blade used 
for striking the ball shall 
be covered with either 
ordinary pimpled rubber, 
with pimples outwards 
having a total thickness 
including adhesive, of 
not more than 2.0 mm, 
or sandwich rubber, 
with pimples inwards 
or outwards, having a Fig. 4.49: Table tennis
total thickness including racket
adhesive of not more 
than 4.0 mm.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   108 31-07-2020   15:26:38



Individual Games 109

Playing conditions
The playing space shall be rectangular and not less than 14 
meter long, 7 meter wide and 5 meter high. The four corners 
may be covered by surrounds of not more than 1.5 meter 
length. For para event, F.O.P. (Field of Play) shall not be less 
than 8×6 meter. In an international event, the light intensity 
equally measured at the height of the playing surface shall 
be at least 1000 lux uniformly over the whole playing area.

Definitions
•• A rally is the period during which the ball is in play.
•• The ball is in play from the last moment at which it is 

stationary on the palm of the free hand before being 
intentionally projected in service until the rally is 
decided as a let or a point.

•• A let is a rally of which the result is not scored.
•• A point is a rally of which the result is scored.
•• The racket hand is the hand carrying the racket.
•• The free hand is the hand not carrying the racket; the 

free arm is the arm of the free hand.
•• A player strikes the ball if he or she touches it in play 

with his or her racket, held in the hand, or with his or 
her racket hand below the wrist.

•• A player obstructs the ball if he or she, or anything 
he or she wears or carries, touches it in play when it 
is above or travelling towards the playing surface, not 
having touched his or her court since last being struck 
by his or her opponent.

•• The server is the player due to strike the ball first in a rally.
•• The receiver is the player due to strike the ball second 

in a rally.
•• The umpire is the person appointed to control a match.
•• The assistant umpire is the person appointed to assist 

the umpire with certain decisions.
•• Anything that a player wears or carries includes 

anything that he or she was wearing or carrying, other 
than the ball, at the start of the rally.

•• The end line shall be regarded as extending indefinitely 
in both the directions.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   109 31-07-2020   15:26:38



110 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? Functional Rules of Table Tennis
India has won a total of •• The right to choose the initial order of serving, receiving 
five medals in the 19th and starting at a particular end shall be decided by 
Commonwealth Games. toss and the winner may choose to serve or to receive 

first or to start at a particular end.
•• When one player or pair has chosen to serve or to 

receive first or to start at a particular end, the other 
player or pair shall have the other choice.

•• After 2 points have been scored, the serving player or 
pair shall become the receiving player or pair. This 
will continue until the end of the game, unless both 
the players and pairs score 10 points or the expedite 
system is in operation, when the sequence of serving 
and receiving shall be the same but each player shall 
serve for only 1 point in turn.

Fig. 4.50: Player playing table tennis

•• In each game of a doubles match, the pair having the 
right to serve first shall choose which of them will 
do so and in the first game of a match, the receiving 
pair shall decide which of them will receive first; in 
subsequent games in the match, the first server having 
been chosen, the first receiver shall be the player who 
served to him or her in the preceding game. 

•• In doubles, during the change of service, the previous 
receiver shall become the server and partner of the 
previous server shall become the receiver.

•• The player or pair serving first in a game shall receive 
first in the next game of the match and in the last 
possible game of a doubles match, the pair due to 
receive next shall change their order of receiving when 
the first pair scores 5 points.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   110 31-07-2020   15:26:39



Individual Games 111

Fig. 4.51: Left arm service in table tennis

•• The player or pair starting at one end in a game shall 
start at the other end in the next game of the match 
and in the last possible game of a match, the players or 
pair shall change ends when the first one player or pair 
scores 5 points.

•• If a player serves or receives out of turn, play shall 
be interrupted by the umpire as soon as the error is 
discovered and shall resume with those players serving 
and receiving who should be server and receiver 
respectively at the score that has been reached, 
according to the sequence established at the beginning 
of the match and, in doubles, to the order of serving 
chosen by the pair having the right to serve first in the 
game during which the error is discovered.

•• If the players have not changed ends when they should 
have done so, play shall be interrupted by the umpire 
as soon as the error is discovered and shall resume 
with the players at the ends at which they should be 
at the score that has been reached, according to the 
sequence established at the beginning of the match.

•• In any circumstances, all points scored before the 
discovery of an error shall be reckoned.

•• The expedite system shall come into operation after 10 
minutes’ play in a game or at any time when requested 
by both the players or pairs except that expedite system 
shall not be introduced in a game if at least18 points 
have been scored.

•• If the ball is in play when the time limit is reached and 
the expedite system is due to come into operation, play 
shall be interrupted by the umpire and shall resume 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   111 31-07-2020   15:26:39



112 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 4.11 with service by the player who served in the rally 
Play doubles and mixed that was interrupted; if the ball is not in play when 
doubles in Table Tennis with the expedite system comes into operation, play shall 
your classmates by following resume with service by the player who received in the 
the laws of the game. immediately preceding rally.

•• Thereafter, each player shall serve for 1 point in turn 
until the end of the game, and if the receiving player or 
pair makes 13 good returns in a rally, the receiver shall 
score a point.

•• Introduction of the expedite system shall not alter the 
order of serving and receiving in the match.

•• Once introduced, the expedite system shall remain in 
operation until the end of the match.

Scoring System
•• A match shall consist of the best of any odd number 

of games.
•• A game shall be won by the player or pair first scoring 

11 points unless both the sides score 10 points each, 
when the game shall be won by the first player or pair 
subsequently gaining a lead of 2 points.

Fundamental Techniques of Table Tennis (Grip)
The racket can be held with two different types of grip.

•• The penhold grip mainly used by Chinese and 
Japanese. 

•• Most commonly used grip is called ‘shakehand’ grip.

Fig. 4.52: Pen hold grip and shakehand grip (left to right respectively)

Service 
There are different kinds of services that may be done from 
forehand or backhand such as long service, short service, 
flat service, spin service (side spin, back spin, top spin) low 
toss and high toss service.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   112 31-07-2020   15:26:39



Individual Games 113

Activity 4.12
Revise the fundamental skills of 
Table Tennis game.

Fig. 4.53: Backhand low toss service

Fig. 4.54: Forehand service sequence (left to right repectively)

Types of Strokes
•• There are offensive and defensive strokes played by a 

table tennis player including backhand and forehand. 
•• The offensive strokes in table tennis include drive, loop 

drive, loop, loop kill, hook, counter drive, flip and smash.
•• The defensive strokes in table tennis include push, slice, 

block, drive, lob, drop shot and spin (side backhand top). 
   Most commonly used skill is forehand push, which 
can be played in the following way—

•• This stroke is mainly used if a player cannot play a 
more aggressive attacking stroke. 

•• It is used when the opponent plays the ball short to the 
forehand with back spin. Right foot is the leading foot 
to return the ball with body weight transferred onto the 
right foot. 

•• The racket moves in a downward forward direction to 
contact the ball just in front of the body with slight 
follow through.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   113 31-07-2020   15:26:40



114 Health and Physical Education - XI

•• The ball travels in upward direction from the racket.
•• Initially the stroke is practised when there is little back 

spin on the ball from the opponent.

Wrestling

Do You Know? History 
Vinesh Phogat is the first Wrestling has a prominent place in the Olympic Games 
woman wrestler of India to win and considered as one of the oldest forms of combat. It is 
gold at Asian Games. believed that pictures of combating sports like wrestling 

were depicted in 15,000-year-old cave drawings found 
Activity 4.13 in France. Early Egyptians and Babylonians were also 
Collect information about the believed to be using the same techniques for the purpose of 
wrestlers of India and their exhibiting their superiority over others. Wrestling was also 
achievement at international 
wrestling. very popular in Greece. It was developed by ancient Greeks 

as a way to train soldiers in hand-to-hand combat and 
military exercises. As per records found in the history of 
wrestling, it was year 1888 when the first national wrestling 
tournament was hosted at New York City. During the first 
Olympic Games, only one event in free style wrestling was 
introduced. It was until Saint Louis Olympic Games in 
1904, where the free style wrestling competition was hosted 
in five categories. In 1908 Olympic Games, Greco Roman 
wrestling was also introduced in five weight categories but 
the number was increased up to eleven categories in later 
years. The International Federation of Associated Wrestling 
Styles (FILA) was founded in the year 1912 at Antwerp, 
Belgium. Norway hosted the first world women’s wrestling 
championship in the year1987 and women wrestling was 
included in the Olympic Games 2004.

Wrestling in India
Wrestling has been popular in India since ancient times; it 
was mainly an exercise to stay physically fit. The wrestlers, 
traditionally, use to wear a linen cloth called Langota. The real 
name which was used for the technique similar to wrestling 
in India was Malla Yuddh. One of the premier characters of 
the epic Mahabharata was Bhima, he was considered to be a 
great wrestler of that time. Jarasangha, Duryodhana, Karna 
and Balarama were included as other great wrestlers during 
Mahabharata. In an other Indian epic Ramayana, Hanuman 
is described as one of the greatest wrestlers of all time.

Governing Body
The governing body of the wrestling game at international level 
is known as United World Wrestling (UWW). Earlier, wrestling 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   114 31-07-2020   15:26:40



Individual Games 115

game was governed by International Amateur Wrestling 
Federation, meant basically for the amateur wrestlers. Wrestling 
game in India is governed by a controlling body named Wrestling 
Federation of India (WFI), which was registered on 27th January, Do You Know?
1967 under the Society Act 1960 of the Government of India. Sakshi Malik won a bronze 
The Wrestling Federation of India is the national governing body medal at Summer Olympic 
for the regulation of wrestling in India. Games in the year 2016.

Types of wrestling

Free style
Free style is a type of wrestling in which holds on whole body 
parts are allowed. Free style wrestling was one out of total 
nine events that were included in the first Olympic Games 
1896. 

Fig. 4.55: Free style wrestling

Greco-Roman
The Greco-Roman type of wrestling forbids holds below the 
waist; this is the major difference between Greco-Roman and 
freestyle wrestling. Greco-Roman is an international sport 
that was contested at the first modern Olympic Games in 
1896 at Athens as an exhibition sport. Greco-Roman style of 
wrestling has been included in every edition of the summer 
Olympics held since 1908. Two wrestlers are scored for their 
performance in two minutes bout for three periods. A wrestler 
can also win by pinning down (or fall) the opponent without 
completing the full time bout or periods. Women’s wrestling 
was added to the summer Olympics, in 2004, at St. Louis 
(Missouri), USA.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   115 31-07-2020   15:26:40



116 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fig. 4.56: Greco-Roman wrestling

Fundamentals of Wrestling

Weight Categories
There are different weight categories in wrestling for various 
age groups, at school level as well as at senior level. Wrestlers 
in the junior age category are allowed to participate in the 
competitions at senior level. However, in order to take part at 
senior level competition, wrestlers aged 18 in the concerned year 
must provide a medical certificate and parental authorisation. 
Wrestlers aged 17 in the year in question may not participate 
in senior competitions. Weight categories are classified for 
the purpose of giving equal opportunity to every wrestler 
competing in the competition. Wrestling competition organised 
at international level for different age groups are:

School Boys: 14 –15 years 
Cadets: 16 –17 years 
Juniors:  18 –20 years 
Seniors (Under 23): 19–23 years 
Seniors: Above 20 years

Table 13: Weight Categories up to Junior level
S. School School Cadet Cadet Junior Junior 

No. Boys Girls Boys Girls Boys Girls
1. 29 – 32 28 – 30 39 – 42 36 – 38 46 – 50 40 – 44
2. 35 32 46 40 55 48
3. 38 34 50 43 60 51
4. 42 37 54 46 66 55
5. 47 40 58 49 74 59

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   116 13-08-2020   15:45:21



Individual Games 117

6. 53 44 63 52 84 63 Activity 4.14
7. 59 48 69 56 96 67 Collect information about 
8. 66 52 76 60 96 –120 67 – 72 Arjuna award winners in 

wrestling and discuss about  the 
9. 73 57 85 65 participation of Indian women 
10. 73 – 85 57 – 62 85 – 100 65 – 70 in wrestling.

Table 14: Weight Categories up to Junior level
S. Senior Olympic Senior Olympic Women 

No. (Freestyle) (Freestyle) (Greco- (Greco- (Freestyle 
Roman) Roman) Olympic)

1. 57 57 59 59 48/48
2. 61 65 66 66 53/53
3. 65 74 71 75 55
4. 70 86 75 85 58/58
5. 74 97 80 98 60
6. 86 125 85 130 63/63
7. 97 98 69/69
8. 125 130 75/75
Table 15: New weight categories (boys) described by School 

Games Federation of India (SGFI) (from 2018–19)
Under 14 Under 17 Under 19 Under 19 
(Freestyle (Freestyle (Freestyle) (Greco-

Boys) and Greco- Boys Roman) 
Roman Boys) Boys

35 41–45 57 55
38 48 61 60
41 51 65 63
44 55 70 67
48 60 74 72
52 65 79 77
57 71 86 82
62 80 92 87
68 92 97 97
75 110 125 130

Costume of a Wrestler
Singlet
Contestants must appear on the edge of the mat, wearing 
an approved one-piece singlet of the colour assigned to them 
(red or blue). It is forbidden to have a mixture of red and blue 
colours on the singlet.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   117 31-07-2020   15:26:40



118 Health and Physical Education - XI

Ear protectors
If the wrestlers want, they can wear ear protectors, which 
must be approved by United World Wrestling (UWW) and 
must not contain any metal or have hard shells. The referee 
can oblige a wrestler whose hair is too long, to wear ear 
protectors.

Wrestling shoes
Contestants must wear wrestling shoes, providing firm 
support for the ankles. The use of heels in shoes, nailed 
soles, shoes with buckles or any metallic part is prohibited.

Measurement of Wrestling Arena
The following measurements and wrestling terms are used to 
designate the various parts of the wrestling mat: 

•• The central circle indicates the middle of the mat, which 
is one meter in diameter. 

•• The orange circle in the central surface of wrestling 
mat is called central wrestling area and is 7 meters in 
diameter, from the inside measurement. 

•• The orange strip is 1 meter wide. 
•• The area outside the orange circle is called protection 

area, which is 1.5 meter wide. 
•• In all cases, the colour of the protection area will have 

to be different from the one of the mat.
The coach of each athlete will be present in the same side 

of the mat. The red wrestler will be placed on the left side and 
the blue wrestler on the right side.

Corner Corner

12 m

Protection Area

Central Wrestling
Area

1m 7 m
1.5 m

Passivity Zone

Fig. 4.57: Wrestling mat

Rules
The rules for wrestling usually change with the type of 
wrestling game being played. For instance, in Greco-Roman 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   118 31-07-2020   15:26:41

12 m



Individual Games 119

Wrestling, players cannot hold an opponent below the waist, 
but holding legs is generally allowed in Freestyle Wrestling.

Prohibitions Activity 4.15
•• Wrestling styles forbid the use of martial arts’ tactics. Collect information about 

Strikes and kicks aren’t permitted. Dronacharya awardees and 
•• It is prohibited to wear the emblem or abbreviation of their contribution to Indian 

Wrestling.
another country in the wrestling costume. 

•• It is prohibited to apply any greasy or sticky substance 
to the body. 

••  It is prohibited to arrive at the mat perspiring at the 
beginning of the match and at the beginning of each 
period. 

•• It is prohibited to wear bandages on fingers, wrists, 
arms or ankles except in the case of injury and on 
doctor’s orders. These bandages must be covered with 
elastic straps.

•• It is prohibited to wear any object that might cause 
injury to the opponent, such as rings, bracelets, 
prosthesis, piercing, etc. 

•• It is prohibited to wear under-wired bras for women 
wrestler.

Classification of points
•• The prime objective of Olympic Wrestling is to put 

your opponent on their back or to pin the opponent 
to the ground. This is only applicable if any part of 
the shoulder or both shoulder blades of the opponent 
contact the mat for at least a period of two seconds.

•• To encourage risk-taking during bouts, a wrestler who 
may unsuccessfully try to execute a hold but ends 
up in the ‘parterre’ position (hands and knees on the 
ground), the wrestler on above will not be awarded any 
point. However, during a hold, if a defending wrestler 
initiates a counter-attack successfully, points would be 
awarded for the action.

•• Three points are given to the near fall position for the 
player who gets the opponent to fall down but can’t 
pin down completely. These points are given when 
shoulders of the opponent are within 4 inches of the 
mat (for at least 2 seconds) or when one shoulder 
touches the mat and the other is at 45 degree angle or 
when the wrestler is in high bridge.

•• An offensive wrestler can also get a point in ‘danger 
position’. A ‘danger position’ is the position when a 
defensive wrestler’s body assumes bridge position 
in order to be avoided being pinned down. A ‘danger 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   119 31-07-2020   15:26:41



120 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? position’ is considered when the wrestler’s line of the 
The first wrestler of India to win back or shoulder is vertical or parallel to the mat, 
a medal at Olympic Games was forming an angle of less than 90 degrees, but the 
Khashaba Dabasaheb Jadhav in position is assumed only to resist the fall.
1952. •• Points are awarded for the following—

		  Takedown: Up to 2 points are awarded if the 
Activity 4.16 opponent is taken down on the mat and the other 
Collect information about player is controlling them.
budding wrestlers through 		  Escape: Up to 1 point is given to a player who gets 
Khelo India Programme. away from the mat or gets into a neutral position 

when pinned down.
		  Reversal: 2 points are given to the player who 

gains control of the opponent from underneath 
them.

		  Near fall: 2 points if the fall lasts for two seconds 
or 3 points if it lasts for 5 seconds.

		  Penalty Points: Up to 2 points for illegal holds, 
and technical violations like going off the mat, 
grabbing clothing, locking or overlapping hands.

Caution to a Wrestler
Caution is given to the wrestler for the following actions 
during the competition—

•• For fleeing the mat, fleeing a hold, refusal to start, and 
illegal hold be noted by awarding (0). 

•• After each caution (0), the opponent will automatically 
receive two points in Greco-Roman wrestling.

•• After each caution (0), the opponent will automatically 
receive one or two technical points in Freestyle wrestling 
depending on the gravity of the infraction.

•• In Greco-Roman wrestling, no point is granted to the 
opponent when a wrestler is warned for the second 
time for passivity.

•• Offensive wrestler can get a penalty to lock hands (except 
cradles) around the torso of the defensive wrestler.

•• It can only be done if the opponent is standing on their 
feet or close to the fall count.

•• A referee will consider overlapping fingers as locked hands.

Technical Violation
The referee can penalise the wrestler for the technical 
violation of the following rules—

•• Going off the mat or forcing your opponent off the mat 
to avoid wrestling.

•• Leaving the mat during the match without the referee’s 
permission.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   120 31-07-2020   15:26:41



Individual Games 121

•• Reporting to the mat not properly equipped or not ready 
to wrestle, or with the illegal equipment at the time of Activity 4.17
starting the match. Collect information about all 

•• Bringing roughness in the game unnecessarily. the Indian wrestlers who won 
•• Conducting oneself indecently. medals at Olympic Games.

•• Incorrect starting position or false start.

Points on Technical Violation
•• The first and second time wrestler is penalised, the 

opponent is awarded point.
•• The third time wrestler is penalised, the opponent is 

awarded 2 points.
•• The fourth time the wrestler is penalised with 

disqualification from that bout.

Duration of the Bout
•• For school boys and cadets — two periods of 2 minutes 

with a 30 seconds break. 
•• For juniors and seniors — two periods of 3 minutes with 

a 30 seconds break.
•• For all the competitions, the timing should be displayed 

on the scoreboards and shall start from 0 to 6 minutes 
for seniors and 0 to 4 minutes for schoolboys and 
cadets.

Criteria to Win
•• A bout may be won by fall, withdrawal by injury, 

default, disqualification of the opponent, or by technical 
superiority through points.

•• In case of tie by points, the winner will be declared by 
successively considering — the highest value of holds; 
the least amount of cautions; and the last technical 
point(s) scored.

•• If nobody gets pinned, the wrestler who scored the most 
points during the match is declared as a winner.

Match Officials
In all competitions, the refereeing for each bout shall consist 
of—

•• Mat Chairman
•• Referee
•• Judge 
Some of the great wrestlers produced by India are Master 

Chandgi Ram, Satpal,  Kartar Singh, Ombir Singh, K.D. 
Yadav, Palwinder Singh Cheema, Sushil Kumar, Yogeshwar 
Dutt, Geeta Phogat, Narsingh Yadav, Babita Kumari, Vinesh 
Phogat, Babita Kumari, Sumit Malik, etc.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   121 31-07-2020   15:26:41



Assessment

Athletics

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Explain the meaning and history of athletics.
	 2.	 Describe the events organised in athletics.
	 3.	 Describe the classification of track events in athletics.
	 4.	 Describe the classification of field events in athletics.
	 5.	 Enlist the different types of throw events. Explain shot put 

throw in detail.
	 6.	 Enlist the different types of jump events. Explain high jump in 

detail. 
	 7.	 Explain the types of crouch start in short distance running.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 What is the distance of runway in long jump and triple jump?
	 2.	 What is the size of landing area in high jump?
	 3.	 Name any four throwing events.
	 4.	 Name the famous technique used for high jump.
	 5.	 What is relay?
	 6.	 What is the weight of discus for men and women?
	 7.	 Which type of track is called a standard track?
	 8.	 What is the weight of the shot in shot put for men and women?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 The thickness of the take-off board in long jump and triple 

jump is ___________.
	 2.	 Maximum weight of the crossbar in high jump is ___________.
	 3.	 The ___________ of shot put in women is 4 kg.
	 4.	 28 hurdle jumps and 7 water jumps are there in ___________.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 400 m track is known as standard track.
	 2.	 5 runners participate in a relay race.
	 3.	 Bunch start is a throwing technique.
	 4.	 Disco put style is applied in discus throw.
	 5.	 There are two types of tracks.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   122 31-07-2020   15:26:41



Individual Games 123

Badminton

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Write the history of Badminton in Olympics. 
	 2.	 Write various types of events played in Badminton.
	 3.	 Write the dimensions of the Racket. 
	 4.	 Draw a labelled badminton court.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 Who won India’s first Olympic medal in Badminton?
	 2.	 What is the legal height a badminton player is allowed to serve 

from?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 Weight of a shuttle should be ___________.
	 2.	 Height of the badminton court for international competitions 

shall be ______________.
	 3.	 The colour of the lines of badminton court should be 

______________.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 Thomas Cup was first held in 1956.
	 2.	 In badminton, doubles A side has only one service.
	 3.	 A 60 seconds interval between each game is allowed.
	 4.	 A player can win a game with a score of 30–28 points.
	 5.	 High serve is used sometimes in badminton men’s singles.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   123 31-07-2020   15:26:41



124 Health and Physical Education - XI

Gymnastics

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Explain the history of gymnastics in Olympics.
	 2.	 Explain the evolution of gymnastics in India. 
	 3.	 How many types of gymnastics are there? Enlist the men’s and 

women’s apparatus used in artistic gymnastics.
	 4.	 Write down the specifications of uneven bars and pommel horse.
	 5.	 Enlist some advanced skills in gymnastics and explain the 

process of ‘Cartwheel on Balancing Beam’.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 When was the gymnastics introduced in the Olympic Games?
	 2.	 Who is considered as the father of modern gymnastics?
	 3.	 How many events are there in Artistic Gymnastics for men?
	 4.	 What is the full form of F.I.G.?
	 5.	 When did women compete for the first time in Olympics?
	 6.	 In which year did Nadia Comaneci received the first perfect 

score in Olympics?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 Gymnastics begun in ancient Greece about __________ years ago.
	 2.	 Today, gymnastics is often termed as the ultimate combination 

of ______________.
	 3.	 Nadia Comaneci was the first female gymnast who received 

perfect score in 1976 at ________________ Olympics.
	 4.	 Like any other sport, gymnastics is a physical exercise that 

develops agility, coordination and ______________.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 Gymnastics is an Olympic sport.
	 2.	 There are three events in women Gymnastics.
	 3.	 Roman rings is a men’s apparatus.
	 4.	 Balancing beam is an apparatus for men.
	 5.	 Floor exercise is an apparatus for both men and women. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   124 31-07-2020   15:26:41



Individual Games 125

Judo

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Explain the history of Judo.
	 2.	 Describe the basic rules of Judo.
	 3.	 Explain about the emergence of Judo in India.
	 4.	 Explain the measurement and specifications of the contest 

area in Judo.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 Where did Judo come from?
	 2.	 What is the difference between Judo and Jujutsu?
	 3.	 What are the working principles of Judo?
	 4.	 What is Kuzushi?
	 5.	 What is Kiai?
	 6.	 What are the Judo ranks? 
	 7.	 Who created Judo?
	 8.	 What are the main types of Judo techniques?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 The two types of penalties awarded in Judo are ____________ 

and ____________.
	 2.	 The competition area of Judo is a minimum of ___________.
	 3.	 Judo was introduced in Olympic Games in __________ in Tokyo 

only in female category.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 Judo was included in the Asian Games in 1986.
	 2.	 Judo was introduced in Olympic Games in 1964 in Tokyo only 

in male category.
	 3.	 The contest area is of different colour from the safety area. 
	 4.	 Contest occurs under the supervision of a referee and two 

judges.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   125 31-07-2020   15:26:41



126 Health and Physical Education - XI

Swimming

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Explain the world and Indian history of swimming.
	 2.	 Write about the most renowned swimmers of India.
	 3.	 Explain the teaching stages of front crawl stroke.
	 4.	 Explain the teaching stages of back crawl stroke.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 When was the first swimming association formed?
	 2.	 Discuss about SFI within 50 words.
	 3.	 Explain the dimensions of a standard swimming pool?
	 4.	 What is the difference between freestyle and breast stroke?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 ________ºC to ________ºC is the normal range of temperature 

for water in swimming pool.
	 2.	 In a standard pool, there are ________ lanes.
	 3.	 Grab is a type of ________ in swimming.
	 4.	 Jellyfish is a type of ________ in swimming.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 During the relay, we can change the swimmer of a team.
	 2.	 During breast stroke, if the swimmer is tired he/she can use 

freestyle swimming.
	 3.	 Back stroke in swimming starts from the water level.
	 4.	 During one’s turn, the swimmer is allowed to touch the floor.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   126 31-07-2020   15:26:41



Individual Games 127

Table Tennis

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Briefly write the history of Table Tennis.
	 2.	 Briefly write the scoring system in Table Tennis.
	 3.	 Write about the expedite system in Table Tennis.
	 4.	 How many types of strokes are there in table tennis? 

Explain.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 How does a standard Table Tennis game end?
	 2.	 Besides the green colour? Which colour table can be used for 

the table?
	 3.	 What should be the height of the ball when tossed for the 

service?
	 4.	 Which country has won the most international titles in the 

20th century?
	 5.	 What is the size of Table Tennis table?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 In Table Tennis, penhold grip is used by ____________ players.
	 2.	 Diameter of the Table Tennis ball shall be ________ mm.
	 3.	 Table Tennis became an Olympic sport in ___________.
	 4.	 Height of the table from the floor is _________.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 Table Tennis was included in Asian Games in 1958 in Tokyo.
	 2.	 Table Tennis racket may be of any size, shape or weight.  .
	 3.	 Table Tennis Federation of India was established in 1924.  
	 4.	 Table Tennis is an indoor game.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   127 31-07-2020   15:26:41



128 Health and Physical Education - XI

Wrestling

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Differentiate between freestyle and Greco-Roman wrestling in 

detail.
	 2.	 Draw the labelled diagram of a wrestling playing mat.
	 3.	 Discuss different age and weight categories in wrestling for 

male and female.
	 4.	 Discuss the various ways of winning points by a wrestler.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 List down the match officials in wrestling.
	 2.	 Who was the first wrestler to win an Olympic medal?
	 3.	 What are the two types of wrestling styles?
	 4.	 What is the name of the governing body of wrestling in India?
	 5.	 What does WFI stands for?
	 6.	 What is the term used for wrestling costume?
	 7.	 What is the major difference between Greco-roman and free 

style wrestling?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 The first national wrestling championship under WFI was 

held in __________________.
	 2.	 Passivity zone is of ____________ m in width.
	 3.	 First Indian male medallist in Olympics was ___________.
	 4.	 First Indian woman medallist in Olympics was ____________.
	 5.	 ____________ is the only Indian wrestler to win two medals at 

the Olympics Games.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 The registered office of wrestling federation of India is located 

in UT of Delhi.
	 2.	 Women wrestlers participated first time in Olympics after the 

gap of 100 years of their male counterpart.
	 3.	 In freestyle wrestling, the techniques are used only above the 

waist.
	 4.	 Wrestling is a combat sports originated from Martial Arts. 
	 5.	 Weight categories in Greco-Roman and freestyle are same. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-4.indd   128 31-07-2020   15:26:41



##5##
Team Games

5
Any game which provides opportunities to two or more 
players working together towards a shared objective is called 
a team game. A team game is an activity in which individuals 
are organised in a team to compete with the opposing team, 
in accordance with a set of laws/rules to win. Games like 
Basketball, Cricket, Football, Handball, Hockey, Volleyball, 
etc., are some of the classic examples of major team games.

However, over a period of time, the popularity of team 
games has grown continuously. These games have positively 
influenced not just the players, but also their fans, local and 
national economies. All over the world, the impact of team 
games can be seen resulting in professional players to live 
out their dreams. Star players have become role models to 
youth. Young athletes/players develop life skills which are 
followed as footsteps of their role models.

In this chapter, some of the team games like Basketball, 
Cricket, Football, Handball, Hockey, Kabaddi, Kho-Kho, and 
Volleyball are explained.

Basketball
Basketball is a team game played between two teams 
of five players each, on the court. Very high amount of 
energy (calories) expenditure is there in this game. It also 
helps in building bone and muscle strength and boosts the 
immune system. This game also develops self-discipline and 
concentration among young players.

History
Basketball originated in the United States of America and 
was invented by Dr. James Naismith in December, 1891, who 
was a Physical Educator at the International Young Men’s 
Christian Association Training School (YMCA) (now known 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   129 31-07-2020   15:27:24



130 Health and Physical Education - XI

as Springfield College of Physical Education) in Springfield, 
Massachusetts.

Do You Know?
On January 15 1892, the first 
set of rules of the Basketball 
game were published by 
Dr. James Naismith in the 
college magazine, “Triangle”, 
under the title “A New Game”.

Fig. 5.1: Dr. James Naismith

Naismith sought a vigorous indoor game to keep his 
students occupied and at proper levels of fitness. But after 
rejecting many ideas, he obtained a soccer ball and two 
wooden peach baskets. He hung the baskets on the railing of 
the balcony at the height of 10 ft above the floor at the opposite 
ends of the gym hall. The objective of the game was to toss 
the soccer ball into the peach baskets. The first basketball 
game was played among physical education students with 
nine players on each side, of Springfield secretarial training 
class of Physical Education (PE) College in December, 1891.

The International Basketball Federation FIBA (French 
acronym: Federation Internationale de Basketball) association 
was founded in Geneva in 1932. Basketball was featured in 
the St. Louis, Missouri, United States, III Olympic Games 
in 1904. It was officially recognised as an Olympic game in 
1936 in Berlin. Due to the wide popularity, Basketball was 
played in the first Asian Games in 1951 held at New Delhi. 

History of basketball in India
Basketball was introduced in India by American missionaries 
towards the end of the first decade of 20th century. It was 
presumed that in the year 1905, the game of basketball was 
started at the YMCA Calcutta by H. Peterson and J.N. Guaj. 
The credit of starting and popularising this game goes to 
YMCA College of Physical Education, Madras in the year 1920. 
The first National Basketball Championship was organised 
in 1934 by the Indian Olympic Association and later after the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   130 31-07-2020   15:27:24



Team Games 131

constitution of Basketball Federation of India (BFI) in 1950 at Do You Know?
Mumbai, the First National Basketball Championship under •• Late C.C. Abraham, 
the banner of BFI was held at Ludhiana (Punjab) in 1951. professional Physical 

Education Leader, from 
Measurement of playgrounds, and field and Y.M.C.A. College of Physical 
specifications of equipment Education, Chennai and 

Meher Singh of Rajasthan 
Playing court were the founder, president 
The playing court shall have a hard and flat surface, free and secretary of Basketball 

Federation of India (BFI).
from obstructions with dimensions of 28 m in length and 
15 m in width measured from the inner edge of the boundary •• Wheelchair Basketball was 

developed in USA by a 
lines and free space atleast 2 m on all sides. badly injured army person 

after the Second World War 
Boundary lines around 1946. The rules are 
These lines are not part of the playing court. The centre approximately similar to 
line is marked parallel to the endlines from the mid-point Basketball.
of the sidelines. The extended centreline at sidelines (5 cm) 
divides the court in two halves. It consists of a Back court 
(team’s own basket area) and a Front court (consists of the 
opponents’ basket). All lines are drawn 5 cm in width and in 
clearly visible white colour. The centre circle shall be marked 
in the centre of the playing court and have a radius of 1.80 
m measured to the outer edge of the circumference. If the 
inside of the centre circle is painted, it must be the same 
colour as of the restricted areas.

28m

0.90m Sideline 8.325m
0.15m

1.575m
3.6m

6.75m

Sideline

Fig. 5.2: Basketball court

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   131 20-08-2020   15:06:18

15m

Li
ne

t
Endline

Restricted
Area

Centre
Circle Centre line

Throw-in line Three Poin

No-charge
Semi-Circle

Endline



132 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? Free-throw lines, restricted areas and free-throw
•• Side line and end line of The free-throw lines are drawn parallel to each end line. 

Basketball court is 28m in It shall have its farthest edge 5.80 m from the inner edge of 
length and 15m in width the end line and shall be 3.60 m long. Its mid-point lies on 
respectively. the imaginary line joining the mid-point of the two end lines.

•• Back support poles are 2 m The restricted areas are the rectangular areas marked on 
away from the end lines. the playing court limited by the end lines, the extended free-

•• The height of the ring from throw lines and the lines which originate at the end lines.
floor is same as it was when Their outer edges being 2.45 m from the mid-point of the end 
Basketball was originated. lines, terminate at the outer edge of the extended free-throw 

lines. These lines, excluding the endlines, are part of the 
restricted area. The inner side of the restricted areas must 
be painted in one colour. The freethrow semi-circles marked 
on the playing court with a radius of 1.80 m measured to the 
outer edge of the circumference and with their centres at the 
mid-point of the free-throw lines.

•• 3 points can be scored by shooting the ball into the op-
ponents’ basket from the entire court but from outside 
of the 3 point line.

•• 2 points can be scored by shooting the ball into the 
opponents’ basket, if the shot is taken from inside the 
3 point line.

•• Only 1 point can be scored by single free shots.

0.83m
No-charge

Semi-Circle area 0.83m
Neutral 0.4m
Zone

1.25m 0.85m

1.2m 1.75m

4.9m

Fig. 5.3: Restricted area in basketball

Equipment
The following equipment will be required—Backstop units 
(backboards, comprising rings and nets, backboard support 
structures including padding), basketballs, game clock, 
scoreboard, shot clock, stopwatch or suitable (visible) device 
(not the game clock) for timing and time-outs, two separate 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   132 31-07-2020   15:27:24

5.8m

1.8m

0.375m



Team Games 133

distinctly different and loud signals, one each for the shot 
clock operator and scorer/timer, scoresheet, player foul 
markers, and team foul markers.

Backboard
The backboards (1.80 m horizontally and 1.05 m vertically) 
shall be made of a suitable transparent material, made in 
one (1) piece, non-reflective, with a flat front surface. All lines 
on the backboards shall be white, 50 mm in width. The rings 
shall be made of solid steel and shall have an inside diameter 
of a minimum of 450 mm and a maximum of 459 mm. The 
nets (400 mm to 450 mm in length) shall be made of white 
cord with 12 loops to attach it to the ring.

182.9cm

7.6cm
61cm

45.7cm
5cm

30.5cm

Fig. 5.4: Basketball backboard

182.88cm

18inch

wide Diameter

Fig. 5.5: Basketball backboard and rim dimensions

Basketball
The ball shall be spherical, with black seams not exceeding 
6.35 mm in width and, either of a single shade of orange or of 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   133 31-07-2020   15:27:25

121.9cm

106.68cm

3.05m from the ground



134 Health and Physical Education - XI

International Basketball Federation (FIBA) approved colour 
combination and made of leather/artificial/composite/
synthetic leather/rubber. For all men’s and women’s 
competitions, the basketball specifications are given in the 

Do You Know? following table and diagram.
First time Indian women’s team Table 1: Basketball dimensions according to category
participated in Bangkok Asian 
Game in 1978. Category Size Circumference Weight

Men 7 749–780mm 567–650g
Women 6 724–737mm 510–567g

Functional Rules of Basketball
Basketball is governed by FIBA official rules. The aim of each 
team is to score in the opponent’s basket and to prevent the 
other team from scoring. The team that has scored the greater 
number of points at the end of playing time is declared as the 
winner.

Team
In a match, two teams compete with each other. Each team 
shall consist of not more than 12 team members entitled 
to play, including a captain who represents his team on 
the playing court. During playing time, five players from 
each team shall be on the playing court, without this a game 
cannot begin. Teams may use as many substitutions as. 
A maximum of five team support staff members who may 
sit on the team bench and have special responsibilities, 
e.g., manager, doctor, physiotherapist, trainer, statistician, 
interpreter, etc., besides a coach and, if a team wishes, it can 
have an assistant coach also. Player’s positions are given in 
the diagram below.

Fig. 5.7: Players, position (right), attack, defence (left)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   134 31-07-2020   15:27:25



Team Games 135

Opponents’ Own Basket
The basket that is attacked by a team is the opponents’ 
basket and the basket which is defended by a team is one’s 
own basket.

Uniforms
The ‘All-in-ones’ uniform of the team members shall consist 
of—Jersey of the same dominant colour on the front and back 
and numbered on the front and back atleast 10 cm high 
in front and 20 cm high in back with atleast 2 cm width. 
All players must tuck their Jersey into their playing shorts. 
Shorts end above the knee, of the same dominant colour at 
front and back, but not necessarily of the same colour as the 
jersey. Socks of the same dominant colour for all players of 
the team. Teams must have a minimum of two sets of jersey 
(light/dark). Chest number will be from 0 to 99 or 00.

Officials, table officials and commissioner
The officials shall be a referee and 1 or 2 umpire(s). They 
shall be assisted by the table officials and by a commissioner, 
if present. The table officials shall be a scorer, an assistant 
scorer, a timer and a shot clock operator. Different signals 
are used to run the game by officials. Each foul  and goal 
shall be mentioned in the scoresheet.

Playing time, tied score and extra periods
The game shall consist of 4 periods of 10 minutes each. 
There shall be intervals of 2 minutes between the first and 
second quarter (first half), between the third and fourth 
period (second half) and before each extra period. There shall 
be a half-time interval of play of 15 minutes. If the score is 
tied at the end of playing time for the fourth period, the game 
shall continue with as many extra periods of 5 minutes as is 
necessary to break the tie. 

Beginning and end of a period or the game
The first period begins when the ball leaves the hand(s) of 
the referee on the toss for the jump ball and followed. All the 
other periods start when the ball is disposed to the players 
by the officials for the throw in.

How the ball is played
A game of basketball is played with hand(s) only and may be 
passed, thrown, tapped, rolled or dribbled in any direction, 
subject to the restrictions of the rules. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   135 31-07-2020   15:27:25



136 Health and Physical Education - XI

Goal
A basket scored from inside the three-point area (also called 
2 point field goal area) is worth of 2 points. A basket scored 
from beyond the three-point area (3 point field goal area) is 
awarded 3 points. A basket scored for the free-throw is worth 
of one point for each successful attempt.

Time-out
Each time-out shall last 1 minute. Each team may be granted 
two time-outs during the first half, three time-outs during 
the second half with a maximum of two of these time-outs in 
the last 2 minutes of the second half. One time-out during 
each extra period is also given.

Substitution
A team may substitute a player(s) during a substitution 
opportunity when the game clock is stopped and the ball 
becomes dead.

Game Lost by Forfeit and default
The game is lost by a team if the team is absent or unable to 
present with five players on the court, or by their action to 
prevent the game in scheduled time, or if they refuse to play. 
In this situation, the opponent team is declared winner by 
20–0.

The game may be lost by default when a team has fewer 
then two players during the running game at the playing 
court. The opponent team is declared winner by 2–0.

Violations
A violation is an infraction of the rules. There are different 
types of violation that occurs during the game.
	 1.	Player out-of-bounds and ball out-of-bounds: A 

player is out-of-bounds when any part of his body is 
in contact with the sideline or endline.

	 2.	Dribbling: A dribble starts when a player, having 
gained control of a live ball on the playing court, 
throws, taps, rolls, dribbles it on the floor or 
deliberately throws it against the backboard and 
touches it again before it touches another player. A 
dribble ends when the player touches the ball with 
both hands simultaneously or permits the ball to 
come to rest in one or both hands.

	 3.	Time Rule: Three seconds—A player shall not hold 
the ball in the opponents’ restricted area with live ball 
for more than continuous 3 seconds. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   136 31-07-2020   15:27:25



Team Games 137

•• Five seconds—A player may not hold the ball for 
more than 5 seconds. Activity 5.1

Find out the information about 
•• Eight seconds— A team has to go into the opponents’ Wheelchair Basketball and 

court within 8 seconds. share it with classmates.
•• Twenty four seconds—When a team gains possession 

of the ball, they have to attempt the shot within 
maximum of 24 seconds.

	 4.	Back court: A team which is in control of live ball in 
its front court may not cause the ball to be illegally 
return to its back court.

Fouls
A foul is an infraction of the rules concerning illegal personal 
contact with an opponent and/or unsportsmanlike behaviour. 
A number of fouls may be called against a team. Once a team 
has made four fouls in a period, each next foul will award two 
free throws to the opponent team. Fouls categorised as personal 
foul, technical foul, unsportsmanlike foul, disqualifying foul 
and noted as individual player foul or team fouls.

Fig. 5.8: An offensive foul

	 1.	Personal foul: A personal foul occurs when there is 
illegal contact between two opponents. A player shall not 
hold, block, push, charge, trip or impede the progress 
of an opponent by extending the body part, neither in 
an ‘abnormal’ position nor shall the player indulge in 
any rough or violent play. A player who commits more 
than five personal fouls is excluded from the game.

	 (a)	 Charging: An offensive foul that is committed 
when a player pushes or runs over a defensive 
player. The ball is given to the team upon which 
the foul was committed.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   137 31-07-2020   15:27:26



138 Health and Physical Education - XI

	 (b)	 Blocking: It is an illegal personal contact, which 
impedes the progress of an opponent with or 
without the ball.

	 2.	Technical Foul: It is a non-contact foul of a 
behavioural nature (disregarding warning, 
disrespectful, foul language, delay, etc.).

	 3.	Unsportsmanlike foul: It is a foul where spirit of the 
game or the hard contact is made.

	 4.	Disqualification Foul: It is any unsportsmanlike 
(violence) action by players, coaches or delegation 
members.

Irrespective of the penalty, each foul shall be charged, 
entered on the score sheet against the offender and penalised 
accordingly. All the possible foul penalties against players on 
the playing court involved in fighting or any situation which 
leads to a fight shall be dealt with in accordance of rules.

Basic Skills of Basketball
Basketball is played with the help of different skills and 
techniques like stance, footwork, ball holding and handling, 
dribbling, passing-receiving, shooting and rebounding. 
Few are mentioned here.

Dribbling
It is important to move the ball across the court, get away from 
defensive players, make or find a good passing line, make use 
of faking action, 1 on 1 and of course to penetrate the ball 
to score the goal. There are different types of dribbling which 
may be learnt and developed with the help of different drills in 
stationary and moving positions with or without the defensive 
player.

Fig. 5.9: Dribbling
•• Stationary dribble
•• Low dribble
•• High dribble

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   138 31-07-2020   15:27:26



Team Games 139

•• Change of pace dribble
•• Crossover dribble
•• Behind the back dribble
•• Between the legs dribble
•• Speed dribble
•• Reverse spin dribble

Passing and Receiving
A good offensive attack requires accurate passing and 
receiving. It helps to speed the ball, find an open man, to find 
a good shooter or to get away the ball from the defender. Fake 
and feint are used to increase the quality of passing. There 
are different types of passing using one or both hands during 
different stationary and moving group and team drills.

•• Chest pass
•• Overhead pass
•• Push pass
•• Bounce pass
•• Shoulder pass
•• Hook pass
•• Off the dribble pass
•• Baseball pass

Fig. 5.10: Passing and receiving
Shooting
The objective of the game is to win by scoring maximum 
points. Therefore, improving the team’s shooting is important 
to win a game. Shooting by either one or both hands may be 
done in the following ways:

•• Jump Shot
•• Dunk Shot
•• Free Throw
•• Layup
•• Three point shot

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   139 31-07-2020   15:27:27



140 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fig. 5.11: Shooting

Rebounding
The objective of rebounding is to successfully gain possession 
of the basketball after a missed field goal or free throw, as it 
rebounds from the ring or backboard. This plays a major role 
in the game, as most possessions end when a team misses 
a shot. There are two categories of rebound—offensive 
rebound, in which the ball is recovered by the offensive side 
and does not change possession, and defensive rebound, in 
which the defending team gains possession of the loose ball. 
The majority of rebound is defensive, as the team on defence 
tend to be better positioned to recover the missed shots.

Fig. 5.12: Rebounding

Defence
The game of basketball allows a variety of defences to be 
deployed in an effort to disrupt and combat the offensive 
plays. Here are examples of the three basic categories of team 
defence. In addition, each category consists of an assortment 
of different variations.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   140 31-07-2020   15:27:28



Team Games 141

	 1.	Man to man defence: Man to man defence is usually 
assigned to be matched up with the defenders against Do You Know?

Basketball is also played by 
specific offensive players. Defenders are usually three players on each side.
assigned to be matched up with the offensive players 
by size and ability.

	 2.	Zone Defence: In zone defence, defenders are Activity 5.2
•• What is the air pressure of a 

assigned to guard specific areas on the court. Zones Basketball?
are named or designated by their player alignments. •• When and where was the 

first Basketball match in 
Olymic Games played?

•• Who invented Basketball?
•• Why is the colour of 

basketball orange?
•• What is the size and weight 

of a basketball?

Fig. 5.13: Zone defence

	 3.	Combined Defence: The third type of defence 
that can be deployed is the combination defence. 
With combination defence, some of the players are 
assigned to play man to man while the rest of the 
defenders play zone defence. Combination defences 
are usually deployed in an effort to stop or neutralise 
great individual offensive players.

Awards in Basketball
To motivate the extraordinary achievements of the player 
and coaches, the Government of India honours players with 
different awards along with cash prizes and certificates. 

Prasanthi Singh was honoured with Arjuna Award in 
2017 and she is the first basketball player who received the 
prestigious civilian award Padma Shri in 2018.

Famous Indian Basketball Players
Paramjeet Singh, Sarabjit Singh, Vishesh Bhriguwanshi, 
Tridep Rai, Suman Sharma, Divya Singh, Anitha, I.V. 
Chairian, Satnaam Singh, Jagdeep Singh, Gurvinder Singh, 
and Shri Khusi Ram.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   141 31-07-2020   15:27:28



142 Health and Physical Education - XI

Cricket
Playing any game need strength and vice versa helps in 
building strength. Cricket also, through the constant running 
across the field, helps in increasing the stamina, balance, 
hand-eye coordination, flexibility and ball-handling skills.
Cricket includes a lot of throwing and sprinting across the 
field, which is a good cardiovascular activity.

History
A reference of a game resembling to cricket is there in the 
records of King Edward I, in 1300 being played at Kent. Cricket 
as a game was first recorded in 16th century in England. 
Researches show that the game evolved  from a very old, 
widespread game to pass time in which one player served a 
small piece like a ball made up of wood or any other material 
and another player hit it with a suitable item. The first 
recorded cricket match took place in Kent in 1646. Cricket 
was popular and widely documented in England during the 
1700s. After 1760, the game saw the evolution of over arm 
bowling by replacing under arm bowling. The Marylebone 
Cricket Club (MCC) was formed on 31st May, 1787. After a 
year, it laid down a code of laws regarding the game. Its laws 
were adopted throughout the game. MCC today remains the 
custodian and arbiter of laws relating to cricket around the 
world. Thereafter, cricket recognisably became the game that 
is played today. In the 1800, cricket had reached the West 
Indies and India and in the 19th century cricket was played 
in South Africa and New Zealand. The first international 
cricket game was played between the USA and Canada in 
1844. The match was played at the grounds of St George’s 
Cricket Club in New York. In 1877, an England touring team 
in Australia played two matches against full Australian XIs 
that are now regarded as the inaugural test matches.

History of Cricket in India
Cricket is undoubtedly one of the most popular games in 
India since its inception. The first Indian Cricket club, named 
the Parsee Oriental Cricket Club, was founded in the year 
1848 and they played their first match in Bombay (Mumbai). 
From this point, the journey of Indian cricket began. The 
first international exposure in the history of Indian Cricket 
came in the year 1926. In the same year, a team from the 
Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) toured India. Though it was 
an unofficial tour, Indian people were quite interested and 
enthusiastic about the matches that MCC played during 
the tour.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   142 31-07-2020   15:27:29



Team Games 143

The legendary Indian cricket player, C.K. Naidu played Do You Know?
brilliantly during that tour and he also scored a century India won the 60 over World 
against the MCC in Bombay. Imperial Cricket Conference Cup beating West Indies in 
(ICC), now International Cricket Council, was formed on 1983, 50 over World Cup 
30 November, 1907. At present there are 105 countries as defeating Sri Lanka in 2011 
members of ICC. The Board of Control for Cricket in India and 20 over World Cup beating 
(BCCI) was established in the year 1928. India played its first Pakistan in 2007.

test match against England in 1932. Now cricket is played 
to cover all  the three  formats, ranging from 5 Day tests, to Activity 5.3
the exciting one-day 50 over format, and the 20 over format Gather and share information 
which is called as T20. about the first Indian team of 

test match, one day match and 
T20 match in male and female 
categories.

Fig. 5.14: Cricket in the early ages

Functional Rules
Cricket has many laws, more than any other game. Cricket is 
played with a bat and ball on a large field, known as ground. 
It is played between two teams having 11 players each. There 
is also a reserved player called a ‘twelfth player’, who is used 
if any player is injured during the play. The twelfth player is 
not allowed to bowl, bat, or to act as wicketkeeper or captain 
of the team. The twelfth player is only to act as a substitute 
fielder.

The objective of the game is to score runs with the bat 
by the batsman, or dismiss the opposing batsman when in 
the field by the bowlers. The cricket laws are for the traditional 
form of cricket which is called ‘Test Cricket’. However, there 
are separate rules for one day and T20 format game also.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   143 31-07-2020   15:27:29



144 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 5.4 Field positions
Find out the details about one 
day and T20 format of Cricket.

3rd Man Fineleg

Slips Leg Slips
Gully

WK
Point Square Leg Deep

Square

Cover Point

Cover Mid Wicket

Extra Cover

Bowler
Deep

Mid Wicket

Deep Extra Mid Off Mid On
Cover

Long Off Long On

Fig. 5.15: Fielding positions on the cricket ground

Fig. 5.16: Cricket players and equipment

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   144 31-07-2020   15:27:29



Team Games 145

Number of Players in a team 11 (Playing) + 05 (Extras) = 16
Number of Officials 03 Umpires, 01 Match Referee, 02 Scorers
Length of the Bat 38 inches (965 mm)
Width of the Bat 4.25 inches (108 mm)
Weight of a Cricket Ball 155.9 gms – 163 gms
Circumference of a Ball 22.4 cm – 22.9 cm
Colour of a Ball Red (Day Matches and Test Matches)

White (Day Night Matches)
Length of the Pitch 22 yds or 20.12 mts or 66 feet
Width of the Pitch 3.05 mts or 10 feet
Height of the Stumps 28 inches (With bails 28.5 inches)
Width of the Stumps 9 inches (22.9 cm)

Fig. 5.17: Cricket pitch measurements

There are two ground umpires and a third umpire. 
Their role is to ensure in the ground that the game is played 
as per the preambles and laws. The third umpire is in charge 
of the video decisions.

Game Structure: Test cricket is a game that spans for 
two or more innings. This means that one team needs to 
bowl and the other would do batting. If a team is out twice or 
scores less runs in two innings, than that team is the losing 
team.

Before the game begins, an umpire tosses a coin. 
The captain who guesses the correct side of the coin will then 
choose whether to bat or field first.

How to play Cricket
•• One team will bat while the other team will field.
•• If the bowler bowls the ball from the wrong place or 

the ball is either dangerous or bounces more than 
twice or rolls before reaching the batsman or if fielders 
are standing at illegal positions, it is called ‘No Ball’. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   145 31-07-2020   15:27:29



146 Health and Physical Education - XI

The batsman can hit a no ball and score runs and also 
cannot be declared out from a no ball except if the 
player is run out or hit the ball twice, or obstruct the 
field. A no ball will add one run to the batting team.

•• A ‘Wide Ball’ is declared if the batsman did not have a 
reasonable opportunity to score off the delivery. As if 
the delivery is bowled over the batsmen’s reach. A wide 
delivery will add one run to the batting team.

•• A ‘Bye’ run is scored when a batsman is trying to hit 
the ball but could not hit it and is miss-field by the 

(a)
fielder or wicket keeper.

•• A ‘Leg Bye’ run is scored if while hitting, the batsman 
misses to hit the ball by bat and is deflected by striker’s 
body or protective gear.

(b)

Fig. 5.18: (a) No ball 
(b) Wide ball

(a) (b) (c) (d)

(e) (f) (g) (h)

Fig. 5.19: (a) Bye (b) Leg bye (c) Out (d) Short run (e) Six  
(f) Four (g) Decision change (h) Dead ball

When is a Batsman declared ‘out’ as per cricket rules?
There are 11 ways through which a batsman can be given 
“out” in the game of cricket.

•• Bowled: If the ball is bowled and hits the striking bats-
man’s wickets, the batsman is given out (as long as 
at least one bail or stump is dislodged by the ball). 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   146 31-07-2020   15:27:32



Team Games 147

It does not matter whether the ball has touched the 
batsman’s bat, gloves, body or any other part of the Activity 5.5

•• Draw and discuss the 
batsman. different positions of the 

•• Caught: If a batsman hits the ball or touches the ball fielders in cricket.
at all with the bat or hand holding the bat and the 
fielders, or wicket keeper or bowler catches the ball, it Do You Know?
is called as caught out. There is no fix measurement for 

•• Stumped: A batsman can be given out when the cricket’s outer bounderies.
wicketkeeper puts down the wicket while the player 
is out of the crease and not attempting a run (while 
attempting a run it would be a run out) but trying to 
play the ball and misses it.

(a) (b) (c)

Fig. 5.20: (a) Bowled (b) Caught (c) Stumped

•• Leg Before Wicket (LBW): If the ball is bowled (not a 
No Ball) and it hits the batsman first without touching 
and the bat and umpire thinks and decide that the 
ball would have hit the wickets if the batsman was not 
there, then the LBW decision is possible. However, if 
the ball hits the batsman outside the line of off stump 
while the player was attempting to play a stroke then 
the player is not out.

•• Run Out: A batsman is out if no part of the bat or body 
is grounded behind the popping crease while the ball is 
in play and the wicket is fairly put down by the fielding 
side.

•• Hit Wicket: If a batsman hits the wicket down with the 
bat or body after the bowler has entered the delivery 
stride and the ball is in play, then the player is out.

•• Handled the Ball: If the batsman willingly handles 
the ball with the hand that is not touching the bat 
without the consent of the opposition, then the player 
is declared out.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   147 31-07-2020   15:27:33



148 Health and Physical Education - XI

(a) (b)

Fig. 5.21: (a) Hit wicket (b) Run out

Do You Know? •• Obstructing the Field: A batsman is out if he willingly 
After Jim Leker of England, obstructs the opposition by word or action.
only Anil Kumble from India in 
1999 took all 10 wickets in one 
inning (74/10 in 26.3 overs).

Fig. 5.22: (a) Handled the ball (b) Obstructing the fi
(a) (b)eld

•• Timed Out: The time for an incoming batsman to face a 
ball or be at the non-strikers end within three minutes 
of the outgoing batsman being dismissed. If this is not 
done, the incoming batsman can be given out.

•• Hit the Ball Twice: If a batsman hits a ball twice other 
than for the purpose of protecting his wicket, he is out.

•• Retired: If a batsman retires without the umpire’s 
consent and also doesn’t have the consent of the 
opposition captain to resume his innings, then 
technically he is out.

There are many other cricket laws. Many of the more 
advanced rules and laws can be learned along the way and 
are not vital to general play.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   148 31-07-2020   15:27:35



Team Games 149

Awards in Cricket Do You Know?
To motivate the extraordinary achievements of the players •• Football was essentially 
and coaches, the Government of India honours players with rugby until 1882.
different awards along with cash prizes and certificates. •• Football is the most watched 

and most played sport on 
earth.

In the year 2018
Virat Kohli received Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award in 2018.
Smriti Mandhana was honoured with Arjuna Award. Tarak 
Sinha has been honoured with Dronacharya Award for an 
excellent contribution as a Coach.

Football
The history of football is over more than 1000 years old. 
Today, football is world’s most favourite sport played in 
almost every country. Studies reveal about various games 
similar to the modern football being introduced in different 
parts of the world by different cultures for different purposes. 
Oldest version of football game is believed to be played in the 
villages of Chinese dynasty.

History of the Game
Both rugby and football have a common root. There were 
many who instead of kicking believed in running with 
the ball in their hands. Kicking the ball included tripping 
the legs without any legislation or rules to govern. On the 
contrary, many people stood for football with kicking as it 
involved greater mastery of ball. In football, high level of skill 
precision was required to control and manoeuvre the ball 
with foot. The rules of play were subsequently smoothed 
down and smartened to create organised sports at Britain 
and Scotland. It was at this point that the people spoke out 
against rough customs as tripping, shin-kicking and so on. 
As it happened, the majority also expressed disapproval at 
carrying the ball with hand. It was in 1863 in England that 
the Rugby football group withdrew and formed a separate 
branch. This further led to the development modern-day 
sports of ‘Association Football’, ‘Rugby Football’ and ‘Gaelic 
Football’ in Ireland. Later the Football Association in England 
was formed becoming the sports’ first governing body. In 
1904, ‘Federation International de Football Association’ 
(FIFA) was founded in Paris as an international governing 
body of football. The game of football in today’s scenario is 
called ‘Soccer’.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   149 31-07-2020   15:27:35



150 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? Modern football
Durand Cup started in the Britain is regarded as the home to modern association 
year 1888 in Shimla and it is football. Within Britain and Scotland, the game was popular 
the second oldest tournament from eight century and again played with different variations. 
in the world. Presently, this In medieval times, towns and villages played against the 
tournament is being organised rival towns and villages — and kicking, punching, biting and 
in New Delhi every year with gouge were allowed.  Hundreds of people took part and the 
the help of Indian Defence 
Services. games could last all day. It was same until the game started 

being promoted in schools in England as an integral part of 
the school curriculum. The need for uniform standards and 

Activity 5.6 rules acceptable to everyone was the need of the hour. This 
Collect information about the led to the role of Cambridge University in unifying the schools 
various types of free kicks in and the clubs to a meeting in 1863 for establishing common 
football. acceptable rules. Football Association Challenge Cup was 

started in 1872, which is regarded as the world’s oldest 
football championship. In the year 1888, ‘Durand Cup’ was 
started in Shimla (India) and in modern time Durand cup for 
football is regarded as second oldest football tournament in 
the world. Later in 1904, FIFA (Federation International de 
Football Association) was formed with France, Netherlands, 
Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland, Spain and 
Germany as the founder members.

History of Football in India
Football in India has been a popular sport introduced in 
nineteenth century by the British army, from the capital 
at Calcutta. Durand Cup started in 1888, founded by the 
then India’s Foreign Secretary, Mortimer Durand at Shimla. 
Durand Cup is the third oldest football tournament after 
Football Association (FA) Cup and Scottish Cup. Clubs like 
Mohan Bagan, which is the oldest current team, was formed 
in 1889. Indian Football Association (IFA) Shield is the fourth 
oldest tournament in the world which was founded in 1893 
and is still being played. Durand Cup was shifted to Delhi. 
Since 1950, every year it is organised under the supervision of 
Indian Army.

Before the birth of the All India Football Federation (AIFF) 
in 1937, India was lacking a constituted national organisation 
for football. Since, football gained immense popularity year 
after year, a need for the proper administration of the game 
was considered. The association that governed football in 
West Bengal, Indian Football Association (IFA), was given the 
status of the de-facto governing body of football. That time 
all the foreign tours of Indian football team were organised 
by IFA. AIFF was affiliated to FIFA (international governing 
body of football) in 1948 and to Asian Football Confederation 
(AFC) in 1954. AIFF has played a key role in promoting 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   150 31-07-2020   15:27:35



Team Games 151

football in India. To serve the purpose, it has taken the 
responsibility of Indian national football team. National Football Activity 5.7

Find out the measurements 
League (I-League), Federation Cup and National Football of  the football ground in your 
Championship for Santosh Trophy are some of the prominent school or nearby school in your 
football tournaments being organised by the AIFF. vicinity.

Fig. 5.23: A football ground

Laws of football Do You Know?
In the game of football, rules are called Laws and there Neil Armstrong wanted to take 
are 17 Laws of football that govern the game. FIFA is the a football to the moon, but 
governing body of football around the world. It governs the NASA refused it as nothing 
rules for playing the sport. The referees are being trained for extra was allowed.

consistent interpretation and quality enforcement of the 17 
laws of the game. There are 17 laws of the game which are 
the codified rules of help define association football. 

Law 1
The Field of Play:  It mentions about the field surface along 
with the dimensions for field marking. The field of play should 
be rectangular in shape and the width should not exceed the 
length of the field.

Table 2: Dimensions

Length (Touch Minimum 90 mt 100 yds
Line) Maximum 120 mt 130 yds

Minimum 45 mt 50 yds
Width (Goal Line)

Maximum 90 mt 100 yds

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   151 31-07-2020   15:27:36



152 Health and Physical Education - XI

Table 3: International Matches
Minimum 100 mt 110 yds

Length (Touch Line)
Maximum 110 mt 120 yds
Minimum 64 mt 70 yds

Ball Width (Goal Line)
Maximum 75 mt 80 yds

FIFA defines minimum dimensions of 45m × 90m and 
maximum dimensions of 90m × 120m for a standard football 
ground. FIFA has also set measurements for minimum 
football ground for the official matches or international 

Shin guards competitions as 64m × 100m and maximum to 75m × 110m.

Law 2
Ball: The football must meet the following criteria as per the 
FIFA laws— 
	 (a)	The ball shall be spherical in shape.

Football boots or Studs 	 (b)	 It should be made of leather or any other suitable 
Fig. 5.24: Football equipment material approved by the governing body. 

	 (c)	Ball circumference shall be 68 to 70 cm which is equal 
to 27 to 28 inches.

	 (d)	The weight of the ball shall be between 410 to 450g 
which is equal to 14 to 16 oz at the start of the match. 

	 (e)	Air pressure should be equal to 0.6–1.1 atmosphere 
(600–1,100 g/cm2) at sea level. 

Law 3
Number of Players: A match is played by two teams.  Each 
team shall consist of not more than 11 players during the 
match, one of whom shall act as goalkeeper. A match may 
not start if either team consists of fewer than seven players. 
Substitutions: Up to a maximum of three substitutes may be 
used in any match played in an official competition organised 
under the auspices of FIFA or the member associations. For 
all other competitions, the rules of the competition must 
state how many substitutes may be nominated, it can vary 
from three up to a maximum of twelve, before the tournament 
begins. 
Law 4
Players’ Equipment:  The basic compulsory equipment of a 
player comprises the following items: 
	 (a)	A jersey or shirt with sleeves: If undergarments are 

worn, the colour of the undergarments must be of 
same colour as the sleeve of the jersey or shirt.

	 (b)	Shorts: If undershorts or tights are worn, these must 
be of same colour as the shorts.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   152 31-07-2020   15:27:36



Team Games 153

	 (c)	Stockings: If tape or similar material is applied 
externally, it must be of same colour as that part of Do You Know?

Soccer is the universal name of 
the stocking to which it is applied. the Footbal game. It is governed 

	 (d)	Shin guards by the rules formed by FIFA.
	 (e)	Shoes
Law 5
Referee: Each match is controlled by a referee, who shall 
enforce the Laws of the Game. Duties of a Referee: 
	 (a)	Enforces the Laws of the Game. 
	 (b)	Controls the match in cooperation with the assistant 

referees (Line Judges) and, wherever applicable, with 
the fourth official (Table Official). 

	 (c)	Ensures that the ball used meets the requirements of 
Law number 2. 

	 (d)	Ensures that the player’s equipment meet the 
requirements according to Law number 4. 

	 (e)	Acts as timekeeper and keeps a record of the match. 
	 (f)	Stops, suspends or abandons the match, for any 

infringements of the Laws. 
	 (g)	Stops, suspends or abandons the match because of 

outside interference of any kind. 
	 (h)	Stops the match if, in his opinion, a player is seriously 

injured and ensures that player is removed from the 
field of play. An injured player may only return to the 
field of play after the match has restarted. 

	 (i)	Allows the play to continue until the ball is out of play 
if a player is, in his opinion, only slightly injured. 

Law 6
Assistant Referees:  The decision of the assistant referee 
is always subject to the decision of the referee. However, 
two assistant referees are appointed, whose duties, are to 
indicate: 
	 (a)	when the entire ball leaves the field of play.
	 (b)	which team is entitled to a corner kick, goal kick or 

throw-in.
	 (c)	when a player may be penalised for being in an offside 

position. 
	 (d)	when a substitution is requested. 
	 (e)	when misconduct or any other incident occurs out of 

the view of the referee. 
	 (f)	when offences have been committed whenever the 

assistant referees have a better view than the referee 
(this includes, in certain circumstances, offences 
committed in the penalty area). 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   153 31-07-2020   15:27:36



154 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 5.8 	 (g)	Whether, at penalty kicks, the goalkeeper moves off 
Collect information about the the goal line before the ball is kicked and if the ball 
kick off in football. crosses the line.

Law 7
Duration of the Match: The match lasts two equal periods 
of 45 minutes, unless otherwise mutually agreed between 
the referee and the two teams. Any agreement to alter the 
duration of the periods of play (e.g., to reduce each half to 40 
minutes because of insufficient light) must be made before 
the start of play and must comply with competition rules. 
The half-time interval must not exceed 15 minutes. 

Law 8
Start and Restart of Play: A kick-off is a way of starting or 
restarting play—
	 (a)	At the start of the match. 
	 (b)	After a goal has been scored. 
	 (c)	At the start of the second half of the match. 
	 (d)	At the start of each period of extra time, wherever 

applicable. 
A goal may be scored directly from the kick-off. The 

procedure for the kick-off is by pushing the ball in any 
direction by one of the team mates but all the team members 
must be in their own half before the kick-off. The team 
winning the toss chooses the side to attack while the losing 
team gets the kick-off. In the second half, the team that won 
the toss gets the kick-off.

Law 9
Ball In and Out of Play: The ball is out of play when: 
	 (a)	 It has wholly crossed the goal line or touch line 

whether on the ground or in the air. 
	 (b)	Play has been stopped by the referee. 

The ball is in play at all other times. Ball will also be in 
play when: 
	 (c)	 It rebounds off a goalpost, crossbar or corner flag post 

and remains in the field of play. 
	 (c)	 It rebounds off either the referee or an assistant 

referee when they are on the field of play.

Law 10
Method of Scoring: A goal is scored when the whole of the 
ball passes over the goal line between the goalposts and 
under the crossbar, provided that no infringement of the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   154 31-07-2020   15:27:36



Team Games 155

Laws of the game has been committed previously by the team 
scoring the goal.

Law 11
Offside: It is not an offence in itself to be in an offside position. 
However, players in offside position cannot make themselves 
on-side until the course of the ball changes. 

A player is in an offside position if—
	 (a)	The player is nearer to the opponents’ goal line than 

both the ball and the second-last opponent. 
		 A player is not in an offside position when:

	 (i)	 The player is in their own half of the field of 
play, or 

	 (ii)	 The player is level with the second-last opponent, or 
	 (iii)	 The player is level with the last two opponents.

	 (b)	There is no offside offence if a player receives the ball 
directly from—

	 (i)	 a goal kick 
	 (ii)	 a throw-in 
	 (iii)	 a corner kick

Law 12
Fouls and Misconduct: For not following the Laws of the 
game, the referee can penalise the team members through a— 
	 (a)	Direct Free Kick 
	 (b)	Penalty Kick 
	 (c)	 Indirect Free Kick

The referee may caution the player, substitutes or 
substituted players with a ‘Yellow Card’. The referee may 
suspend the team members with a Red Card leading to 
suspension from the current match along with a second 
match suspension.
	 (a)	 A direct free kick: It is awarded to the opposing team if 

a player commits any of the following seven offences 
in a manner considered by the referee to be careless, 
reckless or using excessive force.

	 (i)	 Kicks or attempts to kick an opponent 
	 (ii)	 Trips or attempts to trip an opponent 
	 (iii)	 Jumps at an opponent
	 (iv)	 Charges an opponent 
	 (v)	 Strikes or attempts to strike an opponent 
	 (vi)	 Pushes an opponent
	 (vii)	 Tackles an opponent 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   155 31-07-2020   15:27:36



156 Health and Physical Education - XI

A direct free kick is also awarded to the opposing team if 
a player commits any of the following three offences.

	 (i)	 Holds an opponent 
	 (ii)	 Spits at an opponent 
	 (iii)	 Handles the ball deliberately (except for the 

goalkeeper within the player’s own penalty area)
	 (b)	A penalty kick: A penalty kick is awarded if any of the 

above ten offences is committed by a player inside 
their own penalty area, irrespective of the position of 
the ball, provided it is in play.

	 (c)	An Indirect Free Kick: An indirect free kick is awarded 
to the opposing team if a goalkeeper, inside their own 
penalty area, commits any of the following four offences:

	 (i)	 Controls the ball with hands for more than six 
seconds before releasing it.

	 (ii)	 Touches the ball again with hands after the ball 
is released from his possession and before it has 
been touched by another player. 

	 (iii)	 Touches the ball with hands after it has been 
deliberately kicked to the player by a team-mate.

	 (iv)	 Touches the ball with hands after receiving it 
directly from a throw-in taken by a team-mate.

An indirect free kick is also awarded to the opposing team 
if, in the opinion of the referee, a player—

	 (i)	 Plays in a dangerous manner 
	 (ii)	 Impedes the progress of an opponent 
	 (iii)	 Prevents the goalkeeper from releasing the ball 

from the player’s hands 
	 (iv)	 Commits any other offence, not previously 

mentioned in Law 12, for which the play is stopped 
to caution or send off a player. 

The indirect free kick is taken from the place where the 
offence occurred.

Cautionable offences (Yellow Card):  A player is 
cautioned and shown the yellow card if he commits any of 
the following seven offences: 

	 (i)	 Unsporting behaviour
	 (ii)	 Dissent by word or action 
	 (iii)	 Persistent infringement of the Laws of the game 
	 (iv)	 Delaying the restart of play 
	 (v)	 Failure to respect the required distance i.e., 10 

yards away from the ball, when play is restarted 
with a corner kick, free kick or throw-in

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   156 31-07-2020   15:27:36



Team Games 157

	 (vi)	 Entering or re-entering the field of play without 
the referee’s permission 

	 (vii)	 Deliberately leaving the field of play without the 
permission of referee.

A substitute or substituted player is cautioned with a 
Yellow Card if commits any of the following three offences: 

	 (i)	 Unsporting behaviour
	 (ii)	 Dissent by word or action 
	 (iii)	 Delaying the restart of play
Sending-off offences (Red card): A player, substitute or 

substituted player is sent off by showing a ‘Red Card’ if they 
commit any of the following seven offences: 

	 (i)	 Serious foul play
	 (ii)	 Violent conduct
	 (iii)	 Spitting at an opponent or any other person
	 (iv)	 Denying the opposing team a goal or an obvious 

goal scoring opportunity by deliberately handling 
the ball (this does not apply to a goalkeeper within 
their own penalty area)

	 (v)	 Denying an obvious goal scoring opportunity to an 
opponent moving towards the player’s goal by an 
offence punishable by a free kick or a penalty kick

	 (vi)	 Using offensive, insulting or abusive language and 
gestures

	 (vii)	 Receiving a second caution (yellow card) in the 
same match 

A player, substitute or substituted player who has been 
sent off, must leave the vicinity of the field of play and the 
technical area.

Law 13
Free Kicks: Free kicks are of two types. 
	 (a)	Direct free kick
	 (b)	 Indirect free kick 

Direct free kick: If a direct free kick is taken and it enters 
the goal:
	 (a)	 If a direct free kick is kicked directly into the opponents’ 

goal, a goal is awarded 
	 (b)	 If a direct free kick is kicked directly into the team’s own 

goal, a corner kick is awarded to the opposing team.
A score cannot be made through an indirect free kick if 

taken straight way into the goal without touching any other 
player.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   157 31-07-2020   15:27:36



158 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know?
A direct free kick, if kicked 
directly into the team’s own 
goal, a corner kick is awarded 
to the opposing team.

Fig. 5.25: Free kick
Law 14
Penalty Kick: A penalty kick is given against a team that 
commits one of the ten offences inside its own penalty area 
while the ball is in play. A goal may be scored directly from 
a penalty kick.

During the penalty kick, all the players other than the 
kicker are located—
	 (a)	 inside the field of play. 
	 (b)	outside the penalty area. 
	 (c)	behind the penalty mark.
	 (d)	at least 9.15 m (10 yds) away from the penalty mark.

Fig. 5.26: Penalty kick

Law 15
Throw-in: It is a method of restarting play. A throw-in is 
awarded to the opponents of the player who last touched the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   158 31-07-2020   15:27:37



Team Games 159

ball when the whole of the ball crosses the touch line, either 
on the ground or in the air. A goal cannot be scored directly 
from a throw-in.

Law 16
Goal Kick: A goal kick is a method of restarting play. A 
goal kick is awarded when the whole of the ball passes over 
the goal line, either on the ground or in the air, having last 
touched a player of the attacking team. A goal may be scored 
directly from a goal kick, but only against the opposing team. 
If the goal kick is kicked into the team’s own goal, a corner is 
awarded to the opposing team.

Law 17
Corner Kick: It is a method of restarting play. A corner kick 
is given when the whole of the ball passes over the goal line, 
either on the ground or in the air, having last touched a 
player of the defending team. A goal may be scored against 
the opposing team directly from a corner kick. 

Measurements of playgrounds and specifications of 
equipment:

All lines in the playground must be of the same width and 
must not be more than 12 cm (5 inch).
Goal area: Two lines are drawn at right angles to the goal line, 
5.5 m (6 yds) from inside of each goalpost. These lines extend into 
the field of play for a distance of 5.5 m (6 yds). These extended 
lines are joined by a line drawn parallel with the goal line. The 
area bounded by these lines and the goal line is the goal area. A 
goal kick is taken from the goal area only.
Penalty area Fig. 5.27: Flag post

•• Two lines are drawn at right angles to the goal line, 
16.5 m (18 yds) from inside of each goalpost. These 
lines extend into the field of play for a distance of 16.5 
m (18 yds). These extended lines are joined by a line 
drawn parallel with the goal line. The area bounded by 
these lines and the goal line is called the penalty area. 

•• Within each penalty area, a mark is made at a distance of 
11 m (12 yds) from the midpoint between the goalposts or 
equidistant to them. This is called penalty mark.

•• An arc with a radius of 9.15 m (10 yds) from the centre 
of each penalty mark is drawn outside the penalty area 
known as penalty arc.

Flag posts: A flag post, not less than 1.5 m (5 ft) high, with 
a non-pointed top and a flag must be placed at each corner. 
Flag posts may also be placed at each end of the halfway line, 
not less than 1 m (1 yd) outside the touch line.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   159 31-07-2020   15:27:38



160 Health and Physical Education - XI

Goals: A goal must be placed on the centre of each goal 
line. A goal consists of two upright posts equidistant from 
the corner flag posts and joined at the top by a horizontal 
crossbar. The goalposts and crossbar must be made of wood, 
metal or other approved material.

They must be square, rectangular, round or elliptical in 
shape and must not be dangerous to players. The distance 
between the posts is 7.32 m (8 yds) and the distance from 
the lower edge of the crossbar to the ground is 2.44 m (8 ft).

Both goalposts and the crossbar have the same width 
and depth, which do not exceed 12 cm (5 inches). The goal 
lines must be of the same width as the goalposts and the 
crossbar. Nets may be attached to the goals and the ground 
behind the goal. These are properly supported and do not 
interfere with the goalkeeper. No part of the goalpost shall be 
projected towards or inside the playing area. The goalposts 
and crossbars must be white in colour.

Fig. 5.28: Goalpost

Famous Indian Football Players
P.K. Banerjee, Chuni Goswami, Sunil Chhetri, I.M. Vijayan, 
Baichung Bhutia, V.P. Sathyan, Sandesh Jhingan, Sasmita 
Mallick, Aditi Chauhan, etc. 

Handball

History
At the end of the nineteenth century, somewhere in Northern 
Europe, it became necessary to unify the rules, which was 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   160 31-07-2020   15:27:38



Team Games 161

done by Karl Schelenz. The new game rules came in force in Do You Know?
Berlin, in 1917. The sports international governing body was In India, Handball was founded 
first formed in 1928 as the Federation International Handball by Jagat Singh Chauhan who 
Amateur. It took its current name in Copenhagen, Denmark in was Physical Education teacher 
1946 as the International Handball Federation (IHF). The first and hailed from Haryana. 
president of IHF was Avery Brundage—an American who went He was the first secretary of 
on to become president of the International Olympic Committee Handball Federation of India.
(IOC). The first Field Handball World Championships were 
played in Germany in 1938, following its appearance at the Activity 5.9
1936 Berlin Olympic Games and then it made a comeback Make a list of the famous 
into the games in the 1972 Munich Olympic games. handball players in male and 
The women’s version of the game was added in the 1976 female section.

Montreal Olympic games. Indoor Handball was invented in 
the 1940s in Denmark. The International Handball Federation 
which was established in 1946, oversees the game, and at 
present it has 175 member countries associated with it. The 
first International Handball Federation (IHF) World Men’s 
Handball Championship commenced in 1954. The IHF World 
Women’s Handball Championship commenced in 1957.

The Asian Handball Federation (AHF) is the governing 
body of handball in Asia. The Asian Handball Federation 
had begun when the Martyr Sheikh Fahad Al-Ahmad Al-
Sabah of the Kuwait initiated a motion to the Executive 
Committee of the Asian Games requesting recognition of the 
handball game and also formation of the Asian Handball 
Federation during seventh Asian Games, Tehran, Iran in 
1974. Accordingly, the Asian Games Federation during its 
meeting on 26th of August 1974, had recognised Handball 
as an official game. The headquarters is located in Kuwait 
City, Kuwait. 

The Handball federation of India was established in 
1972. The first senior National Handball Championship 
was held at Rohtak (Haryana) in 1972. Haryana won the 
gold medal and Vidharbha got the silver medal. First time in 
India, Handball Team participated in Asian Games held in 
India in 1982. 

Functional Rules 

Playing Area
The handball court measures 40 meters in length and 20 
meters in width which is divided by the centre line. The goal 
area line, or 6-meter line, is the most important line. No one 
except the goalkeeper is allowed to stand in the goal area. 
Opponent players may not jump or enter into the goal area 
without releasing the ball for goal.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   161 31-07-2020   15:27:38



162 Health and Physical Education - XI

Handball Tournaments and Championships
World Championship, Olympic Games, Summer Olympics, 
Asian Olympics, Commonwealth Games are the tournaments 
organised by international sports organisations. Whereas, 
Handball Federation of India organises Federation Cup, 
National games and Indian Handball Super League, etc.

20 yds 20 yds

2 yds

6 yds

9 yds
Substitution

Fig. 5.29: Playing area and players, position in handball

Fig. 5.30: Specifications and rules regarding handball

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   162 31-07-2020   15:27:39

20 yds

3 y
ds



Team Games 163

Number of Players
A team consists of 16 players and substitutes in each team. 
There are seven playing members on each team (six court 
players and one goalkeeper). Substitute team member may 
enter the game at any time repeatedly through the team’s own 
substitution area as long as the player they are replacing has 
left the court. Player positions and nomenclature are given 
in the diagram.

Fig. 5.31: Players’ attacking and defensive positions in handball court

Uniform of the Players
Player chest numbers range from 1 to 99. Uniform shirts and 
shorts are of the same colour. The goalkeeper must wear a 
different coloured shirt from the teammates and opponents. 
No jewellery is allowed.

Referees
There are two referees, a court referee and a goal line referee. 
Referees have complete authority and their decisions are 
final. The referees are assisted by a timekeeper and a scorer.

Duration of the Game
The duration of the match for different age groups is allotted 
as mentioned in the following table:

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   163 31-07-2020   15:27:40



164 Health and Physical Education - XI

Table 4: Duration of the game
Age Group Playing time with 10 minutes of interval

8–12 years Two halves of 20 minutes
12–16 years Two halves of 25 minutes
16 and above Two halves of 30 minutes

This is running time except for injury or one team time-
out. The teams have to change bench/side after half-time. 
Overtime consists of two halves of 5 minute/period with 1 
minute half-time break. If the game is still tied, the winner will 
be determined in accordance with the rules of the particular 
competition.

Team Time-out
One minute time-out can be taken by each team in every 
half.

Throw-off
A throw-off is given to the team that wins the toss. Both the 
teams must be in their own side of the court with the defense 
3 meters away from the ball. On a whistle, the ball is passed 
from centre court to a teammate and the play begins. Throw-
off is repeated after every goal scored and after half-time.

Throw-in
When the ball goes out of bounds on the sideline or when the 
ball is last touched by a defensive player (not goalkeeper), a 
throw-in is awarded and goes out of bounds over the endline. 
The throw-in is taken from the nearest spot where the ball 
crossed out. The thrower must put either foot on the sideline 
to perform the throw-in. All opponents must stand 3 meters 
away from the ball.

Scoring
A goal is scored when the entire ball crosses the goal line 
inside the goal. A goal may be scored from any type of throw, 
i.e., free-throw, throw-in, throw-off, and goal-throw.

Playing the Ball
A player is permitted to throw, push, stop, catch, or hit the 
ball, by using hands (open or closed), head, arms, torso, 
thighs, and knees.
	 (a)	A player is allowed:

	 (i)	 to run with the ball for 3 steps.
	 (ii)	 to hold the ball for 3 seconds.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   164 31-07-2020   15:27:40



Team Games 165

	 (iii)	 unlimited dribble with 3 steps allowed before and 
after dribbling (no double-dribble).

	 (iv)	 to take a maximum of 3 steps with the ball.

Defending the Opponent
A player may use the torso of the body to defend an opponent 
with or without the ball. However, using the outstretched arms 
or legs to obstruct, push, hold, trip or hit is not allowed. The 
attacking player is not allowed to charge into a defensive player.

Passive Play
A ball possession team cannot delay the game without 
making a recognisable attempt to attack and to shoot or goal.
Referee Throw: A referee throw is awarded simultaneous 
infringement of the rules after simultaneous possession of 
the ball. The referee throws the ball vertically between two 
opposing players at centre court. The jumping players may 
tap the ball to a teammate or grab the ball. During this, other 
players must be 3 meters away from the ball.

Free-throw
Free-throw is awarded to the opponent against a minor 
foul or violation at the exact spot of the foul. If the foul or 
violation occurs between the goal area line and the 9 meter 
line, the throw is taken from the nearest post outside the 9 
meter line. The thrower must keep one foot in contact with 
the floor.

A Player is NOT allowed to
•• endanger an opponent with the ball.
•• pull, hit or punch the ball out of the hands of an 

opponent.
•• contact the ball below the knee.
•• dive on the floor for a rolling or stationary ball.

7 Meter Throw
The 7 meter throw is awarded when: 

•• Illegally demolish a clear chance to goal
•• The goalkeeper carries the ball back into his/her team’s 

own goal area
•• A court player intentionally plays the ball to his or her 

own goalkeeper in the goal area and the goalkeeper 
touches the ball

•• A defensive player enters his or her goal area to gain 
an advantage over an attacking player in possession of 
the ball.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   165 31-07-2020   15:27:40



166 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 5.10 •• All players must be outside the free-throw line when 
•• Differentiate the yellow and the throw is taken. The player taking the throw has 3 

red card penalties. seconds to shoot after referee’s whistle.
•• What is the name of broken •• Any player may take the 7 meter throw.

line as displayed in the 
figure? Goal-throw

When the ball rebounds off the goalkeeper over the end 
line, a goal-throw is given. The player of the attacking team 
throws over the ball from the end line. The goalkeeper takes 
the throw inside the goal area and is not limited by the 
3-step/3-second rule.

Progressive Punishments: These pertain to the fouls that 
require more punishment than just a free-throw. ‘Actions’ 
directed mainly at the opponent and not the ball (such as 
reaching around, holding, pushing, hitting, tripping and 
jumping into an opponent) are to be punished progressively.

Warnings (Yellow Card)
The referee gives only one warning to a player for rule 
violations and a total of three warnings to a team. Exceeding 
these limits results in 2 minute suspension thereafter. 
Warning is not required prior to giving 2 minute suspension. 
2 minute suspension is awarded to a player for serious or 
repeated rule violations, like non-sportsmanship conduct, 
illegal substitution, etc. 

Disqualification and Exclusion (Red Card)
A disqualification is equivalent to three 2 minute suspensions. 
A disqualified player must leave the competition arena. The 
team has to continue play for rest of the time with one player 
short due to player’s disqualification.

Measurement of Playground and Specifications of 
Equipment

Playing Court 
The playing court in Handball is a 40 meter long and 20 
meter wide rectangle, consisting of two goalposts. The longer 
boundary lines are called side lines, and the shorter ones 
are called goal lines (between the goalposts) or outer goal 
lines (on either side of the goal). There should be a safety 
zone surrounding the playing court, with a width of at least 1 
meter along the side lines and 2 meters behind the goal lines.
	 •	All lines on the court are fully part of the playing area 

that they enclose. The goal lines shall be 8 cm wide 
at the goalposts (see diagram), whereas all the other 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   166 31-07-2020   15:27:40



Team Games 167

lines shall be 5 cm wide. Lines between two adjacent 
areas may be replaced with a difference in colours 
between the adjacent areas of the floor.

	 •	 In front of each goal, there is a goal area. The goal 
area is defined by the goal area line (6 meter line), 
which is drawn with the following dimensions.

	 (a)	 A 3 meter long line directly in front of the goal; 
this line is parallel to the goal line and 6 metres 
away from it (measured from the rear edge of the 
goal line to the front edge of the goal area line).

	 (b)	 Two quarter circles, each with a radius of 6 metres 
(measured from the rear inner corner of the 
goalposts), connecting the 3 meter long line with 
the outer goal line.

The free throw line (9 metre line) is a broken line, drawn 3 
metres outside the goal area line. Both the segments of the line 
and the spaces between them measure 15cm (see diagram).

The 7 meter line is a 1 meter long line, directly in front of 
the goal. It is parallel to the goal line and 7 meters away from 
it (measured from the rear edge of the goal line to the front 
edge of the 7 meter line) see diagram.

The goalkeeper’s restraining line (the 4 meter line) is a 15cm 
long line, directly in front of the goal. It is parallel to the goal line 
and 4 metres away from it (measured from the rear edge of the 
goal line to the front edge of the 4 meter line). The center line 
connects the midpoints of the two side lines.

The substitution line (a segment of the side line) for each 
team extends from the center line to a point at a distance 
of 4.5 meters from the center line. This end point of the 
substitution line is enhanced by a line which is parallel to 
the center line, extending 15cm inside the side line and 15cm 
outside the side line (see diagrams).

Specifications of equipment
A goal (see diagrams) is placed in the center of each outer 
goal line. The goals must be firmly attached to the floor or the 
walls behind them. They have an interior height of 2 metres 
and a width of 3 metres. 

The goalposts are joined by a horizontal crossbar. The rear 
side of the goalposts shall be in line with the rear edge of the 
goal line. The goalposts and the crossbar must have an 8cm 
square cross section. On the three sides which are visible from 
the court, they must be painted in bands of two contrasting 
colors, which also contrast clearly with the background. The 
goals must have a net, that should be attached in such a way 
that a ball thrown into the goal normally remains in the goal.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   167 31-07-2020   15:27:40



168 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fig. 5.32: Specifications of goalpost in handball (all dimensions indicated in cm)

Activity 5.11 The Ball
What is substitution area and Handball is played with a 32 panel leather ball. The ball sizes, 
why is it used? to be used by different categories of teams are as follows:

Table 5: Ball Sizes According to Age Group
Ball Size Age Group

58–60cm and 425–475g Men and Male youth of over 
(IHF Size 3) age 16
54–56cm and 325–375g Women, Female youth (over 
(IHF Size 2) age 14), and Male Youth (12–

16 years)
50–52cm and 290–330g Female youth (8–14 years) and 
(IHF Size 1) Male youth of age (8–12 years)

Table 6: Measurement Specifications
Terms Units

Size of Playfield 40m × 20m
Shooting Circle 6m Goal Area Line and 9m free throw 

line/outer circle

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   168 31-07-2020   15:27:41



Team Games 169

Penalty Point 7m Activity 5.12
Goalpost 2m × 3m •• What is the air pressure of a 

handball?
Ball Weight: 425–475g (M), 325g–400g (W) •• What is the size and weight 

Circumference: 58–60cm (M), 54cm– of a handball?
56cm (W) •• Who invented Handball?

•• Which two countries played 
the first handball match in 

No. of players 12 (7 court players and 5 substitutes) Olympic Games?

Duration of game 2 Halves of 30 minutes (10 min break 
in each half)

Time Out in game 1 time out/half/team

Extra Time 2 halves of 5 minute each

Hockey

History
Historical records indicate that the crude form of hockey 
was played in Egypt around 4,000 years ago. Evidence also 
shows that a form of this game was played by Romans and 
Greeks. The modern game of hockey evolved in England in 
the mid-eighteenth century, primarily around the schools.

The first Olympic Hockey Competition for men was 
held in London in 1908. Ireland and Scotland competed 
separately. After having made its first appearance in 1908 
games, hockey was subsequently dropped from the 1912 
Stockholm Olympic Games. It reappeared in 1920 at Antwerp 
(Belgium) before being omitted again in Paris in 1924. The 
Paris organisers refused to include hockey in the Olympics, 
stating that the sport had no International Federation.

Hockey had made its first step towards an International 
Federation in 1909 when the Hockey Association in England 
and the Belgium Hockey Association agreed to recognise each 
other to regulate international hockey relations. The French 
Association followed soon after, but this was not considered 
sufficient to recognise this game at the international level.

Federation International de Hockey (FIH)
The International Hockey Federation, the world governing 
body was founded in Paris in 1924, initiated by Paul Leautey, 
a Frenchman. Paul Leautey became the first President of the 
FIH. 

In many ways, the FIH serves as the ‘guardian’ of the 
sport. It works in co-operation with both the national and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   169 31-07-2020   15:27:41



170 Health and Physical Education - XI

continental organisations to ensure consistency and unity in 
hockey around the world.

The Federation International Hockey (FIH) not only 
regulates the sport, but is also responsible for its development 
and promotion so as to guarantee a secure future for hockey.

FIH comprises a network of five continental federations 
(CHFS), 12 National associations (NHAS), an executive board 
and 7 expert advisory committees, with a Head Office in 
Brussels. The FIH retains overall responsibility for hockey 
worldwide, including the rules of hockey, umpiring and 
coaching.

Measurement of Playground and Specifications of 
Equipment

Field and field equipment
The field of play is rectangular, 91.40 metres long, bounded 
by sidelines and 55 metres wide, bounded by backlines.

	 1.	Markings
	 (a)	 The lines are 75 mm wide and must be clearly 

marked along their entire length.
	 (b)	 All the marks must be made in white.

	 2.	Lines and other marks
	 (a)	 Side-lines: 91.40 metres long perimeter lines
	 (b)	 Back-lines: 55.00 metres long perimeter lines
	 (c)	 Goal-lines: the parts of the back-lines between the 

goal-posts
	 (d)	 Centre-line: across the middle of the field
	 (e)	 22.90 metre lines across the field 22.90 metres 

from each backline as measured between the 
furthest edges of each line.

	 (f)	 300 mm long lines marked outside the field on 
each sideline with the further edge of the lines 
14.63 metres from and parallel to the outer edge 
of the backlines.

	 (g)	 300 mm long lines marked outside the field on each 
backline on both sides of the goal at 5 metres.

	 (h)	 10 metres from the outer edge of the nearer goalpost, 
as measured between the furthest edges of each line.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   170 31-07-2020   15:27:41



Team Games 171

Fig. 5.33: Hockey playground

	  3.	Goals
	 (a)	 Two vertical goalposts joined by a horizontal cross-

bar are placed at the centre of each backline on 
the external marks.

	 (b)	 The goalposts and crossbar are white, rectangular 
in cross section, 50 mm wide and between 50 mm 
to 75 mm deep.

	 (c)	 The goal posts must not extend vertically beyond 
the crossbar and the crossbar must not extend 
horizontally beyond the goalposts.

	 (d)	 The distance between the inner edges of the goalposts 
is 3.66 metres and the distance from the lower edge 
of the crossbar to the ground is 2.14 metres.

	 (e)	 The space outside the field, behind the goalposts 
should be enclosed by the net, side-boards and 
backboard is a minimum of 0.90 metres deep at 
the crossbar and a minimum of 1.20 metres deep 
at ground-level.

	 4.	  Sideboards and backboards
	 (a)	 Sideboards are 460 mm high and a minimum of 

1.20 metres long.
	 (b)	 Backboards are 460 mm high and 3.66 metres long.
	 (c)	 Sideboards are positioned on the ground at 

right angles to the back line and are fixed to the 
back of the goalposts without increasing their 
width.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   171 31-07-2020   15:27:42



172 Health and Physical Education - XI

	 (d)	 Backboards are positioned on the ground at right 
angles to the side boards and parallel to the 
backline, and are fixed to the end of the sideboards.

	 (e)	 Sideboards and backboards are of dark colour on 
the inside.

Fig. 5.34: Specifications of net

	 5.	Nets
	 (a)	 The maximum mesh size is 45 mm.
	 (b)	 Attachment to the back of the goalposts 

and crossbar is at intervals of not more than 
150 mm.

	 (c)	 The nets are hanged outside the sideboards and 
backboard.

	 (d)	 The nets are secured so as to prevent the ball from 
passing between the net and the goalposts, cross 
bar, sideboards and back-boards.

	 (e)	 The nets are fitted loosely to prevent the ball from 
rebounding.

	 6.	Flagposts
	 (a)	 Flagposts are between 1.20 and 1.50 metres in 

height.
	 (b)	 Flagposts are placed at each corner of the field.
	 (c)	 Flagposts must not be dangerous.
	 (d)	 If unbreakable, flagposts must be attached to a 

spring base.
	 (e)	 Flagposts carry flags, not exceeding 300 mm in 

width or length.
	 7.	Stick

	 (a)	 The head must be a ‘J’ or ‘U’ shape.
	 (b)	 The head must be flat on the left hand side only.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   172 31-07-2020   15:27:43



Team Games 173

	 (c)	 Any curvature along the length of the stick (the 
bow or rake) must have a continuous smooth 
profile along the whole length, and must occur 
along the playing side or the back of the stick but 
not both and is limited to a depth of 25 mm.

	 8.	Ball 
	 (a)	 is spherical.
	 (b)	 has a circumference between 224 mm and 235 

mm.
	 (c)	 weighs between 156 grams and 163 grams.
	 (d)	 is made of any material and coloured white (or 

an agreed colour which contrasts with the playing 
surface).

	 (e)	 is hard with a smooth surface but indentations 
are permitted.

Fig. 5.35: Goalkeepers equipment
Goalkeeper’s equipment
	 1.	Hand protectors

	 (a)	 each has a maximum width of 228 mm and length 
of 355 mm when laid flat, with palm upwards

	 (b)	 must not have any addition to retain the stick 
when the stick is not held in the hand.

	 2.	Leg guards
	 (a)	 each has a maximum width of 300 mm when worn 

on the leg of the goalkeeper.
	 (b)	 The dimensions of the goalkeeper’s hand protectors 

and leg guards are measured using gauges with 
the relevant internal dimensions.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   173 31-07-2020   15:27:43



174 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? Functional rules of Hockey
In Hockey, rolling substitution The rules of the hockey game are developed and modified 
is allowed and any number time to time only by International Hockey Federation to add 
of times a player can be glamour and excitement in the match. These rules can be 
substituted. understood as given below.

Teams
Each team consists of 16 players, out of which 11 players 
play on the field at a time, which includes ten regular players 
and one goal keeper. Five substitution players remain on the 
sideline. In rare circumstances, a team will choose to pull its 
goal keeper off the field in exchange for an extra field player. 
The players on the sideline can be used as substitutes for 
any of the players on the field at any given time.

Coin Toss
Before the start of the match, the umpire tosses a coin. The 
home team gets to choose whether it wants heads or tails. The 
team that wins the toss gets its choice of either possession of 
the ball at the start or the side of the field to defend.

Positions
Positions in field hockey are not absolute. Generally, teams 
arrange players for defence, midfield, and attack. Many teams 
include a single player as the last defender called sweeper. 
Sweeper acts as a last line of defense in front of the goal 
keeper. The minimum number of players needed for a game 
is nine, including the goal keeper. 

Goal Keeper
Goal keeper is the last defender of a team and shall have 
distinguished jersey colour than that of teammates. A full 
protected goal keeper cannot leave the side’s defensive 
25 yards (23m) line during play, unless the goal keeper is 
defending a penalty stroke.

The player who is substituted as a goalkeeper must wear 
a helmet, a thigh pad and sometimes a shoe protector.  If the 
team wants an additional player in the place of a goal keeper, 
then the goalkeeper designated player must wear different 
coloured jersey and cannot use their feet or hands outside 
the 23 meter mark.

Handling Hockey Stick
The head part of a hockey stick is hooked. The right-hand 
side of the stick is rounded, while the left-hand side is flat. 
The ball can be played only with the flat, left-handed side 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   174 31-07-2020   15:27:43



Team Games 175

of the stick, or with its edge. The ball cannot be played with Activity 5.13
the rounded side of stick. This is natural for right-handed Collect information about 
players and unnatural for left-handed players. Left-handed the world governing body for 
sticks are not allowed to be used in games. hockey.

Hitting the Ball
To make a legal hit to the right without using the rounding 
side of the stick, a player must turn the stick over the ball 
and use the flat side. Taking a hit by reversing the stick head, 
turning the handle approximately 180 degrees over the ball 
and striking the ball with a left-to-right swing with the flat 
side of the stick is called reverse hit.

Dribbling
Keeping the ball under close control is called dribbling. 
Dribbling is used while running with possession of the ball. 
It helps a player to move away from the opposing players for 
a chance to pass or to hit on goal. Other essential skills for 
playing field hockey are the ability to control, pass, push, 
stop, and shoot the ball with the stick.

Foot Foul 
Field Hockey players are not allowed to use their feet, or any 
other body part, to control the ball. If the ball hits a player’s 
foot, the umpire will either award the other team a free hit or 
let the game continue if the other team gains an advantage. 
Only the goalkeeper is allowed to use hands, feet, and body 
to stop or strike the ball.

Air Ball
The ball is allowed to be lifted in the air as long as the referee 
does not consider the play to be ‘dangerous.’ The umpire will 
make a call if the ball could potentially hit or injure another 
player. The general rule is that the ball should not be lifted 
above the knee within five meters of another player. An 
exception to this rule is when the ball is raised by using a 
scooping or long-pushing action of the stick, or when there 
are no players in the same proximity as the ball. The ball 
cannot be hit into the air unless it is a direct shot on goal.

Scoring
There are three different ways to score a goal in field hockey.

1.	 Field goal: A goal can only be scored if the shot is taken 
within the ‘shooting circle’, a semi-circular area in front of the 
opponent’s goal. The shooting circle is also known as the ‘D’ 
for the defensive team. The ball must be touched by a player 
of either team inside the circle for it to count as a goal.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   175 31-07-2020   15:27:43



176 Health and Physical Education - XI

2.	 Penalty Corner: A penalty corner is awarded when 
the defensive team breaks certain rules inside the ‘D’, or 
when a defender commits an intentional offense outside 
the circle but within the 25 yards (23 metres) area. Teams 
generally have a set play for short corner. A short corner is 
the best opportunity to score a goal in field hockey, because 
the offensive team attacks with more number of players than 
the defensive team.

The following procedure should be applied to execute a 
penalty corner during the match.

•• Play is stopped for a penalty corner to allow time for 
both teams to set up its respective attack and defense 
positions. 

•• Defensive team is allowed to put five defenders including 
the goal keeper on the end line. 

•• The rest of the defensive team must stay behind the center 
line until the ball is pushed out by the offensive player.

•• One of the attackers will stand on the end line 11 yards 
(10 meters) away from the goal called ‘pusher’, and who 
pushes the ball out to the attackers on top of the shoot-
ing circle.

•• The ball is stopped by one of the waiting attacking 
team players called ‘stopper’, standing on the 16 yards 
circle. The stopper will stop the ball for the team mate 
to either hit or to drag the ball into goal.  

•• In order to count a goal during a penalty corner, the ball 
must travel outside the shooting circle before hitting the 
ball into the goal. The receiver will then push the ball back 
into the circle for a shot to be taken. The shot has to be 
taken from inside the marked circle for the goal to count.

•• Fouls during penalty corner
•• If the first shot into the goal during penalty corner is 

a hard hit and the ball is lifted in the air above the 
backboard, the goal will not be counted. 

•• To avoid the foul during penalty corner, the attacker 
must take push or scoop or flick shots in the goal. 
Even if the ball is lifted in the air due to push or scoop 
or flick shots, a goal is scored. On the international 
level, the ‘drag flick’ is the most popular type of lifted 
shot during the penalty corner.

3.	 Penalty Stroke: A penalty stroke is a single shot 
taken on goal by an offensive player chosen by the team. 
The goalkeeper is the only opposing player that can defend 
this shot. A stroke may be awarded for a number of reasons. 
The most common reason for a stroke to be taken is when 
a defender commits a foul that directly prevents a goal from 
being scored.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   176 31-07-2020   15:27:43



Team Games 177

The shot is taken from a spot referred to as the penalty Activity 5.14
stroke mark. It is located 7 yards (6.4 meters) directly in Collect the names of players 
front and center of the goal. Game play is stopped during the who have received Arjuna 
penalty stroke and all players must stand away and outside Award in the last two years.
of 25 yards (23 metres) line. The player taking penalty stroke 
must push, flick or scoop the ball towards the goal and is 
permitted to raise the ball to any height. Do You Know?

Fouls during penalty Stroke: The National Championship 
When the stick makes in Hockey is known as 

contact with the ball, it should make no distinct hitting Rangaswamy Cup.
noise; otherwise the umpire can disallow the penalty stroke.

Free Hits
Free hits are awarded throughout the main part of the field 
for general offences by either team. The most common fouls 
that lead to free hits are:

•• Obstructing an opponent from playing the ball.
•• Interfering with the stick or body when tackling.
•• Kicking the ball with leg.
•• Playing the ball dangerously (including lifting the ball).

Procedure to take a free hit
•• In a free hit, the ball possession is given to the opponent 

team where the offence took place. 
•• The ball is placed on the ground and a player will 

restart the action by passing it to a teammate, hitting 
the ball forward or backward, or through a self-pass 
(either by dribbling the ball or hitting it into space). All 
the opposing players must stand at least 5 yards from 
this player until the ball is put into play.

•• If the ball is within the 25 yards area of a goal, the 
ball cannot be directly hit into the circle. The ball must 
travel 5 yards by dribbling or passing before it can be 
hit into the circle and shot at the goal.

Obstruction
In most general terms, obstruction is called when the ball 
is shielded from an opposing player who is trying to get the 
ball. Players often use their own bodies or sticks to block the 
ball, but third party obstruction can also be called. Third 
party obstruction is called when an attacking player runs 
to block an opponent’s path (who is trying to get the ball) 
between a teammate who has possession of the ball.

Match Time
An international match time is 60 minutes with four 
15-minutequarter (first quarter 15m and 2m for rest, second 
quarter 15m and 10m for rest third quarter 15m and 2m for 
rest and fourth quarter 15m) for rest. The additional time out for 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   177 31-07-2020   15:27:44



178 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? penalty corners and after goals ensure that the new 60 minutes 
The Indian Men’s Hockey team format is primarily the actual playing time and eliminates the 
remained unbeaten in the dead time associated with penalty corner set up while allowing 
Olympics, winning six gold the teams to enjoy their goal celebration.
medals in a row. The Indian 
team has won a total of eight Penalty Shootout
gold medals till date. The team that scores the most goals within the match time is 

the winner. According to the International Hockey Federation, 
if no goals are scored during regulation time, the game will 
end in a tie or draw.  In the Knock Out Tournament, the 
winner is decided on the basis of penalty shootout.

The New Match Time Format
•• Match duration: 60 minutes equally divided in 

four quarters
•• 40 seconds time out: After penalty corner awarded 

and after a goal scored
•• Two minutes break after the first and the third 

quarters and 10 minutes break for half time.
The penalty shootout will be taken under the following 

conditions—
	 1.	The defending goalkeeper will stand behind his own 

goal line, between the goal post.
	 2.	The ball is placed on the nearest 23 m line in a position 

opposite the center of the goal.
	 3.	The umpire blows his whistle to signal the start of the 

shootout. The attacker and the goalkeeper may then 
move in any direction.

	 4.	An attacker will start from behind the 23 m line near 
the ball.

	 5.	The shootout is completed when any one of the 
following occur—

	 (a)	 8 seconds has elapsed
	 (b)	 The attacker scores a goal
	 (c)	 The attacker commits an offence
	 (d)	 The goalkeeper commits an offence a goal shall be 

awarded
	 (e)	 The ball goes out-of-play over the back line, this 

include the goalkeeper who may intentionally play 
the ball over the back line to end the shootout.

Umpires
There are two umpires (or ‘referees’) in each game. Each 
umpire controls half of the field, although general play in the 
midfield can be called by either umpire.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   178 31-07-2020   15:27:44



Team Games 179

An umpire can give a card to any player who has committed 
a repeated offence. There are three types of cards: Activity 5.15

Collect information on the 
Green card: Temporarily suspends the player for a years in which Indian Men’s 

minimum of two minutes of playing time. Hockey team won Olympic 
Yellow card: Temporarily suspends the player for a gold medals.

minimum of five minutes of playing time.
Red card: Permanently suspends the player from the 

match. 
If a player is suspended temporarily or permanently, then 

the team plays with the remaining players.

Umpire Calls
The whistle is the umpire’s tool to enforce the rules of the 
game. The umpire blows the whistle to:

•• start the first and second half of the game
•• start a bully
•• call a foul
•• start and end a penalty stroke
•• indicate a goal
•• restart a match after it has been stopped
•• stop a match to substitute players into the game
•• stop the match for an injury
The umpire uses the whistle to keep the game moving 

smoothly. The umpire will also use hand signals to indicate 
the specifics of the call.

Outstanding Hockey Players: Some of the outstanding 
hockey players in India are Prithpal, Ajit Pal Singh, M.P. 
Ganesh, Roopa Saini, Vasudeven Bhaskaran, Zafar Iqbal, 
Pargat Singh, Jagbir Singh, Dhanraj Pillai, Rajendra Singh, 
Dilip Trikey, Mamta Kharab, Deepak Thakur, Sandeep Singh, 
Ritu Rani, Sardar Singh, etc.

Kabaddi

History
Kabaddi is an indigenous game of India which has originated 
and developed since the epic age of Mahabharata. The word 
‘Kabaddi’ has been derived from the term Kaunbada which 
means ‘to challenge an opponent’. The game, known as 
Hu-Tu-Tu in Western India, Ha-Do-Do in Eastern India and 
Bangladesh, Chedugudu in Southern India and Kaunbada in 
Northern India. Kabaddi attained national status in the year 
1918. Maharashtra was the pioneer state to bring the game 
to the national platform and popularity. Standard rules and 
regulations were formulated in 1918 but were brought out 
in print in the year 1923 and in this very year, an All India 
Tournament was organised at Baroda with these rules.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   179 31-07-2020   15:27:44



180 Health and Physical Education - XI

13 m

End Line

Lobby Lobby 1 m

1.75 m
1 m 3.75 m

8 m

Lobby Lobby 1 m

End Line

Fig. 5.36: Specifications of net

Table 7: Measurement of Kabaddi Ground

Do You Know? Size of Kabaddi Court 13 × 10 m (for men)
Kabaddi received international 11 × 08 m (for boys and 
exposure during the 1936 women)
Berlin Olympics, demonstrated Size of Lobby 1 m wide on both sides
by Hanuman Vyayam 
Prasarak Mandal, Amaravati, Distance of Baulk Line 3.75 m
Maharashtra. from Mid-Line

Distance of Bonus Line 4.75 m
from Mid-Line

Modern Kabaddi is a synthesis of the game which is 
played in various forms under different names. The game 
was introduced in the Indian Olympic Games at Calcutta in 
1938. In 1950, the All India Kabaddi Federation came into 
existence and compiled standard rules.

The Amateur Kabaddi Federation of India (AKFI) was 
founded in 1973. After the formation of Amateur Kabaddi 
Federation of India, the first men’s nationals were held in 
Madras (renamed as Chennai), while the women’s nationals 
were held in Calcutta (renamed as Kolkata) in 1955 (1955 
does not come after 1973). The AKFI has given shape to 
the new rules and has the right to modify them. The Asian 
Kabaddi Federation was founded under the chairmanship of 
Janardan Singh Gehlot.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   180 31-07-2020   15:27:44

End Line

Bonus Line

Baulk Line

Mid Line

End Line

10 m



Team Games 181

Rules of Kabaddi Do You Know?
Team Kabaddi is now played indoor 

on mats after wearing mat 
Each team shall consist of minimum 10 and maximum 12 shoes.
Players. Seven players shall play at a time and the remaining 
players are substitutes.

Duration of the match
The duration of the match shall be of two halves, i.e., 20 
minutes of each half. In case of men and junior boys there 
is an internal of 5 minutes. In the case of women, junior 
girls, sub-junior boys and girls, there are two halves of 15 
minutes with 5 minutes interval. The side that wins the toss 
shall have the choice of the court or the raid. The teams shall 
change the court after first interval. The number of players 
for each team at the start of second half shall remain the 
same as it was at the end of first half. The last raid of each 
half of the match shall be allowed to be completed even after 
completion of the scheduled time as mentioned above.

Rules for Raider
•• Raider shall continue to chant “Kabaddi”. Raider must 

start the chant before the player touches the opponent’s 
court.

•• If a raider goes out of turn, the Umpire or Referee shall 
order the raider to go back and a technical point will be 
given to the opponent team.

•• Not more than one raider shall enter the opponent’s 
court at a time; otherwise a technical point will be 
awarded to the opponent and a chance to raid.

•• When a raider is out the raid is over, the opponent 
should send their raider within 5 seconds. Otherwise 
their team loses its turn of raiding.

•• If a raider, who is caught by the catcher, escapes from 
their attempt to hold and reaches his court safely, he 
shall not be pursued further.

•• When a raid is held, the cather shall not try deliberately 
stifle the raiders chant by shutting his mouth, using 
violent tackling leading to injuries, any type of scissoring 
or any unfair means. If such incident happens, the 
Umpire or Referee shall declare the raider ‘Not Out’.

Rules and regulations
•• No catcher shall willfully push the raider out of the 

boundary by any part of his body, nor shall any raider 
willfully push or pull catcher’s body out of the boundary. 
If the raider is pushed outside the boundary or the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   181 31-07-2020   15:27:44



182 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? catcher is pushed or pulled outside the boundary, the 
After all the members of a team Umpire or Referee shall declare the raider or the catcher, 
are declared out, the opponent as the case may be, as ‘Not Out’, and the catcher or the 
team will be awarded two extra raider who pushes or pulls the opponents outside the 
points known as ‘Lona’. boundary shall be declared out.

•• During the course of raid, none of the catcher shall 
touch the raider’s court until completion of the raid. 
In case any catcher touches the raider’s court before 
completion of the raid, they will be declared out and the 
opponent team will be given that many points.

•• When a team manages to put out the entire opponent 
team and none of the opponents are entitled to be revived, 
then that team scores a lona and two extra points for 
lona shall be awarded in addition to the points scored 
by the team putting out all the players of the opponent. 
The play continues and all the players who are out shall 
enter in their court within 10 seconds. Otherwise the 
referee or umpire shall award one technical point to the 
opponent. If the team fails to enter within one minute, 
the team shall be scratched from the match and the 
match shall be awarded to the opponent.

•• If a raider is warned or in any way instructed by one 
player of his own side, the Umpire or Referee shall 
award one technical point to the opponent.

•• A raider or catcher is not to be held by any part of his 
cloth deliberately other than his limb or trunk. The one 
who violates the rule shall be declared out. If the raider 
is held deliberately other than his limb or trunk, the 
Umpire or Referee shall declare such raider as not out.

Note: If a raider is intentionally caught by clothes or hair, the 
raider shall be declared ‘not out’ and the catcher who has violated 
the rule shall be declared out.

•• When one or two players of a team are left during the 
game and the Captain of the team declares them out in 
order to bring in the full team, the opponent shall score 
as many points as the players that existed in the court 
at the time of declaration as well as two extra points for 
‘lona’.

•• A player or players who are out shall be revived in 
the same order as they were out when one or more 
opponents are out.

System of Scoring
Each team shall score one point for every opponent out or put 
out. The side, which scores a ‘lona’, shall score two extra points.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   182 31-07-2020   15:27:44



Team Games 183

Time Out Activity 5.16
Each team shall be allowed to take two ‘Time Outs’ of 30 Ask your teacher to conduct 
seconds each in each half; such ‘time out’ shall be called for inter house Kabaddi Matches in 
by the Captain, Coach or any playing member of the team your school.
with the permission of referee. The ‘time out’ time shall be 
added to the match time.

Substitution
Five reserve players can be substituted with the permission 
of the Referee during ‘time out’ or interval.

Bonus Point
For crossing the bonus line, when catcher team have 
minimum six players, bonus point is awarded to the raider.

Result
The team, which scores the highest number of points at the 
end of the match, shall be declared the winner.

Tie in Knockout
If there is a tie in the Knockout match, the match will be 
played of 5-5 raids where both the teams should field 7 
players in the Court and baulk line is treated as bonus line 
but point remains the same. Listed players will perform the 
raid alternatively; no one will be out, only score points will be 
given to their respective team. At last the team which scored 
more points is declared the winner.

Golden Raid
•• Even after 5–5 raids, if there is a tie, a fresh toss will be 

taken and the team that wins the toss shall have the 
chance to raid, i.e., ‘Golden Raid’.

•• If there is a tie even after the Golden Raid, then a chance 
will be given to the opponent team for the Golden Raid.

•• In the Golden Raid, the team which scores the leading 
point shall be declared as winner.

Green Card is flashed for warning, Yellow Card for 
temporary suspension for 2 minutes, and Red Card for 
suspension from the match or to debar from the tournament. 

Fundamental skills in Kabaddi
The main objective of the defence players or catcher is to 
catch the raider and prevent him from escaping to his home 
court. To achieve this objective, the catcher can use any of 
the six fundamental defence skills, i.e., ankle hold, thigh 
hold, knee hold, waist hold, wrist hold and arm hold. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   183 31-07-2020   15:27:44



184 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 5.17 Ankle hold
•• Is there a weight Ankle hold is one of the commonly used defensive skills. In 

categorisation for Kabaddi? this technique, the defending player (catcher) holds the ankle 
•• Find out the age and weight of the raider with both hands.

categories of Kabaddi in 
SGFI.

Fig. 5.37: Ankle hold

Thigh hold
It is also a defensive technique in which the defender throws 
his body on the raider to hold both thighs with the arms 
around the thighs of raider.

Fig. 5.38: Thigh hold

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   184 31-07-2020   15:27:45



Team Games 185

Knee hold
This is not a common skill in kabaddi but when used by the 
defender, it works like a jaw to catch the raider.

Fig. 5.39: Knee hold

Waist hold
Waist hold is used during the struggle when the raider moves 
back to one’s own court after the raid.

Fig. 5.40: Waist hold

Wrist hold
Wrist holding technique is best used during one to one 
situation and not advised during the usual course of game.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   185 31-07-2020   15:27:46



186 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fig. 5.41: Wrist hold

Arm hold
During struggle, arms of the raider are held to stabilise the 
raider but this is not a very common practice as the arm hold 
is natural action occurs during competition. 

Fig. 5.42: Arm hold

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   186 31-07-2020   15:27:47



Team Games 187

Offensive skills

Toe touch
Toe touch is executed by the raider to touch the opponent by 
toe during raid for scoring a point.

Fig. 5.43: Toe touch

Side kick
The raider tries to touch the opponent by side kicking, 
keeping in mind that the opponent should not hold the leg.

Front kick
In front kick, the raider tries to kick from front, in a deceiving 
action, keeping in mind that the opponent should not grab 
the leg.

Fig. 5.44: Front kick

Mule or Back kick
It is a deceiving kick, performed by standing in front of the 
opponent and facing in the same direction.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   187 31-07-2020   15:27:48



188 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 5.18
•• How many gold medals 

did India win in Asian 
games, Jakarta-Palembang 
(Indonesia) 2018?

•• Collect the information of 
teams and their occupied 
owners in Professional 
Kabaddi League in India.

Do You Know?
•• India is the first country 

to introduce Professional 
Kabaddi League. Fig. 5.45: Mule or back kick

•• Asian Kabaddi circuit 
is dominated by Indian Awards in Kabaddi
coaches and players to To motivate the extraordinary achievements of the players 
develop the game of Kabaddi and Coaches, the Government of India honours players with 
in Asia. different awards along with cash prizes and certificates. 

In the year 2018, G. Pranav Sai Reddy of received Arjuna 
Award. E. Prasad Rao has been awarded with Dronacharya 
Award for an excellent contribution as a Coach. 

Kho-Kho
The game Kho-Kho is based upon the natural principles of 
physical development and develops all of the motor qualities 
of an individual. It involves and cultivates a healthy combative 
spirit among the youth. It is not merely a game of running 
with speed but also to chase at natural instinct to overtake.

Fig. 5.46: Players in kho-kho playground

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   188 31-07-2020   15:27:49



Team Games 189

History of Kho-Kho Do You Know?
The origin of Kho-Kho is not easy to mark out, but many Practice of Kho-Kho helps to 
historians believe that it is a modified form of ‘Run and develop coordinative abilities 
Chase’, which in its simplest form involves chasing and more than other games.
touching a person. The popularity and development of this 
game has been associated with the development of ‘Akharas’ 
and ‘Vyayamshalas’ in Maharashtra. Probably, the game 
Kho-Kho has originated from Pune, Maharashtra and slowly 
spread within the country and also gained popularity in the 
neighbouring countries, i.e., Nepal, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka 
and Pakistan. The rules of this game were framed in 1914 
by a committee of veteran players. Initially two players were 
made to stand at the two ends instead of the posts. The 
game is controlled and governed by the rules formed by Kho-
Kho Federation of India which was established in 1956. It 
is believed that the first championship of Kho-Kho was held 
in 1959 at Vijaywada. ‘Hanuman Vyayam Prasarak Mandal’ 
Amravati, has given the modern form to this game. Kho-Kho 
game was first introduced in the National Games in 1985, 
held in Delhi. First Asian Kho-Kho championship was held in 
1996 in Calcutta, where Nepal, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and 
India participated. It was also introduced as a demonstration 
game in the Berlin Olympics in 1936.

Measurements of Kho-Kho Playground
Kho-Kho ground is rectangular in shape and can be 
constructed either outdoor or indoor. In outdoor spaces, it 
should be made on a levelled clay surface and synthetic or 
wooden surface should be used when playing indoors.

Table 8: Basics of Kho-Kho

Terms Units

Shape of the playfield Rectangular

Total area including lobbies 32m × 21m

27m × 16m (Men/Women and Junior Boys/
Dimensions of the playfield Girls)

23m × 14m (Sub Junior Boys/Girls)

1.5m × 16m (Men/Women and Junior 
Free Zone Boys/Girls)

1.5m × 14m (Sub Junior Boys/Girls)

Centre Lane 24m (Men/Women and Junior Boys/Girls)
20m (Sub Junior Boys/Girls)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   189 31-07-2020   15:27:49



190 Health and Physical Education - XI

Terms Units
35cm × 30cm (Men/Women and Junior 

Cross Lane Boys/Girls)
30cm × 30cm (Sub Junior Boys/Girls)

Distance: Pole to first Cross 2.55m (Men/Women and Junior Boys/
lane Girls)

2.15m (Sub Junior Boys/Girls)

Distance between two 2.30m (Men/Women and Junior Boys/
chasters block Girls)

1.90m (Sub Junior Boys/Girls)
Number of innings in Kho- 02 for each team (total 4 turns of 9 minutes 
Kho each)
Duration of the interval 6 minutes (after first inning for both teams)
Time interval between team 
turns including interval 3 minutes (9 + 3 + 9 + 6 + 9 + 3 + 9) = 48 
time minutes

Dimensions of the pole 
(Height) 1.20m to 1.25m

Diameter of the pole 9cm to 10cm
Number of players 9 playing members and 3 extra players

Officials 2 Umpires, 1 Referee, 1 Time Keeper, 1 
Scorer

Fig. 5.47: Specifications of kho-kho playground (men/women)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   190 31-07-2020   15:27:50



Team Games 191

Equipment
For the construction and playing Kho-Kho, the following 
equipment are required—
	 1.	Posts (Two Wooden Poles)
	 2.	Cord (for field marking only)
	 3.	Steel measuring tape (for field marking)
	 4.	Lime powder (for field marking)
	 5.	Stopwatch
	 6.	Score sheet	
	 7.	Large score board (score indicator)
	 8.	Time indicating Plates (30 mm × 20 cm)

General rules and regulations
	 1.	Each team consists of 12 players. Nine players play 

the game. 
	 2.	On the basis of the toss, the captain chooses running 

(defending) or chasing (attacking).
	 3.	Nine players of the chasing team participate during 

the attack, out of which eight players sit on the 
boxes of the central lane. The players sit in the boxes 
alternately in such a way so as to face in opposite 
direction.

	 4.	  An active chaser gives a vocal signal ‘kho’ to the team’s 
own sitting player with a simple tap by palm on his/
her back and sits in their box. It is a violation if the 
sitting player moves before the kho is completed. This 
violation of the sitting player is termed as ‘early kho’.

	 5.	A chaser while chasing is not allowed to change 
the direction, but they can change the direction in 
rectangles known as free zones which are outside the 
poles.

	 6.	 If a chaser touches the runner, the runner is given 
out.

	 7.	The match consists of two innings. Each team is given 
nine minutes for chasing (attack) and nine minutes 
for running (defend).

	 8.	The running team is divided into three groups consisting 
of three players in each group. First group enters with 
the starting whistle and the second group enters 
when the players of first group are out and the game 
continues.

	 9.	A runner is also declared out if any part of his body 
touches outside the playing area or moves out of the 
playing area while defending himself.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   191 31-07-2020   15:27:50



192 Health and Physical Education - XI

	 10.	A substitution can be made:
	 a)	 for the runners team before giving the order of the 

runners to officials.
	 b)	 chasers can be substituted during the game any 

time.
	 11.	After getting out, the runner should sit in the lobby 

accorded to his group.
	 12.	 In a match, there are two umpires, one referee, one 

time keeper and one scorer.

Specific exercises of warm-up and conditioning
	 1.	Jogging, and running
	 2.	Breath control exercises 
	 3.	Dodging and Zig-Zag running
	 4.	Bending and stretching exercises
	 5.	Frog jump

Fundamental skills of kho-kho
	 1.	Types of giving Kho

	 a)	 Simple Kho
	 b)	 Beginners Kho
	 c)	 Late Kho

	 2.	Method of chasing
	 a)	 Left hand chase
	 b)	 Right hand chase

	 3.	Method of sitting
 	 a)	 Bullet/Bunch method
	 b)	 Parallel method

	 4.	Method of getting up
	 a) 	Monkey style
	 b)	 Standing up style
	 c)	 Combined style

	 5.	Making the chain
	 a)	 Single chain
	 b)	 Double chain  
	 c)	 Making a ring

	 6.	Dodging
	 7.	Diving

	 a)	 straight dive (front dive)
	 b)	 Sideward dive

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   192 31-07-2020   15:27:50



Team Games 193

Do You Know?
Kho-Kho is now played indoor 
on mats also.

Activity 5.19
Ask your teacher to organise 
an inter-class/inter-group Kho-
Kho competition in the school.

Fig. 5.48: Straight dive in kho-kho

Fig. 5.49: Side dive in kho-kho

Important tournaments 

International
	 1.	Asian Championship—started in 1996 at Calcutta
	 2.	Netaji Subhash International Tournament—first held 

in 1998

National
	 1.	Federation Cup
	 2.	Nehru Gold Cup
	 3.	National Kho-Kho Championship
	 4.	 Inter University Championship

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   193 31-07-2020   15:27:51



194 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 5.20 Volleyball
Mark a Volleyball court on the 
playfield in your school. History of Volleyball

Volleyball is played by two teams on a playing court divided by 
a net. It is one of the most successful, popular, competitive and 
recreational sports in the world. The game of volleyball originally 
called Mintonette was invented in 1895 by William G. Morgon. 
The Volleyball Federation of India (VFI) was formed in the year 
1951. The Federation Internationale de Volleyball (FIVB) was 
founded in 1947. Volleyball was introduced in the Asian Games 
in 1958 for Men and in 1962 for Women. The FIVB Volleyball 
Men’s World Championship started in 1949 and for women in 
1952. Volleyball made its Olympic debut at the 1964 Tokyo 
Games.

Court Dimensions

Fig. 5.50: Volleyball court layout

•• The playing court is rectangular in shape measuring 
18 × 9 m. It is surrounded by a free zone of 5 m from 
the side lines and 6.5 m from the endlines. 

•• The height of the free playing space, above the playing 
area, from the playing surface, shall be 12.5 m.

•• Attack line is 3 m from the axis of the centre line, which 
marks the front zone. 

•• The service zone is 9 m wide and is behind each end 
line. It is laterally limited by two short lines, each 15 cm 
long, drawn 20 cm behind the endline as an extension 
of the side lines.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   194 31-07-2020   15:27:52



Team Games 195

•• All lines of the court are white and 5 cm wide.
•• Full Court diagonal = 20.125 m Activity 5.21

Draw a Volleyball court as  
•• Half Court diagonal = 12.728 m per International Standards  

of FIVB giving all its 
Equipment specifications.

Fig. 5.51: Court and net specifications in volleyball

Ball
•• The ball shall be spherical, made of a flexible 

leather or synthetic leather case with a bladder 
inside, made of rubber. 

•• The colour may be a uniform light colour or a 
combination of colours. 

•• The circumference is 65–67 cm and its weight 
is 260–280 g. 

•• Its inside pressure shall be 0.30 to 0.325 kg/cm2. Fig. 5.52: Volleyball
•• The height of net is 2.43 m for men and 2.24 

m for women measured from the centre of the 
playing court. 

•• The net is 1 m wide and 9.50 to 10 m long, made of 10 
cm square black mesh. 

Preferably adjustable posts that are 2.55 m high are 
placed 1m outside the side lines. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   195 31-07-2020   15:27:53



196 Health and Physical Education - XI

Antenna and Side Bands
•• An antenna is a flexible, 1.80 m long and 10 mm in di-

ameter, made of fibreglass or similar material. 
•• The top 80 cm of each antenna extends above the net and 

is marked with 10 cm stripes of red and white colour.
•• Two white bands 5 cm wide are fastened vertically to 

the net and placed directly above each side line.

How to play volleyball
•• A team consists of 12 players of which one of the players 

other than the Libero, is the team captain.
•• Before the match, the referee carries out a toss in the 

presence of the two team captains to decide upon the first 
service and the sides of the court in the first set. If a 
deciding set is to be played, a new toss will be carried out. 

•• Before the start of each set, the coach has to present 
Fig. 5.53: Antenna and side the starting line-up of six players of the team on a 

bands line-up sheet. The team’s starting line-up indicates the 
rotational order of the players on the court. This order 
must be maintained throughout the set.

Net

4 3 2

5 6 1

Court positions and rotation direction

Fig. 5.54: Player positions and rotation direction of players

•• At the moment the ball is hit by the server, each team 
must be positioned within its own court, in the rotational 
order (except the server). The three players along the 
net are front-row players and occupy positions as— 
4 (front-left), 3 (front-centre) and 2 (front-right); the 
other three are back-row players occupying positions 5 
(back-left), 6 (back-centre) and 1 (back-right).

•• Rotational order is determined by the team’s starting 
line-up and controlled with the service order and players’ 
positions throughout the set. When the receiving team 
gains the right to serve, its players rotate one position 
clockwise—the player in position 2 rotates to position 1 
to serve, the player in position 1 rotates to position 6, 
etc. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   196 31-07-2020   15:27:53



Team Games 197

•• Each team is entitled to a maximum of three hits (in 
addition to blocking), for returning the ball.

•• A player cannot hit the ball two times consecutively.
•• A team scores a point by successfully landing the ball 

on the opponent’s court or when the opponent team 
commits a fault or receives a penalty.

•• A rally is the sequence of playing actions from the 
moment of the service hit by the server until the ball is 
out of play.

•• If the serving team wins a rally, it scores a point and 
continues to serve.

•• If the receiving team wins a rally, it scores a point and 
it must serve next.

•• Each team may request a maximum of two time outs of 
30 seconds each and six substitutions per set.

•• A player of the starting line-up may leave the game, but 
only once in a set. The player may re-enter, but only 
once in a set, and only to the previous position in the 
line-up.

•• All intervals between the sets are of three minutes.
•• To win a set: A set (except the deciding 5th set) is won 

by the team which first scores 25 points with a minimum 
lead of two points.

•• In the case of a 24-24 tie, play is continued until a two-
point lead is achieved (26-24; 27-25; etc.). 

•• To win the match: The match is won by the team that 
wins three sets.

•• In the case of a 2-2 tie, the deciding 5th set is played to 
15 points with a minimum lead of 2 points.

•• Each team has the right to designate from the list of 
players up to two specialist defensive players—liberos. 

•• The libero on court is the Acting Libero. If there is 
another libero, than that person is the second Libero 
for the team. Only one libero may be on court at any 
time. 

•• The libero player(s) must wear a uniform which has a 
different dominant colour from the colour of the rest of 
the team. 

•• The libero is allowed to replace any player in a back row 
position. The player is restricted to perform as a back row 
player and is not allowed to complete an attack hit from 
anywhere (including playing court and free zone), if at the 
moment of the contact, the ball is entirely higher than the 
top of the net. 

•• They may not serve, block or attempt to block. 
•• Libero replacements are not counted as substitutions. 
•• They are unlimited but there must be a completed rally 

between two libero replacements.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   197 31-07-2020   15:27:53



198 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fundamental Skills

Fig. 5.55: Under arm pass
Fig. 5.56: Over hand serves or tennis service

	 1.	The Service
	 (a)	 Tennis Service
	 (b)	 Jump and Serve
	 (c)	 Floating service 

	 2.	The Pass
	 (a)	 Under arm pass
	 (b)	 Over head pass
	 (c)	 Forward dive and pass
	 (d)	 One arm pass with side rolling

Fig. 5.57: Overhead pass or 
volley pass 	 3.	The Set-up

	 (a)	 Overhead or Volley Pass
	 4.	The Attack

	 (a)	 Smash or Spike

Fig. 5.58: The attack

	 5.	The Block
	 (a)	 Single block 
	 (b)	 Double block

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   198 31-07-2020   15:27:55



Team Games 199

Activity 5.22
Practice Tennis Service in 
Volleyball and the Physical 
Education Teacher will rectifies 
your mistakes.

Fig. 5.59: The block

	 6.	Tennis Service
	 (a)	 The ball is tossed with fingers, left foot forward 

with weight transferred simultaneously.  
	 (b)	 The Arm is stretched in order to accelerate the 

ball. 
	 (c)	 The Wrist is kept rigid with flat hand keeping the 

forearm and shoulder relaxed. 
	 (d)	 Hip is rotated to move back, shoulder, elbow and 

hand. 
	 (e)	 Arm is quickly accelerated towards the ball, to hit 

it with base of the palm.
	 (f)	 The hitting arm and the body moves forward 

stepping with the rear foot.

Fig. 5.60: Jump serve

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   199 31-07-2020   15:27:56



200 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fig. 5.61: Under arm pass

	 7.	The pass
	 (a)	 Under arm pass: This skill is used when the ball 

is below your forehead to receive a striking ball or 
dropped ball, etc.

	 (b)	 Overhead pass: This skill is used when the ball 
is high, above the player’s shoulders/head and 
generally used to receive the service to set a ball 
or receiving a loose crossed ball.

	 (c)	 The set-up: Set-up skill is generally a second 
contact with the ball in order to set up a spike for 
another player. This skill is used to spike a ball or 
drop the ball into the opponent’s court.

Fig. 5.62: Overhead pass (Left), set-up (Right)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   200 31-07-2020   15:27:57



Team Games 201

	 (d)	 The Serve: It is used to put the ball into play, to 
start the volley and this skill is solely executed Activity 5.23

Play a Volleyball match between 
by one player. It is further classified into mainly two teams of your class. Use 
three parts. libero, substitutions and time 

	 (i)	 Tennis Service outs as per rules.
	 (ii)	 Jump Service
	 (iii)	 Floating Service

Fig. 5.63: Floating service

	 (e)	 The Attack: In this skill, a player attempts to hit 
the ball from over the net towards the opponent 
court with the aim to score a point. It is executed 
from the front zone as well as the back zone.

	 (f)	 The Block: In this skill, a player attempts to stop 
the opposite team from hitting the ball into his 
or her court. By using block technique, a player 
stops the opposite team from scoring a point. 

Awards in Volleyball
To motivate the extraordinary achievements of the players 
and Coaches, the Government of India honours players with 
different awards along with cash prizes and certificates. 

Tom Joseph was the recipient of Arjuna Award in 2014.
G.E. Sridharan was honoured with Dronacharya Award 

for his excellent contribution as a Coach in the year 2007.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   201 31-07-2020   15:27:58



Assessment

Basketball
	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Explain the reason behind invention of Basketball by  

Dr. Neismith.
	 2.	 What are the reasons of basketball’s development at such a 

fast pace?
	 3.	 Discuss the functional rules of basketball.
	 4.	 Explain the four fouls in basketball.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 What is the full form of FIBA?
	 2.	 Who is known as the father of basketball?
	 3.	 What is the full form of BFI?
	 4.	 When was the first set of basketball rules framed?
	 5.	 What is the height of basketball ring from the floor?
	 6.	 What is the weight of the basketball?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 The first national basketball championship was held in 

_______________________ under IOC.
	 2.	 Basketball become a regular part of Olympics officially in the 

year of ________________________.
	 3.	 Basketball game is divided into _____________ quarters.
	 4.	 Circumference of a basketball is ___________________.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 The first national championship under BFI was conducted 

in 1951.
	 2.	 Three seconds rule is related to violation.
	 3.	 The boundary lines are a part of playing area in Basketball.

Cricket
	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Write down the international and Indian history of cricket.
	 2.	 Explain the 11 ways through which a batsman can be given 

‘out’ in the game of cricket.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   202 31-07-2020   15:27:58



Team Games 203

	 3.	 Elaborate the different types of bowling in cricket.
	 4.	 Explain the different types of batting in cricket.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 When and where was the BCCI framed?
	 2.	 What is the old and new full form of ICC?
	 3.	 What is T20?
	 4.	 What is a Wide Ball?
	 5.	 Who was the recipient of Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award in 

2018?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 Cricket is a game played with a ________ and __________ on a 

large field, known as a ___________.
	 2.	 First Indian batsman who scored century in Test Match was 

__________.
	 3.	 First Indian batsman who scored century in One day match is 

_________.
	 4.	 The colour of cricket ball should be _________ in night test 

matches.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 There are two types of crease.
	 2.	 The height of stumps is 28 inches.
	 3.	 A ‘Bye’ run is scored when a batsman is trying to hit the ball 

but could not hit it and is miss-field by the fielder or wicket 
keeper.

	 4.	 A batsman is not out if he willingly obstructs the opposition by 
word or action.

Football

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Explain the world history of Football.
	 2.	 Draw a labelled football ground.
	 3.	 Explain any five laws of football.
	 4.	 What are the players’ equipment in football?
	 5.	 List the types of kicks in football and explain any two.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   203 31-07-2020   15:27:58



204 Health and Physical Edcation - XI

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 When was the first Football Association formed?
	 2.	 Tsu-Chu was played in which country?
	 3.	 What is FIFA?
	 4.	 When was AIFF formed?
	 5.	 What are the dimensions of a football field for international 

competitions?
	 6.	 List the criteria as per FIFA for the football to be used.
	 7.	 What is the difference between free kick, indirect free kick and 

penalty kick?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 The game of football is also known as ___________ in the world.
	 2.	 The first known/oldest football tournament is _____________.
	 3.	 India holds the record of organising  _________ cup as second 

oldest tournament in the world.
	 4.	 Less than ___________ players cannot be allowed for a team to 

play in tournament.
	 5.	 Two yellow cards are equal to ____________ which means 

sending off offence.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 The Throw-In is a method of restarting play.
	 2.	 The measurement of a goal area is 5.5m × 19m.
	 3.	 A goal can be scored directly from the indirect free kick.
	 4.	 A direct free kick, kicked in own goal is awarded as corner to 

opponent.
	 5.	 Unsporting behaviour is a questionable offence.
	 6.	 A direct goal can be scored from the corner kick but only 

against the opposing team.
	 7.	 A flag post should not be less than 1.5m (5 feet).

Handball

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Write down the History of Handball.
	 2.	 Draw a labelled handball playfield.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   204 31-07-2020   15:27:58



Team Games 205

	 3.	 Explain the functional rules of Handball.
	 4.	 Differentiate between the 6 m Goal Area Line and 9 m free 

throw line.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 What is the full form of IHF?
	 2.	 When and where was the IHF framed?
	 3.	 How many players and substitutes are there in a Handball 

team?
	 4.	 Write down the names of the current Indian Handball team 

members?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 The first national handball championship was held in 

_______________.
	 2.	 Handball became a regular part of Olympics officially in the 

year of ______________ .
	 3.	 Time out is related to _____________ quarters of playing time.
	 4.	 Panalty line is _________________ away from the Goal Post.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 The first World Championship under IHF was conducted in 

1954.
	 2.	 3 seconds rule is related to violation.
	 3.	 The length of a Handball ground is 42 m.

Hockey

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Who founded the International Hockey Federation and in 

which year?
	 2.	 In which year was hockey introduced in the Olympic Games.
	 3.	 Draw a labelled diagram of hockey field playground.
	 4.	 Explain in detail the new match time format in field hockey.
	 5.	 Explain the new format of shootout in field hockey.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   205 31-07-2020   15:27:58



206 Health and Physical Edcation - XI

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 What is the full form of FIH?
	 2.	 What is the weight of a field hockey ball?
	 3.	 What should be the shape of the head of a hockey stick?
	 4.	 How many umpires are there in field hockey?
	 5.	 How many types of cards can be issued by the umpire in field 

hockey? What is the effect of yellow card on a player?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 The height of the goal post in field hockey is ____________.
	 2.	 The player is suspended for ____________ minutes if he gets a 

green card.
	 3.	 National championship for field hockey is ____________.
	 4.	 The duration of a field hockey match is ____________.
	 5.	 The international field hockey match played is ____________ 

quarters of ____________ minutes.
	 6.	 Indian men’s Hockey team won _______________ gold medals in 

Olympic Games.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 A player is suspended for 5 minutes when the umpire shows 

yellow card to the player.
	 2.	 The height of the backboard in goal post is 480 mm.
	 3.	 The height of the flag post is 2.00 m.
	 4.	 Field hockey was first introduced in 1900 Olympic Games.

Kabaddi

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Briefly explain the origin of Kabaddi as a game in India.
	 2.	 Describe any three rules of giving raid.
	 3.	 What are the situations in which the raider can be given ‘out’?
	 4.	 How does an anti-raider team get points?
	 5.	 How can a bonus point be scored?

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   206 31-07-2020   15:27:58



Team Games 207

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 Name the place from where Kabaddi has originated?
	 2.	 When did Kabaddi receive international exposure?
	 3.	 How many players play in a Kabaddi match?
	 4.	 What is ‘lona’?
	 5.	 What is the duration of time out in a Kabaddi match?
	 6.	 Enlist some defensive fundamental techniques mostly used in 

Kabaddi.
	 7.	 What does green card indicate in Kabaddi?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 The game of Kabaddi has been developed and played since the 

epic age of ____________.
	 2.	 The surface for playing Kabaddi game in present day is 

____________.
	 3.	 A raider is allowed to chant only____________.
	 4.	 A raider cannot be held by his ____________ or ____________.
	 5.	 When all the members of a team are made out by the opponents, 

it is called ____________.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 To warn a player, the umpire shows green card.
	 2.	 Temporary suspension of 4 minutes is given by yellow card.
	 3.	 Red card is given to a player for suspension from the match. 
	 4.	 A raider gets 1 point for crossing the bonus line only when 

there are minimum 6 defending players.
	 5.	 In the case of tie match in knock-out tournament, five raids 

are allowed from both the teams.

Kho-Kho

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Explain the history of Kho-Kho.
	 2.	 Draw a Kho-Kho court according to the specifications.
	 3.	 Describe some fundamental skills of Kho-Kho.
	 4.	 Write about the important national and international 

tournaments organised in Kho-Kho. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   207 31-07-2020   15:27:58



208 Health and Physical Edcation - XI

	 5.	 Explain the general rules and regulations of Kho-Kho.
	 6.	 Explain the dimensions of the Kho-Kho ground for women.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 Define ‘chasers’.
	 2.	 State the height of the pole in Kho-Kho.
	 3.	 Can a runner touch the sitting chaser?
	 4.	 Is a player considered out, if his both feet are outside the 

playing court?
	 5.	 Name the basic techniques of Kho-Kho.
	 6.	 Who was the first Kho-Kho player to get the Arjuna Award?
	 7.	 Can the chasers finish their turn before the allotted time?
	 8.	 Will the defenders have to come again, if they are all out before 

the time?
	 9.	 What are the dimensions of each square for men’s playfield?
	 10.	 How many points are awarded if a runner is out?
	 11.	 How many officials are required in a Kho-Kho match?
	 12.	 Name some of the famous players of Kho-Kho.
	 13.	 How many players are there in a Kho-Kho team?
	 14.	 How many innings are there in a Kho-Kho match?
	 15.	 What is the total duration of a Kho-Kho match?
	 16.	 Who had given the modern form to Kho-Kho?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 For the first time, the rules of Kho-Kho were framed in the year 

______________.
	 2.	 The modern frame of the game is credited to ______________.
	 3.	 The governing body of Kho-Kho in India is ______________.
	 4.	 Asian championship started in ______________.
	 5.	 Chaser in Kho-Kho is also called ______________.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 Hanuman Vyayam Prasarak Mandal has given the modern 

form of Kho-Kho.
	 2.	 Kho-Kho federation of India was established in 1940.
	 3.	 Eleven players play in a Kho-Kho game.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   208 31-07-2020   15:27:58



Team Games 209

	 4.	 Running team is divided into three groups consisting three 
players each.

	 5.	 The Kho-Kho game develops agility.

Volleyball

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Explain the international and Indian history of Volleyball game.
	 2.	 Explain about ‘libero’ in Volleyball.
	 3.	 Write down the scoring system in Volleyball.
	 4.	 Explain about the fundamental skills of Volleyball.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 When was the Volleyball Federation of India (VFI) formed?
	 2.	 When was the Federation Internationale de Volleyball (FIVB) 

founded?
	 3.	 List the equipment used in Volleyball.
	 4.	 Write down the fundamental skills of Volleyball.
	 5.	 Name the types of services in Volleyball.
	 6.	 What is ‘attack’ in Volleyball?
	 7.	 Who was the recipient of the Arjuna award in 2014 in 

Volleyball?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 In Volleyball, the height of the free space above the playing 

area from the playing surface shall be _______ m.
	 2.	 Diagonal measurement of full Volleyball court shall be ______ m.
	 3.	 A team may request a maximum of ________ substitutions per set.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 Volleyball was introduced in 1964, Tokyo Olympic Games. 
	 2.	 Federation Internationale de Volleyball (FIVB) was formed in 

1949.
	 3.	 Libero cannot serve, block or attempt to block.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-5.indd   209 31-07-2020   15:27:58



Yoga and its 
Relevance in the 

Modern Times 6
Yoga is a science of living. It needs to be incorporated in 
daily life. It works on physical, mental, emotional, social and 
spiritual levels of human beings. Yoga helps in improving the 
quality of life. For example, yoga teaches us how to think, 
behave and grow to become a fully mature person. Yoga 
brings harmony between body and mind. It is an art and 
science for healthy living.

The word ‘yoga’ is derived from the Sanskrit word ‘yuj’ 
meaning to join, to yoke, and to unite. It is an ancient system 
of self-development and natural process of evolution of 
human beings. 

Now a days, the word yoga has a strong impact on human 
Fig. 6.1: Yoga mudra life. The ultimate purpose of yoga is the attainment of human 

growth. Yoga has been established as a new field in education 
system. It helps in achieving higher state of consciousness 
on the evolution of an individual’s development. It is the 
discipline of body and mind.

Children face too much stress in their surroundings, 
such as, school, home, playground, etc. Due to this stress 
they have many problems such as physical, mental and 
emotional. When these health hazards create problems for 
long, they lead to psychosomatic diseases and social unrest. 
All these problems originate due to imbalance between our 
physical, mental and spiritual levels. They are closely related 
to materialistic way of life. Attachment and endless ambitions 
are the two primary causes of our sufferings.

According to the Upanishads, yoga is a higher state of 
consciousness and a process to ease the mind and manifest 
the wisdom. Yoga establishes the activities of a healthy state 
of body, mind and harmonious interpersonal relationships. 
Due to unhealthy lifestyle, the overall growth of child gets 
ceased and it leads to ill health. Yoga works on various 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   210 31-07-2020   15:28:38



##6##
Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 211

aspects of human body and mind and helps to improve self-
awareness, self-control, relaxation, concentration, flexibility 
and coordination.

History and Development of Yoga
Yoga has a very long history and in terms of legacy it is as old 
as human civilisation. Its history is also linked with the vedas 
and upanishads.

Yoga had a special place during the Indus Valley 
Civilisation (2000 B.C). The stone seals restored from the 
sites of the Indus Valley Civilisation depict the practice of 
Yoga during old days.

The word yoga is frequently referred in all the four Vedas 
Rigveda, Yujurveda, Samveda and Atharvaveda.

Moksha is the ultimate goal of yoga, which is well 
explained in the Upanishads. The teaching of Buddha (Arya 
Asthangic Marga) and Jainism (five great vows) are the two 
pillars of yoga tradition. These two had greatly contributed to 
the development of yoga.

The epics: Ramayana and Mahabharata have numerous 
references about yoga. The Bhagavad Gita is considered as a 
classical treatise on yoga.

There is also description of Yoga in Shad Darshans. Fig. 6.2: Vedas
Maharishi Sage Patanjali had codified the comprehensive 

system of Yoga around second century B.C. Patanjali gave 
the concept of eight limbs of yoga called as Ashtang Yoga.

Nath culture also played an important role in the 
development of the Hatha Yoga Tradition. Hatha Yoga deals 
with day-to-day health related problems and emphasised on 
the human body and mind. The famous scriptures of Hatha 
Yoga are Hatha Yoga Pradeepika, Gheranda Samhita, Hatha 
Ratnavali, Shiva Samhita, Siddha Siddhanta Paddhati, 
etc. Nineteenth century gurus, such as, Ramakrishna 
Parmahansa, Swami Vivekananda, Maharishi Aurobindo and 
Ramana Maharishi preached yoga to the masses.

Schools of Yoga
The basic goal of yoga is thus to attain bliss and also to provide 
true knowledge about human beings. In order to attain the 
above goals, various thoughts, ideas and opinions were given by 
seers which are known as the schools of yoga. These are—

Karma Yoga (Path of Action)
Karma Yoga is one of the main streams of yoga. Karma 
literally means action. The aim of Karma Yoga is attaining 
union with the higher-self by harmonising the actions. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   211 31-07-2020   15:28:39



212 Health and Physical Education - XI

Karma Yoga inspires the person to perform the work to the 
best of their abilities without any attachment or expectation 
of the results. The concept of Karma Yoga and its practice 
are mentioned in the Bhagavad Gita. This stream of yoga 
emphasises the following.

•• Karma as duty: Karma Yoga lays emphasis on doing 
karma or action as duty. When an act is performed 
dutifully with total involvement, it leads to joy and 
happiness.  

•• Karma Sukaushalam: Karma Yoga states that 
yoga means a skilled action. Actions should be done 
efficiently. Actions performed with full concentration 
and detachment brings efficiency.

Fig. 6.3: Swami Vivekanand •• Nishkama Karma: Nishkama Karma means action 
which is free from personal motives and is performed as 
a duty. This attribute emphasises that actions should 
be performed without any expectations of the results.

Jnana Yoga (Path of Knowledge)
•• Jnana Yoga is related to the knowledge of ‘self’, the world 

and realisation of ultimate reality or truth. Jnana Yoga, 
thus is a path of philosophy that uses intellect and helps 
to gain knowledge and keeps the person away from avidya.

•• Avidya (ignorance) is the main cause of pain, misery 
and sufferings in life. A person because of avidya 
(ignorance) identifies himself with various names, and 
forms such as body, mind, race and nationality, etc., 
and remains in pursuit of worldly possessions. This 
knowledge develops discriminating knowledge (Viveka) 
that will help to remove the veil of avidya, enables 
the one to discriminate between reality and unreality 
(appearance) and guides towards the path of real 
happiness and bliss.

•• The main aim of the Jnana Yoga, thus is to overcome 
the avidya (ignorance) so that one can understand 
and distinguish between the real and unreal. The 
three important stages of Jnana Yoga are shravan 
(adequate hearing), Manana (constant remembrance) 
and Nidhidhyasana (contemplation or meditation).

Raja Yoga (Path of Psychic Control)
•• The science of Raja Yoga proposes a practical and 

scientific method of reaching the truth. Raja Yoga, 
the path of psychic control is a systematic process of 
culturing the mind.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   212 13-08-2020   15:42:11



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 213

•• It is aimed to develop dormant potential of the 
personality. 

•• Raja Yoga discusses the way of controlling and 
modification of mind (chittavrittis). 

•• Abhyasa (continuous practice) and viaragya 
(detachment) are also emphasised in Raja Yoga for the 
control of chittavrittis and spiritual practices. 

•• Raja Yoga is based on Ashtanga Yoga (eight limbed 
Yoga) as propounded by Maharishi Patanjali.

•• All the eight limbs of yoga work on various levels of 
human personality.

Bhakti yoga (Path of Devotion)
•• Bhakti Yoga (path of devotion) is a systematic method 

of engaging the mind in the practice of divine love. 
Bhakti means selfless and unconditional love to god. 
This mode of worship consists of unending and loving 
remembrance of God. The person merges himself/
herself with the God.

•• The attitude of love and devotion has the softening 
effect on emotions and calms down the mind. There 
are nine forms of Bhakti Yoga mentioned in ancient 
text. These are Shravan, Kirtan, Smaran, Padsevan, 
Archana, Vandana, Dasya, Sakhya, Atmanivedan.

Guidelines for Yoga Practice
The guiding principles given below should be followed by the 
Sadhakas performing the yogic practices.

Before the yogic practice
•• Shauch means cleanliness, an important pre-requisite 

for Yogic practice.
•• It includes the cleanliness of surroundings, body and 

mind.
•• Yogic practices should be performed in a calm and 

quite atmosphere with a relaxed body and mind.  
•• Yogic practices should be performed on an empty 

stomach.
•• Bladder and bowels should be emptied and evacuated 

before starting yogic practice.
•• Yogic practice should not be performed on uneven 

surface.
•• A mattress, durry or folded blanket should be used.
•• Light and comfortable cotton clothes are preferred to 

facilitate easy movements of the body. 
•• These practices should not be performed in a state of 

exhaustion, illness or in a hurry.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   213 13-08-2020   15:41:14



214 Health and Physical Education - XI

During the practice
•• Practice session should start with prayer as it creates 

conducive environment and thereby relaxes the mind.
•• Perform the practice slowly with body, breathe 

awareness along with relaxation.
•• Breathing should always be done through nostrils 

unless instructed otherwise.
•• Observe your body movements, do not strain too much. 

Practice as per your own capacity.
•• Regular practice is very essential for good results.
•• There are contra-indications/limitations for each 

Asana, Pranayama, Kriya and Bandha. Such contra-
indications should always be kept in mind. In case of 
chronic diseases or cardiac problems, doctor and yoga 
therapist should be consulted prior to the performance 
of yogic exercises.

•• During pregnancy and menstruation, yoga expert 
should be consulted prior to yogic practice.

After the practice
•• Bath may be taken only after 15 to 30 minutes of the 

yoga practice.
•• Light food may be taken only after 15 to 30 minutes of 

the yoga practice.
•• After each practice session, shavasana should be 

practised as per need. 
•• Yoga session should end with meditation followed by 

deep silence and then Shanti Path.

Yogic Principles and Practices For 
Wellness

•• Wellness is a state of being healthy. Yoga promotes 
wellness by bringing harmony between various 
dimensions of wellnesss namely physical, emotional 
(neutral), intellectual, social, environmental and 
spiritual health.

•• Yoga is an art and science of healthy living. It is a 
spiritual discipline based on an extremely subtle 
science, which focuses on bringing harmony between 
body and mind. 

•• For wellness, we have to maintain balance among 
various aspects of life like physical, mental, social and 
spiritual.

•• Adolescence is the time when an individual undergoes 
tremendous physical, emotional and psychological 
changes. This brings stress.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   214 31-07-2020   15:28:39



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 215

•• Yoga is the proven remedy for all the causes of stress 
and strain among the adolescence.

•• Regular practice of yoga amongst the students leads 
to improved concentration, reduced blood pressure, 
better grades in the academics, improved interpersonal 
relationships, more confidence, better sleep, calmness, 
sharper brains, relief from headache if any and 
decreased absenteeism and aridness.

•• The following are few of the mechanisms through which 
yoga works for wellness.
▪▪ Shodhana Kriyas cleanse the accumulated toxins 

through various shuddikriyas and sukshmavyayama 
(simple movements for all body parts).

▪▪ Adoption of a yogic lifestyle with proper nourishing 
diet creates positive antioxidant enhancement thus, 
neutralising the free radicals.

▪▪ Yogasana steadies the entire body through different 
physical postures. Physical balance and a sense 
of ease with oneself enhance mental/emotional 
balance and enable all the physiological processes 
to occur in a healthy manner.

▪▪ Pranayama helps to improve control over autonomic 
respiratory mechanisms, through breathing 
patterns that generate energy and enhance 
emotional stability.

▪▪ Dharana helps to focus the mind positively on the 
activities being done, enhances energy flow and 
results in healthy blood circulation to the different 
body parts and internal organs.

▪▪ Dhyana creates a calm internal environment 
through contemplative practices. Mental balance 
produces physical balance and vice versa too.

Yoga for Wellness

Shodhanakriya
It is practiced for internal purification. These are followed in 
Hatha Yoga. It helps to clean the accumulated toxins and 
generates a sense of relaxed lightness.

Neti
Neti is a Hathayogic Kriya, which is concerned with the 
cleaning of nasal passage. This practice involves cleaning up 
the throat as well. Neti is a pre-requisite for cleaning up the 
respiratory passages for the proper practice of Pranayama. 
There are two types of Neti. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   215 31-07-2020   15:28:39



216 Health and Physical Education - XI

Jala neti (nasal cleansing with water)
In Jala Neti, water is used for cleansing the nasal passage.
Steps for practising Nasal Neti are—

•• Sit in Kagasana. Keep 1.5 to 2 inches distance between 
the feet. 

•• Lean forward from the lower back.
•• Tilt the head to the opposite side of the nostril whichever 

is more active in breathing at the moment.
•• Insert the nozzle of the pot into the nostril whichever is 

active in breathing at that moment.
•• Slightly open the mouth and breathe through it.

Fig. 6.4: Jala neti •• Keep the body relaxed.
•• Let the water flow in through one nostril and out 

through the other nostril.
•• During the process, eyes should focus on the water 

Do You Know? stream flowing out of the nostril.
An expert can perform Sutra 
Neti together with both nostrils. •• After finishing half of the water, the put down the pot 

and clear the nose. Repeat with the other nostril.
•• Clear the nose.
•• Clean the nose through the practice of Mukha Dhauti 

(forceful exhalation from nose and passive inhalation 
from mouth).

Dos and Don’ts
•• During the practice of Jala Neti, breathing should be 

done from mouth.
•• Ideal time to perform is before sunrise, lukewarm salted 

water is to be used for this kriya.
•• Head should not be tilted much during the practice of 

Jala Neti.
•• Do not blow the nose too hard after the practice as the 

remaining water may be pushed to the ears.

Fig. 6.5: Sutra neti Benefits
•• This exercise is excellent for the cases of chronic 

headache, insomnia, drowsiness and improves eyesight.
•• The diseases peculiar to the nose, and also coughs are 

effectively cured.
•• Effective for stress and anxiety.

Sutra neti (nasal cleansing with thread)
According to yogic text, insert a soft thread through the nose 
to the length of one hand span so that it comes out of the 
mouth. This is called Sutra Neti.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   216 31-07-2020   15:28:40



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 217

Stages for Practice
•• Sit in Kagasana. 
•• Tilt the head slightly back and insert the sutra (thread 

or rubber catheter) into one of the nostrils, whichever 
is more active in breathing at the moment. Gently push 
it through the nostril using both hands.

•• When the thread (sutra) has come through to the back 
of the throat, put the index and middle fingers into 
the mouth; catch hold of the sūtra; and draw it out 
carefully through the mouth. Leave a few inches of the 
thread hanging out of the nose.

•• Now, slowly and gently pull the thread forward and 
backward 4–5 times.

•• Slowly take the thread out through mouth and repeat 
the practice through the other nostril.

Dos and Don’ts Do You Know?
•• Insert the thread slowly and breathe continuously. The An expert can perform 300 

thread should be clean. strokes of Kapalbhati.
•• This practice should be performed under guidance.
•• Do not try Sutra Neti unless Jala Neti is perfected.
•• Do not apply force while inserting the thread.
•• Do not rub the Sutra too fast during practice.

Benefits
•• Sutra Neti stimulates the nerves and improves the 

function of eyes, tear ducts and olfactory zone in the 
brain (nasal zone).

•• It massages the membranes and sinus glands and 
strengthens them. 

•• It increases resistance to invasion by viruses.
•• It is very effective in ENT problems.

Fig. 6.6: Kapalbhati
Kapalbhati
Kapala means skull (head) and Bhati means to shine. 
Because this practice makes the skull (head) shine, therefore 
it is called Kapalbhati.

In other words, it rejuvenates the skull (head) and the 
mental functions.

Stages for Practice
•• Sit in a meditative posture, eyes closed and the whole 

body relaxed.
•• Inhale deeply through both nostrils expanding the 

abdomen and exhale with a forceful contraction of the 
abdominal muscles.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   217 31-07-2020   15:28:41



218 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? •• The breathing must be of the ‘bellows’ type and perform 
An expert practitioner 30–40 strokes in one round. Start from 10 strokes.
can perform more than 20 •• At the end of practice, deep exhale and relax.
movements in one time.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Stroke should be in rhythmic manner.
•• Active exhalation and passive inhalation.
•• Don’t strain the facial muscles during the practice.
•• Avoid performing the practice in the case of high blood 

pressure, heart diseases and gastric ulcers.

Benefits
•• It purifies the frontal air sinuses and stimulates the brain. 
•• Massages abdominal organs; and improves digestion.
•• It increases the capacity of lungs.
•• It is useful in treating cold, rhinitis (inflammation of the 

mucus membrane of the nose), sinusitis and bronchial 
infections.

Agnisara
Agnisāra is also known as Vahnisara. Vahni and Agni are 
synonymous words meaning fire and ‘Sāra’ means essence. 
According to Hatha yogic tradition, the essence of fire is located 
in the navel region. During this kriya, there is a movement in 
navel region. It can be performed in sitting or standing position.

Fig. 6.7: Agnisara Stages for Practice
•• Stand erect with the feet apart at shoulder level.
•• Bend the knee and body at an angle of 60o. Place the 

hands on thighs above the knees.
•• Exhale completely then contract and expand the 

abdominal muscles rapidly for as long as comfortable 
while retaining the breath outside.

•• Then slowly breathe in. Repeat the practice 2–3 times.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Stomach should be empty while performing Agnisara.
•• The movement should be in rhythmic manner.
•• Don’t hold the breath beyond capacity.
•• Avoid performing this practice in case of high blood 

pressure.

Benefits
•• It gives gentle massages to abdominal organs, and 

improves digestion. 
•• It reduces fat and strengthens the abdominal muscles.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   218 31-07-2020   15:28:42



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 219

•• It stimulates the relevant nerves and harmonises all 
the abdominal conditions of the bowel, liver, kidney, Do You Know?

Surya namaskara can be 
spleen, pancreas and digestion, allowing optimum performed with mantra.
assimilation of nutrients. 

Surya Namaskara or Sun Salutation Activity 6.1
Surya or the sun is the primal cause of everything. It gives •• Prepare a model of Surya 
energy to all the living beings on the earth. Surya namaskara Namaskara.
is the set of seven asanas in twelve steps. Every morning •• Conduct competition 
performing it with breathing techniques, energises the whole between class.
body and mind.

Technique
Starting position—stand erect with feet together and arms by 
the side of the thighs; balance the body equally on both the 
feet (samasthiti).

1 2 3 4

Fig. 6.8: 1. Namaskarasana 2. Hastottanasana 3. Padhastasana 4. Ashwasanchalanasana

	 1.	Namaskarasana: Inhale, bring the arms up and 
with exhalation join the palm together in Namaskara 
mudra in front of the chest.

	 2.	Hastottanasana: Inhale, raise both the arms up; 
stretch the body as much as possible and bend 
backwards without bending the knees.

	 3.	Padhastasana: Exhale, bend forward from the lower 
back keeping the spine straight. Place the hands 
on the ground by side of the feet. Try to touch the 
forehead to the leg without bending the knees.

	 4.	Ashwasanchalanasana: Inhale, place the right leg 
back as far as possible and touch the knee of right 
foot on the ground. Bend the left leg from the knee 
and keep the knee and foot at right angle; arching the 
spine back and look up between the eyebrows centre.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   219 31-07-2020   15:28:42



220 Health and Physical Education - XI

	 5.	Parvatasana: Stretch the left foot backward by the 
side of right foot, lower your head and move the 
buttocks upwards. Keep the arms and legs straight 
and heels on the floor.

	 6.	Ashtanga Namaskarasana: Lower the knees, chest 
and chain to the floor. Keep the hips slightly up. The 
toes, knees, chest, hands and chin should be touching 
the floor.

5 6

Fig. 6.9: 5. Parvatasana, 6. Ashtanga namaskarasana

	 7.	Bhujangasana: Lower the hips, inhale, then raise 
the head and push the chest up. Raise the upper 
body upto the navel. Keep the palms on the ground.

	 8.	Parvatasana: Exhale, lift the hips up and lower the 
head and chest downwards in an inverted ‘V’ posture. 
Keep the head between the arms and feet on the ground.

7 8

Fig. 6.10: 7. Bhujangasana, 8. Parvatasana

	 9.	Ashwasanchalanasana: Inhale, bend the right 
leg and bring it forward. Keep the right foot on the 
ground between the arms and left leg backward with 
the knee touching the ground. Arch the spine back, 
look up between the eyebrows centre.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   220 31-07-2020   15:28:43



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 221

	 10.	Padhastasana: Exhale, bring the left leg forward 
and place the left foot beside the right foot. Place the 
hands on the ground by side of the feet. Try to touch 
the forehead to the knees without bending the knees.

	 11.	Hastottanasana: Inhale, raise both the arms up; 
stretch the body as much as possible and bend 
backwards without bending the knees.

	 12.	Namaskarasana: Exhale, come back to the original 
position. Slowly bring the arms down and join the 
palms together in front of the chest in namaskara 
mudra.

9 10 11 12

Fig. 6.11: 9. Ashwasanchalanasana, 10. Padhastasana, 11. Hastottanasana, 12. Namaskarasana

This is one round of Surya namaskara. Repeat the same 
process of twelve steps by using the other leg in fourth 
position (Ashwasanchalanasana).

Dos and Don’ts
•• Perform while maintaining good physical balance.
•• Perform every step with breathing pattern.
•• Avoid this in case of high blood pressure, fever, slipped 

disc and hernia.
•• Do not practise beyond one’s capacity.

Benefits
•• Stimulates and balances all the systems of the body.
•• Increases concentration and calmness.
•• Helps in curing constipation.
•• Improves blood circulation all over the body, and 

reduces fat.
•• Helps in removing carbon dioxide from the lungs 

replacing with fresh oxygen and improves brain function 
by bringing oxygenated air by blood to the brain.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   221 31-07-2020   15:28:44



222 Health and Physical Edcation - XI

Activity 6.2 Yogasana
Teacher can conduct a We all know that asanas are beneficial for our physical and 
competition between students mental development. Some of the asanas are explained here:
in classroom and measure the 
holding time of yogasana. Tadasana

Tadasana is named after the Tada (Palm tree) as in the final 
posture, the body remains erect in standing position like a 
palm tree.

Stages for Practice
•• Stand with your feet 2 inches apart.
•• Inhale and raise your arms up to shoulder level, 

interlock your fingers and turn the wrist outwards.
•• Raise the heels off the floor.
•• Try to balance on the toes.
•• While exhaling, slowly bring arms down along with the 

heels.
•• Remove the interlock. 
•• Relax for a while in the standing position.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Breath becomes slow and deep.
•• Raise the legs slowly without any jerk.
•• Avoid this practice in case of knee pain and ankle injuries.

Benefits
Fig. 6.12: Tadasana

•• This āsana stretches the muscles and nerves, thereby 
improves functioning of various systems of the body. 

•• The muscles become strong. It gives strength to the 
toes.

•• It is helpful in increasing the height of young growing 
children. It is helpful for the patients of sciatica.

Vrikshasana
Vriksha means tree. The final position of this asana is a 
stand- still position which resembles the shape of a tree, 
hence the name.

Stages for Practice
•• Stand with feet 2 inches apart. Focus on a point in front.
•• Exhale, bend the right leg and place the foot inside the 

left thigh. The heel should be touched to the perineum.
•• Inhale and extend the arms up and join the palms in 

namaskara mudra.
Fig. 6.13: Vrikshasana •• Stay in the position for 10 to 30 seconds and breathe 

normally.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   222 31-07-2020   15:28:45



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 223

•• Exhale and bring the arms and the right foot down. 
Relax and repeat the asana by bending the left leg.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Normal breathing should be continued in the final 

posture.
•• Avoid this practice in case of knee pain and ankle injuries.

Benefits
•• It increases the flexibility of joints of knees and ankles 

and strengthens them.
•• It tones up the leg muscles and rejuvenates the 

ligaments also.
•• It helps to cure rheumatic pain and the problem of 

numbness.
•• it improves concentration.

Padahastasana
Pāda means feet, and hasta means hands. Therefore, 
Pādahastāsana means taking the palms down towards the 
feet.

Stages for Practice
•• Stand straight with feet 2 inches apart.
•• Inhale slowly and raise the arms up.
•• Stretch up the body from the waist.
•• Exhale and bend forward until the trunk is parallel to 

the ground.
•• Exhale, and bend forward until the entire palm rests on 

the ground near to feet. Fig. 6.14: Padahastasana

•• Maintain this final posture for 10–30 seconds.
•• Now inhale, come up slowly to the vertical position and 

stretch the arms above the head.
•• Exhale and slowly return to the starting position in 

reverse order.
•• Relax in the standing posture.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Bend from the lower back while performing  

Padahastasana.
•• Bending should be according to their capacity.	
•• In the final stage, avoid hunch in the back.
•• Avoid performing this asana in case of severe back pain.

Benefits
•• It makes the spine flexible, improves digestion, and 

prevents constipation and menstrual problems.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   223 31-07-2020   15:28:45



224 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? •• It helps to improve blood circulation in the head and 
Bending should always be heart region.
followed by counter-bending. •• It helps to stimulate the glands, i.e., thyroid, endocrine 
Example: Performing back and pituitary gland.
bending after a forward 
bending and vice-versa. Ardha Chakrasana

In Sanskrit language, Ardha means half and Chakra means 
wheel. In this posture, the shape of the body takes the shape 
of half wheel, therefore it is called Ardha-chakrasana. 

Stages for Practice
•• Stand erect on the ground with feet together.
•• Keep your hands by the side. Keep your elbows parallel 

to each other.
•• Now slowly inhale and bend backwards as much as 

possible.
•• Try to maintain the posture with normal breathing and 

without losing the balance.
•• Inhale and slowly come up to the original position. 

Relax in standing position.

Dos and Don’ts
•• While bending backward, eyes should be kept open.
•• Maintain the final position with the normal breath.	

Fig. 6.15: Ardhachakrasana •• Avoid this practice in case of vertigo and high BP.
•• Do not bend knees in the final position.

Activity 6.3 Benefits
Students prepare a record book •• This asana gives relaxation to the neck and back 
and write their physical and 
mental experiences of asanas. muscles, especially of lower back.

•• It improves flexibility of the spine.	
•• It helps to remove fat from 

the waist.
•• It also removes stiffness 

from the hip joints.
•• It improves the breathing 

and lung capacity.

Trikonasana
Trikona means triangle. 
Tri means three and kona 
is an angle. As the asana 
resembles three arms triangle 
made by the trunk and the 
limbs, it has been named as 
Trikonasana.

Fig. 6.16: Trikonasana

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   224 31-07-2020   15:28:46



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 225

Stages for Practice Activity 6.4
•• Stand on your legs 3–4 feet apart. Practice asanas daily for 15 
•• Slowly raise both the arms sideways up to shoulder days. Write your holding time 

level. in final position and analyse the 
•• Turn your right foot towards the right side. Exhale, improvement.

slowly bend to the right side and place the right hand 
just behind the right foot.

•• The left arm is straight up, in line with the right arm.
Turn your head and gaze at the tip of the left hand 
middle finger.

•• Remain in the posture for 10–30 seconds with normal 
breathing.

•• As you inhale, slowly come up. Repeat it from the left 
side.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Bend from the waist.
•• Keep the knees straight in the final position.
•• Avoid bending forward while bending sideways.
•• Avoid this practice in case of severe back pain.	

Benefits
•• Strengthens calf, thigh and waist muscles.
•• Makes the spine flexible, and improves lung capacity.
•• Prevents flat foot, and reduce fat.
•• Kyphosis and Scoliosis patients can also do this 

practice.

Parshvakonasana
Parsva means side or flank and Kona means angle. In the 
final pose of this asana, the body forms a lateral angle, hence 
it is called Parsvakonasana.

Stages for Practice
•• Stand erect.
•• Inhale and spread feet 

approximately 3–4 feet apart. 
Raise the arms sideways at the 
shoulder level.

•• Turn right foot to the right side 
and bend the knee, form a right 
angle with the thigh and calf.

•• Exhale and bend from the waist 
to the right side and bring the 
right arm down, place the right 
palm on the floor by the inner 
side of the right foot. Fig. 6.17: Parshvakonasana

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   225 31-07-2020   15:28:46



226 Health and Physical Education - XI

•• In the final posture, spine must be kept straight and 
the left foot flat on the floor. Hold the posture for 30 
seconds, and breathe normally. 

•• Inhale and come back to the starting position.
•• Repeat it from the other side.

Dos and Don’ts
•• In the final position, the knee of the bend leg should be 

in line with the heel. 	
•• Avoid forward bend in the final posture.
•• Avoid in case of severe back pain.

Benefits
•• It strengthens the heart muscles.
•• It improves digestion.
•• It helps to reduce fat from waist and hips.
•• It increases harmony between the body and mind.

Padmasana
In Sanskrit language, Padma means lotus. This asana is a 
traditional posture. In this asana, the feet look like the shape 
of lotus petals. That is why, it is called as Padmasana.

Fig. 6.18: Padmasana

Stages for Practice
•• Sit on the ground.
•• Fold the right leg and place the right foot above the left 

thigh.
•• Fold the left leg and place it above the right thigh.
•• Place hands on the knees in Jnanamudra.
•• Keep the spine straight. Breathe normally.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   226 31-07-2020   15:28:47



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 227

Dos and Don’ts Activity 6.5
•• Place the foot on the opposite thigh. Students should practise 
•• Both the knees should ideally touch the ground in the Vajrasana after dinner, daily 

final pose. for 15 days and write their 
•• Avoid leaning forward. experiences in the record book. 
•• Avoid this practice in case of knee pain and ankle The teacher will check it.

injuries.

Benefits
•• Padmāsana induces mental calmness and tranquillity. 
•• It tones up the nerves of coccyx and sacral region by 

supplying them with more blood.  
•• It improves the digestive process and helps to relieve 

constipation.
•• It improves the concentration and memory. 
•• It is helpful for people suffering from shortness of 

breath.

Vajrasana
Vajra means adamantine. It is believed that the body becomes 
like adamantine by practising it. This can be considered 
as a meditative posture. While practising it for meditative 
purposes, students should close their eyes at the final stage. 
This is the only posture that can be practised just after 
having meal.

Stages for Practice Fig. 6.19: Vajrasana
•• Sit with legs extended together, hands by the side of the 

body, palm resting on the ground, and fingers pointing 
forward. This is dandasana.

•• Fold the right leg at the knee and place the foot under 
the right buttock. 

•• Similarly folding the left leg, place left foot under the 
left buttock.

•• Place both the heels apart and the big toe touch and 
overlap each other. 

•• Position the buttocks in the space between the heels.
•• Keep the hands on respective knees. Keep the spine 

erect.
•• While returning to the original position, bend a little 

towards right side, take out your left leg and extend it. 
•• Similarly extend your right leg and return to the original 

position. 

Dos and Don’ts
•• Keep the knees and thighs together while sitting in 

Vajrasana.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   227 31-07-2020   15:28:48



228 Health and Physical Education - XI

•• Heels should be outside.
•• Avoid excessive arching of the spine.
•• Avoid this practice in case of ankle injury and knee 

pain.

Benefits
•• This āsana strengthens thigh muscles and calf muscles. 
•• This āsana is good for digestion. 
•• It provides firm base to the spine and keeps the spine 

erect. 
•• It helps to improve concentration.

Bhadrasana
In Sanskrit language, Bhadra means noble. Which is the 
grace in the form of awakening that takes place.

Fig. 6.20: Bhadrasana
Stages for Practice

•• Sit on the ground stretching both the legs together in 
front.

•• Place your hands by the side, with palms resting on the 
ground.

•• Fingers should remain together pointing forward. This 
is dandasana.

•• Fold the legs slowly at knees; and join both the soles 
with each other. 

•• Hold the ankles. 
•• Slowly bring the heels towards perineum.
•• The knees should touch the ground. Head, neck and 

back should be straight.
•• Maintain the final position for 20–30 seconds.
•• Come back in dandasana and relax.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   228 31-07-2020   15:28:48



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 229

Dos and Don’ts
•• Spine should be kept straight.
•• Knees should be touched to the ground.
•• Avoid excessive arching of the spine.
•• One should avoid pushing the foot inside beyond one’s 

capacity.

Benefits
•• This asana is good for lumber region and keeps it healthy. 
•• It is beneficial in women’s physical problems and 

facilitates easy child birth.
•• It helps in improving concentration.
•• It calms down the mind.

Ushtrasana
Ushtra means camel. The body in this posture resembles the 
posture of a camel, hence the name.

Fig. 6.21: Ushtrasana

Stages for Practice
•• Sit in Vajrasana.
•• Kneel down on the floor. Keep your thighs and feet 2–3 

inches apart, toes pointing back and resting on the 
floor.

•• While inhaling bend backward. Be careful not to jerk 
the body while bending backwards.

•• With exhalation place the right palm on the right heel 
and left palm on the left heel.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   229 31-07-2020   15:28:49



230 Health and Physical Education - XI

•• In final position, thighs will be vertical to the floor and 
the head tilted backwards.

•• Weight of the body should be evenly supported by the 
arms and legs.

•• Inhale, slowly come back to normal position and relax 
in Vajrasana.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Keep the thighs vertical to the ground.	
•• Avoid jerking the body while bending backward.
•• Avoid in case of hernia, vertigo, and frozen shoulder.
•• Proceeding to the final stage of asana should be gradual.

Benefits
•• This is useful in back pain and neck pain. 
•• It helps to reduce fat over the abdomen and hips. 
•• It helps to strengthen the back muscles and leg muscles.
•• It is beneficial in respiratory disorders.

Shashankasana
Shashanka means rabbit. The body in this posture takes the 
shape of a rabbit, hence the name.

Fig. 6.22: Shashankasana

Stages for Practice
•• Sit in Vajrasana. Keep the spine erect.
•• Spread both the knees wide apart with the toes 

remaining together.
•• Place the palms between the knees.
•• Exhaling, bend forward from the waist with the arms 

straight.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   230 31-07-2020   15:28:49



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 231

•• Chin and chest should be resting on the floor. 
•• Look in front and maintain the position. Activity 6.6

Teacher should check the 
•• Inhale and come back in Vajrasana. interest of students in this 

asana. The teacher can check 
Dos and Don’ts the perfection of students and 

•• Keep the back straight in the final pose. motivate them.
•• Don’t raise hips while practising this asana.

Benefits
•• It tones up the reproductive organs.
•• It strengthens the abdominal and pelvic region.
•• This āsana relieves sciatica nerve.
•• It helps to reduce stress, anger, etc.

Uttanamandukasana
Uttana means upright and Manduka means frog. The final 
position of Uttanamandukasana resembles an upright frog, 
hence the name. In the final posture, the head is held by the 
elbows.

Fig. 6.23: Uttanamandukasana

Stages for Practice
•• Sit in Vajrasana.
•• Spread both the knees wide apart with the toes 

remaining together.
•• Raise your right arm, fold it and take it backward from 

above the right shoulder and place the palm below the 
left shoulder.

•• Now fold the left arm similarly and place the palm below 
the right shoulder.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   231 31-07-2020   15:28:49



232 Health and Physical Education - XI

•• Maintain the position.
•• While coming back, slowly remove the left arm and 

then right arm, bring the knees together as in the initial 
position.

•• Relax in Vajrasana.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Spread the knees well.
•• Keep the back and neck straight in the final position.
•• Avoid the gap between thighs and ground.

Benefits
•• This asana is helpful in back ache and neck pain. 
•• It helps in improving the diaphragmatic movements.
•• It improves the lung capacity.

Paschimottanasana
Paśchima means back and Uttān means stretch out. In this 
āsana, the back side of the body including the spinal column 
gets stretched, hence the name.

Fig. 6.24: Paschimottanasana

Stages for Practice
•• Sit in Dandasana. Inhale and raise your arms up. 

Stretch your back and bend forward as much as 
possible.

•• Hold the toes and place the elbows by the side, on the 
ground.

•• Maintain the posture as per the capacity. Come back 
by raising hands and head in the initial position.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Keep the knees straight. Normal breathing should 

continue.
•• Avoid hunch in the back.
•• Avoid the practice in case of severe back pain.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   232 31-07-2020   15:28:50



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 233

Benefits Do You Know?
•• It stimulates the function of abdominal organs, and This asana is also performed 

improves digestion. with another state, where hands 
•• It is helpful in removing constipation, obesity, dyspepsia are kept upright with elbows 

and seminal weakness. resting on ground and face rests 
•• It helps to improve blood circulation and regulates in between both palms while 

blood pressure and reduce fat. looking forward.
•• It improves the flexibility of spine.

Suptavajrasana
Suptavajrasana is further development of Vajrasana. 
Suptavajrasana means lying in Vajrasana; hence, it is named 
Suptavajrasana.

Stages for Practice
•• Sit in Vajrasana. Slowly bend backwards taking the 

support of the hand; and place elbows on the ground.
•• Slowly straighten the hands and completely lie on the 

back with shoulders resting on the ground and knees 
remaining together.

•• Beginners may keep their hands on respective thighs.
•• After practising this position well, stretch the arms 

behind and hold the elbow/arm with the hand of 
another arm.

•• While returning to the original position, first take out 
your hands and place them by the sides of your body. 

•• Now, with the help of elbows come back to the initial 
position.

Fig. 6.25: Suptavajrasana

Dos and Don’ts
•• With the support of hand, come in supine position.
•• Keep the knees together in final position.
•• Do not strain in knees and thigh muscles.
•• Avoid the practice in case of knee pain.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   233 31-07-2020   15:28:51



234 Health and Physical Education - XI

Benefits
•• This asana strengthens the abdominal muscles. 
•• It is useful in the management of high blood pressure 

and sciatica.
•• It is a good remedy for constipation and backache.
•• It improves blood circulation and calmness.

Vakrasana
Vakra means twisted. In this āsana, the spine is twisted; due 
to this reason, this asana is called Vakrasana.

Stages for Practice
•• Sit in dandasana.
•• Bend the right leg, and place the right foot beside the 

left knee.
•• As you exhale, twist the body to the right.
•• Bring the left arm around the right knee and clasp the 

right big toe or place the palm beside the right foot.
•• Take the right arm back and keep the palm on the 

ground with the back straight.
•• Remain in the posture for 10–30 seconds with normal 

breathing and relax.
•• Take out your hands with exhalation and relax.
•• Repeat the same procedure on the other side.

Fig. 6.26: Vakrasana

Dos and Don’ts
•• Perform within physical limits. Do not strain the body 

unnecessarily.
•• Avoid the practice in case of knee pain, hernia and 

organ displacement.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   234 31-07-2020   15:28:51



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 235

Benefits
•• This asana massage abdominal muscles. 
•• It is useful in the management of high blood pressure 

and sciatica.
•• It is a good remedy for constipation, diabetics, back 

ache and improves blood circulation.
•• It helps in calmness of mind.
•• Enhances lung capacity.

Ardhamatsyendrasana
Ardhamatsyendrasana is named after the great yogi 
Matsyendranātha. Full version of this asana is very difficult 
for a beginner to master it. Therefore, it has been modified. 
This modified version is called Ardhamatsyendrasana. 
Matsyendra is the name of a Hatha yogi it is said that he Fig. 6.27: Ardhamatsyendrasana
attained siddhi in this asana, so the full version of this 
asana is known as Matsyendrasana.

Stages for Practice Activity 6.7
•• Sit on the ground in dandasana. Bend the left leg, Teacher conducts class 

competition and appreciates 
then place the left heel on the side of the right hip. the better students.

•• Place right foot near the left knee, on the ground.
•• Place left arm over the right knee and grasp the toes 

of right foot with the left hand. 
•• Take right arm behind the back around the waist.
•• Turn your head towards the right side and try to look 

behind.
•• Repeat it from the opposite side.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Keep the balance of body on the hips.
•• Place the bend knee behind the armpit of the opposite 

arm.
•• Avoid the practice in case of severe back pain, 

vertebral and disc disorders.
•• Avoid the jerking movement in the twisting of back.
•• Do not lean forward or backward.

Benefits
•• This āsana is good for the stimulation of pancreas, 

adrenal glands, kidneys, liver and spleen.
•• It helps to relieve constipation, asthma, indigestion, 

diabetics and obesity.
•• It strengthens muscles of the spine and back and 

makes them flexible.
•• It corrects stooping shoulders, a bent back and the 

defective posture.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   235 31-07-2020   15:28:52



236 Health and Physical Education - XI

•• It stretches and strengthens the shoulders, hips and 
neck.

•• It is good for diabetic patients.

Gomukhasana
In Sanskrit language, ‘Gomukha’ means ‘cow’s face’. In this 
āsana, the leg’s position takes the shape of Gomukha, hence 
the name Gomukhāsana.

Stages for Practice
•• Sit in Dandasana.
•• Fold left leg from the knee and place it on the ground 

by the side of right buttock.
Fig. 6.28: Gomukhasana •• Similarly fold right leg from the knee, bring it over left 

leg and place right heel by the left buttock.
•• Raise the left arm, bend it at the elbow and take it below 

the shoulders towards the back.
•• Raise the right arm, bend it at elbow and take it upward 

and behind the back.
•• Interlock the fingers of both the hands behind the back.
•• Keep the head straight. 
•• Gaze in front and maintain normal breathing.
•• Stay in this position for as long as comfortable and 

then return to the original position, step by step.
•• Repeat the same by changing the position of the legs 

and hands.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Avoid sitting on the heels.
•• Avoid the practice in case of shoulder, neck and knee 

pain.
•• Keep the neck straight in the final position.
•• The above elbow should be closed to the ear.

Expected Learning Outcomes
•• The practice of this asana strengthens muscles of the 

back and biceps. 
•• It removes the pain in hip and lower extremities. 
•• It helps in making the spine straight. 
•• This āsana is very useful in arthritis and dry piles.
•• It is useful in frozen shoulders, neck pain and cervical 

spondylitis. 
•• It gives good exercise to the lungs and helps in 

respiratory diseases. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   236 31-07-2020   15:28:52



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 237

Makrasana Activity 6.8
In Sanskrit Makara means crocodile. In this āsana, the body Prepare a list of asanas useful 
resembles a crocodile, hence the name. for relaxing the body.

Fig. 6.29: Makrasana

Stages for Practice
•• Lie on the abdomen (prone lying position), with arms 

beside your body.
•• Spread the legs little apart (1–2 feet) and place them 

comfortably on the ground in such a position that the 
heels face each other and toes point outwards.

•• Fold the arms at elbows. Place palm on the palm with 
the head/face relaxing on the palms.

•• Slowly close eyes and relax. Do normal breathing and 
remain in this position as long as comfortable.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Place both feet apart and keep the heels towards each 

other.
•• Avoid this practice in case of heart problems.	

Benefits
•• It is good for asthma, dyspepsia and vata diseases.
•• It is helpful in relaxing.
•• Removes mental and physical fatigue.
•• It reduces anxiety.

Bhujangasana
‘Bhujanga’ means cobra. The final position of this āsana 
resembles the shape of a cobra. Hence it is named as 
Bhujangasana.

Fig. 6.30: Bhujangasana

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   237 31-07-2020   15:28:53



238 Health and Physical Education - XI

Stages for Practice
•• Lie down in the prone position.
•• Join the feet and bend the arms at the elbow, place the 

palms near the chest on the floor.
•• Slowly raise the head, neck and shoulders. Raise the 

trunk up to the navel.
•• Maintain the posture for as long as comfortable. Then 

slowly bring the body down on the ground.
•• Relax in makrasana.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Keep the elbows parallel to each other and pointed 

upward.
•• Normal breathing should be continued.
•• Avoid this practice in case of hernia and abdominal 

injuries.
•• Do not raise body below the navel.
•• Do not straighten your elbows and move slowly.

Benefits
•• This is good for stress management.
•• It is beneficial for relieving flatulence after meals.
•• It can relocate the slipped disc, removes backache and 

keeps the spine supple and healthy. 
•• It tones the ovaries and uterus, and helps alleviate 

Activity 6.9 menstrual and other gynaecological disorders.
Students practice Shalabhasana •• It improves the lung capacity.
daily and maintain in the record 
book. Teacher will check the Shalabhasana
improvement in holding time. The meaning of salabha is locust. In the final position of 

this āsana, body resembles the shape of a locust, hence the 
name.

Fig. 6.31: Shalabhasana

Stages for Practice
•• Lie down in prone position, place the palms below the 

thighs, press them downward and join the heels.
•• Chin should be placed on the ground.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   238 31-07-2020   15:28:54



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 239

•• Lift the legs as high as possible while inhaling. 
•• Bring down the legs while exhaling.
•• Release the hands.
•• Relax in makrasana.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Raise the legs slowly without jerks.
•• Take the support of the hand to raise the legs.
•• Place the chin on the ground.
•• Keep the knees straight in the final position.
•• Avoid bending the knees.
•• Avoid keeping distance between the knees.
•• Avoid bending at the elbows.
•• Do not practice it beyond one’s physical limits/capacity.

Benefits
•• Shalabhasana stimulates the autonomous 

nervous system particularly the parasympathetic 
one. 

•• It massages abdominal organs. 
•• It is good for lower back ache and slipdisk.
•• It relieves constipation and improves digestion.
•• It improves blood circulation and directs blood 

circulation upwards.

Pawanmuktasana
‘Pawana’ means wind and ‘mukta’ means released. As Fig. 6.32: Pawanmuktasana
the name suggests, the practice of this asana helps 
in releasing excessive gas from the body. This asana when 
performed with one leg, is called Ekapada Pawanamuktasana.

Stages for Practice
•• Lift both legs, bend them at the knees and encircle the 

knees with both arms. Press the knees and bring them 
towards the chest. 

•• Raise the head with the chin touching the knees. This 
is Pawanamuktasana.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Press the knees to the chest.
•• Toes should be relaxed.
•• Avoid raising beyond the mid-torso.
•• Perform within physical limits.
•• Avoid this practice in case of Cervical Spondylitis.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   239 31-07-2020   15:28:54



240 Health and Physical Education - XI

Benefits
•• The practice of this āsana helps in eliminating toxic 

gases from the abdomen. 
•• This āsana relieves constipation and the feeling of 

heaviness in the stomach.
•• Extra fat in the abdominal area gets dissolved. It also 

reduces abdominal fat.
•• The spine becomes flexible.
•• Improves blood circulation.

Setubandhasana
Setubandha means formation of bridge. The body in this 
posture is positioned like a bridge. Setu means bridge, and 
bandha means to bind. In this asana, body imitates a bridge 
structure.

Fig. 6.33: Setubandhasana

Stages for Practice
•• Bend both the legs at the knees and bring the heels 

near the buttocks.
•• While holding both the ankles, firmly keep the knees 

and feet in one straight line. Separation between legs 
should be same as the distance between shoulders.

•• Inhale, slowly raise your buttocks and trunk up as 
much as you can to form a bridge.

•• Remain in this position for 10–30 seconds, with normal 
breathing.

•• Exhale, slowly return to the original position and relax 
in Shavasana.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Keep the feet near the buttocks.
•• Keep the knees vertical to the ground.
•• Avoid giving any jerk to the body in the final position.
•• Avoid this practice in case of Cervical Spondylitis.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   240 31-07-2020   15:28:55



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 241

Benefits Activity 6.10
•• It removes strain on the back. •• Students will share their own 
•• It stretches and massages the colon and other experiences with their friends 

abdominal organs. and make a comparative 
report.

•• It helps to improve lung capacity.
•• Teacher can conduct 

•• It provides strength to the back muscles. competition between yoga 
•• Brings flexibility to the spine. practitioner and non yoga 

practitioner students and 
Viparitkarani motivate them for doing 
According to Sanskrit, Viparita means ‘opposite’ and Karani better.
means ‘doing’, ‘by which’. In this āsana, the state of body is 
opposite (head downwards and legs upwards) to the normal. 
That’s how the asana derived its name as Vipritasana.

Stages for Practice
•• Lie in relaxed supine position with the legs together.
•• Raise the legs up, keeping them straight.
•• Push down on the arms and hands and raise the 

buttock.
•• Support the lower back with hands, keeping elbows on 

the floor.
•• Remain steady for a while with normal breathing.
•• Release the position and relax on the back.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Keep the balance of the body on elbows.
•• Keep the knees straight.
•• Avoid practising this posture immediately after any Fig. 6.34: Viparitkarani

violent exercise.
•• Avoid this practice in case of heart problems.

Benefits
•• Its regular practice improves digestion, stimulates 

appetite and helps in relieving constipation.
•• This practice improves blood circulation to the brain.
•• It brings the luster to the skin.
•• It balances functioning of the thyroid, parathyroid, and 

thymus glands.
•• It also helps in the management of insomnia, varicose 

veins, and hernia.

Shavasana
In Sanskrit, Shava means dead body. The posture is called 
Savasana as the body in this asana resembles a dead body.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   241 31-07-2020   15:28:56



242 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fig. 6.35: Shavasana

Stages for Practice
•• Lie down on the back with the hands comfortably away 

from the body.
•• Make a distance of one to two feet between the feet with 

toes pointing outward.
•• Place both the hands on the ground, 10 inches away 

from the body with fingers in a semi-flexed position and 
palms facing upwards.

•• Keep the head in the most convenient position.
•• Gently close the eyes, breathe normally or practise 

moderately deep abdominal breathing.
•• Attend to the flow of the breath without moving the 

body.
•• Become aware of the natural breath and allow it to 

become rhythmic and slow.
•• Try to relax all parts of the body by diffusing tension in 

each part of the body.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Relax the whole body.
•• Back should be relaxed.
•• Avoid the tightness in any part of the body.

Benefits
•• It helps to reduce stress and removes physical and 

mental fatigue.
•• It relaxes all muscles and nerves of the body.
•• It is helpful to overcome the psychological disorders.
•• It is very beneficial for managing high blood pressure, 

cardiac diseases, and stress and anxiety disorders.

Pranayama
Prana refers to the ‘vital force’ and ayama means to restraint. 
Prana is the vital energy without which the body would 
not survive. Pranayama is a breathing technique by which 
breath regulates and controls the prana. It helps to improve 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   242 31-07-2020   15:28:56



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 243

the control over autonomic respiratory mechanisms through Activity 6.11
breathing patterns that generate energy and enhance Students can check their breath 
emotional stability. Some of the breathing practices are holding time and maintain 
mentioned here. a record book (mentioning 

the time of hold) to collect 
Phases of Pranayama: Puraka, Rechaka and one month data with of 
Kumbhaka their physical and mental 

experiences.
•• Puraka: In puraka, inhalation is very gentle and deep 

with full awareness. This helps the chest to expand 
more in its clavicular (upper) region, coastal (middle 
and lower) region, from front to back and also sideways. 
This expansion creates more inner space allowing more 
inflow of air into lungs. At the same time, diaphragm 
contracts more and moves down towards abdominal 
cavity to the maximum. In this process, muscles of the 
front wall in abdominal cavity and the perineal region 
are under pressure to move outwards and downwards 
respectively.

•• Kumbhaka means retention of breath inside or 
outside. Kumbhaka performed along with bandhas 
(Mulabandha, Uddiyanabandha and Jalandharbandha) 
helps in the process of metabolism and assists in 
more efficient exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. 
Through regulated breathing, Kumbhaka ensures 
sufficient supply of oxygen and thus helps the brain to 
work efficiently.

•• Rechaka: Rechaka assists in more efficient releasing 
of carbon dioxide. The duration of rechaka is supposed 
to be double of puraka. The process of rechaka starts at 
the end of kumbhaka, when bandhas are released. In 
the process of rechaka, diaphragm is pushed upwards 
towards the cavity of chest making the chest to contract. 
Slow and prolonged exhalation prescribed for rechaka 
helps in completely pushing the carbon dioxide out of 
lungs. 

Yogic Deep Breathing
There are three types of breathing:

•• Abdominal
•• Thoracic
•• Clavicular
Combination of all three types of breathing becomes yogic 

deep breathing.

Technique
	 1.	Sit in a comfortable posture.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   243 31-07-2020   15:28:56



244 Health and Physical Education - XI

	 2.	 Inhale: Deep, slow and long intake of oxygen with 
the combination of three types of breathing. (During 
inhalation, first the abdomen comes out and 
diaphragm has tened moves the chest cavity outward 
and upward and in the last air fills clavicular region 
(collar bone) and it moves upward.

	 3.	Exhale: Repeat the whole procedure in reverse 
manner.

	 4.	Repeat the same practice four to five times.

Nadishodhana Pranayama
Nadishodhana means to purify the nadis. Nadishodhana 
pranayama is also known as anuloma-viloma. Viloma means 
produced in the reverse order. This variety gets its name from 
the fact that the nostrils are alternatively used during each 
inhalation and exhalation in this pranayama.

Stages for Practice
•• Sit in any comfortable meditative posture.
•• Keep the head and spine erect.
•• Close the eyes.
•• Pay attention to the breath.
•• Place the hands on their respective knees.
•• Adopt nasagran mudra of the right hand and jnana 

mudra of the left hand.
•• Close the right nostril with the thumb. 
•• Inhale through the left nostril and exhale through the 

right nostril, keeping the respiration rate slow, deep 
and silent.

•• Inhale through the right nostril again.
•• Exhale through the left nostril, keeping the respiration 

rate slow, deep and silent.

Fig. 6.36: Nadishodhana pranayama

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   244 31-07-2020   15:28:57



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 245

Dos and Don’ts
•• Keep the ratio of 1:1 between inhalation and exhalation.
•• Avoid producing any sound from the nose.
•• Avoid pressing hard on the nostrils.

Benefits
•• Calms and steadies the mind, improves focus and 

concentration.
•• Improves blood supply to the brain.
•• Balances the left and right hemispheres and promotes 

clear thinking.
•• Benefits  in following conditions—asthma, allergies, high 

or low blood pressure, stress-related heart conditions, 
hyperactivity, insomnia, chronic pain, endocrine 
imbalances and psychological conditions as anxiety, 
stress, etc.

Ujjayi Pranayama

Stages for Practice
•• Sit in padmasana or siddhasana.
•• Close the mouth. Contract the region at the back of 

the throat, inhale slowly through both the nostrils in 
smooth and uniform manner till the breath fills the 
space from the throat to the heart.

•• During inhalation, a peculiar sound is produced owing 
to the partial closing of glottis.

•• This sound should be of mild and uniform pitch.
•• It should be continuous also.
•• Expand the chest while inhaling. 
•• Slowly exhale through the left nostril.

Fig. 6.37: Ujjayi pranayama

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   245 31-07-2020   15:28:58



246 Health and Physical Education - XI

Dos and Don’ts
•• Breathing should be deep, slow and long.
•• Do not make harsh sound during inhalation.

Benefits
•• Ujjayi pranayama removes heat from the head and 

keeps it cool.
•• It removes phlegm in the throat and prevents all sorts 

of pulmonary diseases.
•• It prevents diseases caused by deficient inhalation of 

oxygen and cardiac diseases.
•• Regular practice of this pranayama defends the 

practitioner from diseases of phlegm, degeneration, 
dyspepsia, dysentery, enlarged spleen, cough or fever.

Bandhas
Bandhas means to hold or lock. Bandhas may be introduced 
during the practice of mudra and pranayama.

Jalandhara Bandha
Jalandhara bandha is performed by contracting the throat 
and bringing the chin to the chest while retaining the breath.

Fig. 6.38: Jalandhara bandha

Stages for Practice
•• Sit comfortably in Padmasana or Siddhasana.
•• Place both the hands (palms) on the knees in jnana 

mudra.
•• Allow the whole body to relax.
•• Inhale slowly and deeply and retain the breath.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   246 31-07-2020   15:28:58



Yoga and its Relevance in the Modern Times 247

•• Lower the chin down in front and set it against the 
jugular notch or the sternum notch and close the eyes.

•• Hold the breath according to capability.
•• Raise the head slowly and release the bandha.
•• Exhale deeply.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Keep the back straight
•• Avoid jerky movement of the neck.
•• Avoid this practice in case of heart diseases and cervical 

spondylitis.

Benefits
•• This practice improves the functioning of thyroid gland 

and helps in curing the ailments of throat.
•• It enhances the process of exchange of gases during 

the retention of breath.

Uddiyana Bandha
The word ‘Uddiyana’ comes from ‘ud’ and ‘di’, which means 
to fly up or to rise up. Through this bandha, prana like a bird 
flies up incessantly, hence it is called uddiyanabandha.

Stages for Practice
•• Sit comfortably in Siddhasana or Padmasana.
•• Place both the hands (palms) on the knees firmly.
•• Exhale completely through mouth and hold the breath 

out.
•• Pull abdominal muscles up and inside towards the 

spine. This is Uddiyana Bandha.
•• Retain the breath outside as long as one feels 

comfortable.
•• Raise the head, inhale slowly and release the abdominal 

muscles.
•• Return to the normal position.

Dos and Don’ts
•• Pull the abdominal muscles after exhalation.
•• Avoid holding the breath beyond limit.
•• Avoid in case of heart diseases.

Benefits
•• Uddiyana Bandha improves blood circulation and 

strengthens all the internal organs.
•• All the abdominal organs get toned, massaged and 

strengthened.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   247 31-07-2020   15:28:58



248 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? •• It helps in improving the digestion process.
Dhyana can activate our sixth •• It enhances the lung capacity.
sense. Dhyana
Activity 6.12 Dhyana is a part of Astanga yoga. It is related to the practice 
Practice meditation for five to of mind and is the gateway to inner world. One can enter and 
ten minutes daily and prepare into dhyana stage after the practice of shatkarma, asana, 
an experience report on the pranayama. They involve controlling the mind to finally 
changes that you feel after 15 transcend the mind. It helps to improve the concentration 
days. and emotional stability and improves the functioning of 

mental activities.
There are several methods to practice dhyana. All the 

practices of dhyana are to be focussed on a single point 
either a mantra or an object.

Process of Dhyana
•• Sit in any meditative posture.
•• Place hands in Jnana mudra on the knees.
•• Spine should be straight and relaxed with closed eyes.
•• Now focus on breathing.
•• Observe inhalation and exhalation.
•• Maintain the process for 5–7 minutes.
•• Slowly bring awareness back to the surroundings.
•• Gently rub the palms together and place them on eyes.

Fig. 6.39: Dhyana •• After few seconds remove palms and open eyes.
This is the practice of breath awareness. One can practice 

it by focussing on different things, i.e., any object in between 
eyebrow center, any sound, etc.

Meditation or Dhyana activates the parasympathetic 
nervous system which provides the relaxation of body and 
mind.

•• It helps in controlling the blood pressure.
•• It normalises the heart rate.
•• It helps to calm down all the mental activities.
•• It reduces anxiety.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   248 31-07-2020   15:28:59



Yoga and Its Relevance in Modern Time 249

Assessment

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Write the meaning of yoga and its relevance in day-to-day life.
	 2.	 Write about the history and development of yoga.
	 3.	 Mention the guiding principles of yoga.
	 4.	 Write the role of asana in wellness.
	 5.	 Write the role of pranayama in wellness.
	 6.	 Write the role of shodhana a kriyas in wellness.
	 7.	 What is kapalbhati? Write its technique and benefits.
	 8.	 Explain the concept of puraka, rechaka, and kumbhaka.
	 9.	 Write the benefits of dhyana.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 What is Karma yoga?
	 2.	 What is Jnana yoga?
	 3.	 What is Raja yoga?
	 4.	 Write the types of neti.
	 5.	 Write the name of yogic practices.
	 6.	 Write the root word of yoga.
	 7.	 How many poses are present in surya namaskara?
	 8.	 Nath culture is related to which school of yoga?
	 9.	 Ashtanga yoga is related to which school of yoga?
	 10.	 What is Nishkam karma?
	 11.	 What is Navdabhakti?
	 12.	 What is Vihara?
	 13.	 Which system is related to pranayama?
	 14.	 Name the practice which cleanse our nasal passage.

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 Vedas have __________ types.
	 2.	 Uddiyana bandha is related to __________ region.
	 3.	 Jalandhara bandha is related to __________ region.
	 4.	 In Kapalbhati, the meaning of kapal is __________.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   249 31-07-2020   15:28:59



250 Health and Physical Education - XI

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 Ujjayi is a practice of asana.
	 2.	 Surya Namaskar is a process of 12 asanas.
	 3.	 Agnisar is related to water element of body.
	 4.	 Jnana Yoga is a path of devotion.
	 5.	 Kapalbhati is a pranayama.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-6.indd   250 31-07-2020   15:28:59



##7##
Safety and Security

7
Games and sports are important for the development of 
physical, emotional, mental and social health. While playing 
any games and sports, safety and security of children is very 
important. It is also necessary to take steps to prevent injuries 
in sports field during competitions or sports training. In this 
chapter, we are discussing safety issues regarding the sports 
facilities and also dealing with the health hazards related to 
alcohol and substance abuse, including common medicines.

Safety Measures in Playgrounds, Gymnasium 
and Swimming Pool
In the present scenario of competition in games and sports, 
coaches and athletes are mostly concerned with the winning 
spirit and hard but systematic sports training. During 
sports training and competitions of various games, safety 
measures and security of players need to be kept in mind. 
Injuries during sports training lead to fearful emotional or 
psychological phobia. To save the players from such phobia, 
simple safety rules and measures should be applied. These 
safety rules are to be observed by the physical education 
teachers, sports trainers, coaches, school administrators 
as well as sports equipment manufacturers. Besides these, 
students who are taking part in technical sports such as 
gymnastics and swimming, and self-defense activities shall 
also be taught to avoid injuries and observe safety measures 
during sports training. These safety measures may be applied 
in the following steps:

Safety regarding Sports Facilities
One of the most important safety measures which shall 
be kept in mind is regarding the sports ground, sports 
instruments and sports uniform.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   251 31-07-2020   15:43:21



252 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? Sports ground
Due to decreasing land While preparing sports ground, the construction company 
and forest ratio, cutting should try to remove all the possible hazards such as nearby 
or eliminating trees is not high tension electric line, barbed wire, bushes or wild grass 
permissible. bushes, close wall with hard surface and shifting of trees. 

The surface of the ground should be safe and clean, free 
from hazardous material like stone, broken bricks, etc. 
Wherever possible, the construction of hard surfaces for 
games like basketball, badminton and tennis should be built 
up properly with proper space. The chain link fencing or 
stairs for accommodating trainers, coaches and players or 
spectators should be away from the playing area, probably 6 
meters away from the end lines of the play field. 

Field
Proper and separate sitting area for extra players of the 
participating teams shall also be provided to avoid the mixing 
of players. Playing area of sports should be sufficient enough 
to prevent accidental injuries. Sitting area for spectators 
should be away from the actual playing area to avoid any 
untoward incident during competitions. Playing area should 
be clean and away from the hazardous materials/objects. 
Trees and bushes should be shifted from the play field to 
avoid collision. Sufficient warming up area away from the 
competition arena may be provided. Dangerous broken glass 
material or sharp edged stones should also be removed from 
the playing area to avoid potential injury.

Safety regarding sports instruments
Due to sports engineering and technological advancement, 
modern sports are played with sports equipment which are 
performance friendly and add technical support during 
movements. During planning and organising of sports 
equipment, the manufactures shall add the ‘concept of safety to 
sportsperson’ as priority. The material used for manufacturing 
the instrument/equipment shall be of high standard as the 
sportsperson is highly dependent on them for performing 
their skills. Players are also advised not to use the damaged 
equipment/instruments to avoid accidents. Efforts should be 
made that the playing surface of different games and sports 
should be constructed separately as advised by the respective 
officials, federations or associations, if space is available.

Safety regarding uniforms
Sports uniform adds glamour and advantage to the 
performance in games and sports but poor fabric and non-

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   252 31-07-2020   15:43:21



Safety and Security 253

suitable shoes may be painful to the players. Sports uniforms Do You Know?
play an important role to prepare the mood of sportspersons, The game of Kabaddi and Kho-
as it helps the players to feel better. Preparation of Kho in modern time is played 
sportspersons for competition includes selection of— on synthetic surface. Usually 
	 a)	Types of shoes indoor synthetic surfaces are 
	 b)	Fabric of the T-shirt and its colour less vulnerable to injuries.

	 c)	Selection of the shoe — Most of the novice players do 
not know how to select the shoe for sports training, Activity 7.1
as they are not aware of the injuries caused by the •• Collect information about 

the safety measures taken 
poorly manufactured shoes. Generally the defect is in your school building 
either in the material or the arch of the sole. The play field/indoor hall and 
defection arch may not provide support to the foot equipment.
resulting in unbalanced body weight. In some cases, it •• Discuss with teacher.
has been noticed that the lack of proper arch support 
in the shoes may cause stress in the legs that leads 
to muscles stiffness. Ultimately the sportsperson gets 
tired and may rupture leg muscles if the activity is 
not done with proper shoes. The objective of wearing 
properly manufactured shoes are:

	 (i)	 comfortable feeling
	 (ii)	 proper ankle support
	 (iii)	 proper balance
	 (iv)	 avoiding leg injury due to uncomfortable shoes

	 d.	Fabric of the T-shirt: T-shirt and its colour are 
important for the players, especially for the novice. 
Due to weather variations in India, a light colored 
fabric which does not absorb sweat is considered 
better. Fabric which consumes sweat may cause 
allergy and skin problem if it remains in contact with 
the body for longer duration.

Safety measures in relation to Gymnasium
Gymnasium in any institution is used for sports training for 
multiple sports. It is considered as an asset to the institute, 
and students often visit the gymnasium for the purpose of 
building their body, rehabilitation after injury as well as to 
get into proper shape. Injury in gymnasium may take place 
due to the following:
	 a)	Unsafe method of keeping equipment
	 b)	Lack of proper place for exercises
	 c)	Lack of warm-up area
	 d)	Old equipment
	 e)	Unsafe fitting of electrical gadgets

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   253 31-07-2020   15:43:21



254 Health and Physical Education - XI

	 f)	 Uncleaned surface
	 g)	Slippery gymnasium surface
	 h)	Poor lighting conditions
	 i)	 Poor sanitation and lack of water supply
	 j)	 Not observing safety measures during lifting and 

keeping the weight barbells
	 k)	Lack of proper knowledge of using equipment

Safety measures in relation to swimming pool
The schools or institutions having swimming pool need to 
operate it with proper safety measures. To observe safety 
rules in swimming pool, there shall be instructors, assistant 
coaches, life guards, gatekeeper and sweepers. Availability of 
human power, water quality and cleanliness of the swimming 
pool are very important aspects of safety measures. The 
following steps should be taken for safe and hygienic pool 
conditions:
	 a)	There should be separate swimming pool for the 

beginners and the advance swimmers.
	 b)	Students should avoid going into the deeper side of 

the swimming pool without proper safety measures.
	 c)	Life guards should be well trained and careful during 

the pool activity. Special attention should be paid for 
the swimming and diving activities towards the deep 
end of the pool.

	 d)	Swimming pool instructors/coaches and life guards 
should be well equipped with life saving devices 
such as, long stick, rope, whistle, lifesaving jackets, 
swimming pads and kicking boards, etc.

	 e)	Students should follow proper instructions and 
guidelines of swimming pool for safety measures as 
well as to avoid injuries.

	 f)	 Proper swimming uniform like costume, cap and eye 
protector must be used regularly during swimming in 
the pool.

	 g)	Water treatment plant must be operational during the 
swimming activities of the students.

	 h)	Chlorination of water through proper amount of 
chlorine will be helpful in removing accumulated 
algae from the water.

	 i)	 Surface of the swimming pool should be cleaned regularly 
with the help of suction head brushing machine.

	 j)	 Swimming activities should be allowed only in the 
presence of life guards.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   254 31-07-2020   15:43:22



Safety and Security 255

	 k)	While constructing the surface of pool, smooth finishing 
and use of standard chemicals may be ensured. Do You Know?

Developing physical fitness 
	 l)	 Safety stairs and hangers in the pool will help may help a player to prevent 

swimmers to enter in the pool. injuries up to 60 per cent 
      m)	Showers at pool side with fresh water taps should in that particular game, it 

also be facilitated for pre and post swim showers. is scientifically proven that 
good physical fitness helps in 

	 n)	The surface of washrooms in swimming pool site better reaction ability, decision 
should be supported through matting to avoid injury making ability and enhances 
from the slippery surface. self-confidence of the player.

	 o)	Proper lighting in the pool is always useful particularly 
in the evening for supervising swimmers inside the pool. Activity 7.2

Gather information regarding 
Safety Measures to Prevent Injuries the sports injuries that occur 
It is always said that ‘prevention is better than cure’. Many in swimming pool and 
accidents during sports can be prevented by taking appropriate gymnasium.

preventive measures. Students who participate in games and 
sports activities should be given safe and secure environment 
and facilities for enhancing the confidence of parents as well 
as students. Injuries can be prevented by knowing the reasons 
due to which injuries occur and observing the safety measures 
during playing. While constructing play arena and sports 
facilities, the needs of differently abled students should also be 
kept in mind.

Why do sports injuries occur?
Injuries during sports take place due to many factors, which 
includes careless attitude of the player towards fitness and 
training. Some of the important factors that are responsible 
for the sports injuries are—
	 a)	poor equipment, surface and floor.
	 b)	lacking in the knowledge of rules of the game.
	 c)	 lack of technical and tactical knowledge.
	 d)	lack of fitness and conditioning.
	 e)	not observing safety rules while playing technically 

difficult sports like gymnastics, diving, judo and 
wrestling, etc.

	 f)	 lifting of heavy weights without helpers may lead to 
accident and cause severe injury.

How to prevent sports injuries?
Sports injuries can be prevented in sports arenas, during 
competition and in technical sports. Supervision by coach 
and instructor will always help to avoid sports injuries during 
playing, training and competition.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   255 31-07-2020   15:43:22



256 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 7.3 Prevention of injury related to sports facilities
•• Collect more information There are various ways to amend sports infrastructure in 

about the preventive order to curb accidents during competition and during 
measures to be taken while training of sports. 
developing sports facilities.

•• Compare and analyse it Prevention of injury related to competition
with the steps taken by your Preventive measures to prevent sports injury should also be 
school. taken before competition.

•• Discuss with your classmates.
	 a)	Proper warming up should be done before going for 

•• Suggest ways. any games or sports. Warming up helps to enhance 
body’s reflex actions and reduce the chances of injury.

	 b)	Proper safety measures should be adopted for 
competition such as safety gears and clothing for 
sports.

	 c)	Players should follow rules and regulations of the 
competition to prevent injuries.

	 d)	All the equipment related to the sports should be 
checked thoroughly and any equipment which may 
not be in good shape or broken should be replaced or 
get repaired.

	 e)	Officials of the competition should also evaluate the 
playing arena before the start of game.

Technical measures for prevention of injuries
Besides the above preventive measures to avoid sports 
injuries, some important technical measures should also be 
observed to prevent injuries.
	 a)	Players should work on their fitness and conditioning 

to avoid tiredness during sports competition. 
Tiredness hampers the reaction and negatively 
influences the speed of players. A tired player is most 
likely to get injury during performing or playing, which 
can be prevented only by enhancing the physical 
fitness level.

	 b)	All the sports where difficulty level of movements 
is high, possibility of occurring injury are likely to 
be higher. It is suggested to the players to practise 
difficult technical movements of sports before taking 
active participation.

	 c)	Coaches and trainers should guide students regarding 
the safety rules at regular intervals and observe the 
safety measures taken by them.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   256 31-07-2020   15:43:22



Safety and Security 257

	 d)	Proper nutrition also helps to avoid sports injuries 
occurring due to stress or overload training. Nutrition 
helps to repair and build the ruptured muscle fibers.

	 e)	Selection of the right kind of shoe and sports uniform 
also helps in preventing injuries like bruises, blisters, 
broken nails, sprain, strain and shin pain, etc. 
Every sport requires different kind of sports 
movements and speed. Thus, it is suggested to select 
the shoe and sports uniform according to suitability Do You Know?
to a given sports condition to avoid injury. Do you know that half of the 

users who started the use of 

Dealing with Alcohol, Substance Abuse tobacco in their youth will 
be losing their lives by their 

including Common Medicines during middle age?

Adolescence
Adolescence is particularly a vulnerable time in a person’s 
life. Navigating this stage of life can be challenging even for 
the most ‘normal’ or well-adjusted adolescents. Substance 
abuse is a menace, especially during the adolescence as it 
affects their physical, social and emotional growth. Of all 
the substances, alcohol and tobacco (including pan masala, 
gutkha, khaini, cigarette, beedi, etc.) are two of the substances 
most commonly misused and abused by adolescents. Being 
easily available, many children are exposed to these in their 
homes at a very early age. Parents are role models, whether 
good or bad, and children of such parents who misuse these Do You Know?
substances are at a greater risk of getting into the addiction. You would be surprised to 
However, with proper treatment and support of loved ones, know that nicotine is used as 
the youngsters can surely overcome their addiction habit insecticides and pesticides in 
and live successful and happy lives. agriculture. 

Why is tobacco use unhealthy?
Tobacco is used in various forms such as smoking (cigarettes/
beedi/hookah); smokeless (pan masala with tobacco, gutkha/
khaini). 

You know that cigarette smoking is injurious to health. 
Most people believe that beedi is safer than cigarette. But 
smoking beedi is also equally dangerous. 

As you know that the nicotine present in the tobacco 
leaves is highly addictive. It raises the blood pressure. There 
are about 4000 chemicals found in the smoke from the 
cigarettes which become a cause for different kind of cancers.

Carbon monoxide gas exhaled by the smoker, is highly 
poisonous. Tar, a substance resulting from the burning of 
tobacco leaves, is similar to coal tar used for building the 
roads. So just imagine the harm it causes to the lungs!

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   257 31-07-2020   15:43:22



258 Health and Physical Education - XI

Table 1: Some of the Constituents of cigarette smoke

Say “NO” to tobacco. Constituents Cancer causing Toxic metals
Remember, one moment chemicals
of wise decision is the Toluene Vinyl chloride Arsenic
foundation for future 
happy life for you and Carbon monoxide Benzene Chromium
your family. Butane Polonium 210 Cadmium

Smokeless tobacco
You have heard and seen the advertisements of pan masala 
and wondered what it is made up of. Pan masala contains 
supari, that is arecanut or betel nut, which is a traditional 
item and a part of many religious ceremonies in our country. 
Most of us believe that pan masala is not harmful as it 
is just a mixture of areca nut cuttings, commonly known 
as supari, food flavours and sweeteners. Actually it is a 
specialised, ingenious mix of traditional items and chemical 
products developed to cause addiction. New formulations of 
pan masala are constantly developed and introduced in the 
market to encourage initiation and sustained use of these 
and other similar products with an objective to deliver higher 

Case Study “highs” to the addicts.
You must have seen the 
short film on Mukesh A dangerous fact which is not known is that continuous 
shown in theatres before use of tobacco causes oral cancer. Its use by the pregnant 
any film, who dies at a mothers is nearly as dangerous as alcohol drinking. If taken 
very young age due to during pregnancy, even the unborn babies are harmed by 
eating Gutkha. Discuss 
the case of Mukesh in the the chemicals present in gutkha and pan masala.
class and the effects of 
smoking. Health hazards of tobacco and substance misuse

Substance misuse affects all the aspects of life of the user. 
Smoking causes different types of cancers, the most common 
being lung cancer. Research has established that pan 
masala, gutkha, and khaini all cause oral cancer. All types of 
tobacco products that mention ‘low tar or additive-free’ are 
harmful. Substance misuse in any form leads to dependence 
and addiction. It affects the personality and makes one angrier, 
volatile, depressed and tense. The day-to-day activities along 
with thinking and memory are affected, resulting in a negative 
impact upon the work in school/college/job.

Effect of tobacco abuse among women
Have you noticed attractive advertisements of lighted 
cigarettes? Though we mostly see men smoking, the 
young women are one of the biggest targets of the tobacco 
industry. The tobacco industry organises richly-funded 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   258 31-07-2020   15:43:22



Safety and Security 259

marketing campaigns targetting young children through 
advertisements highlighting and falsely linking the tobacco 
use with behaviour aspects such as freedom and liberty, or 
beauty, slim figure and prestige. 

Marketing strategies lure consumers especially the youth, 
with misleading categories, such as ‘light’ or ‘low tar’. More 
young children smoke ‘light’ cigarettes, often in the mistaken 
belief that ‘light’ means ‘safer’. In fact, ‘light’ smokers often 
engage in inhaling more deeply and more frequently to absorb 
the desired amount of nicotine. Women who smoke are more 
likely to experience infertility and delays in conceiving than 
those who do not. Smoking during pregnancy increases the 
risks of premature delivery, still birth and death. Smoking 
increases women’s risk for cancer of the cervix as well.
Activity 7.4
Look at the pictures given below. They look scary. You may 
have seen such pictures on cigarette packets. It is mandatory 
to display pictorial warnings on tobacco products in India and 
many other countries.

•• Find out which countries have very gory and scary pictures 
on the cigarette packets. Make a collage and display with a 
message.

•• Form a chain of five students and share the benefits of not 
smoking with them

•• Plan and stage a role play on “Say No to Tobacco”.

How can we identify the symptoms of alcohol or 
substance abuse among children during adolescence?

Symptoms to observe for alcohol/tobacco abuse
•• Feeling depressed, hopeless, rundown or even suicidal
•• Being selfish and not caring for others
•• Frequent absent-mindedness
•• Money or valuables disappear from home
•• Irritability and aggressiveness, violent behaviour
•• Declining grades
•• Important routine activities such as homework, and sports 

getting affected

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   259 31-07-2020   15:43:22



260 Health and Physical Education - XI

•• Having a new friend circle, often not disclosing to family
•• An urge to drink on a daily basis
•• Avoiding family and friends, spending more time alone in 

order to consume drugs or alcohol
•• Taking risks, including driving rashly as well as having 

risky behaviour.

Reasons for Alcohol Consumption and Substance Abuse
Many teenagers believe that drinking alcohol is a way of 
gaining acceptance and admiration of their peers, fitting in 
the friend circles and a way to show off that they have grown 
up. Studies have shown that many adolescents started 
substance abuse because of the pressure from their friends.

Some children indulge in substance abuse to show their 
anger or a way of rebelling against their parental or societal 
norms. For many, it is due to curiosity. Sometimes it is done 
to explore the unknown behaviour. No matter whatever the 
reasons are, substance misuse is not very healthy and is 
dangerous.

Some of the adverse effects could be:
	 a)	Greater difficulty in focussing and paying attention.
	 b)	Poor school performance.
	 c)	Depression and anxiety.
	 d)	Unnatural deaths, for example from motor vehicle 

accidents, due to drunken driving.
	 e)	Tendency to indulge in crimes like stealing, fighting, 

etc.
	 f)	 Suicidal tendencies are much higher in children of 

adolescence age who drink or engage in substance 
misuse.

Given below are some of the most common myths and facts 
related to substance abuse:

Myth Facts
There is no harm in Almost all drug addicts start by trying 
trying a drug just once, just once. Once the drug is taken, the 
because one can stop user is always amenable to further 
after that. drug intake, which becomes a part of 

their habit.
Drugs increase creativity Drug addict loses clarity and may 
and make the user more become incoherent over a period of 
imaginative time.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   260 31-07-2020   15:43:22



Safety and Security 261

Drugs can sharpen Drugs induce dullness and adversely 
thinking and lead to affect the normal functioning of body 
greater concentration. and mind.
Will power alone can help Besides strong will power, love and 
a drug addict to stop support of family and friends, medical 
taking drugs. and psychiatric treatment may be 

needed to come out of drug addiction.
Alcohol helps people Very often the opposite is found to 
forget their problems. be true. People bring up forgotten 

problems under intoxication. Alcohol 
only adds up to the existing problems.

Drug use makes one cool In the beginning, it may be seen that 
and better accepted by the use of drugs helps in winning 
peers and classmates. more friends but this is a myth as 

these peers are not true friends or 
well-wishers. Furthermore, over a 
period of time, drug dependence 
makes one asocial and isolated.

Inhalants are basically Using inhalants such as thinners, 
harmless even though glue, cleaning fluids can cause 
people make a big deal permanent damage to organs like the 
about them. liver, brain and nerves. They are also 

extremely flammable and can cause 
burns if matches are lit nearby.

Case Study
Three friends — Mani, Adil and Ronny met at a marriage party. 
Mani and Ronny wanted to drink in celebration and compelled 
Adil, (who has never had a drink before) to join them. They insisted 
him that he should join them for the sake of friendship. Adil is in a 
dilemma. On the one hand, he doesn’t want to lose his friendship 
but on the other he is conscious that nobody in his family drinks 
alcohol. He has also learnt from his parents that alcohol is harmful 
for health.

		  Questions for discussion
	 1.	 What are the choices that Adil has?
	 2.	 What would you have done if you were in Adil’s place?
	 3.	 How else could Adil’s friends have celebrated?

Common medicines
There has been a growing trend of taking medicines by 
the people not only for the treatment of certain diseases 
against proper prescription but also for other reasons such 
as cosmetics, weight loss or weight gain, etc. Often these 
are purchased through sales over the counter, without any 
proper prescription. This trend is seen more among children 
of adolescence age and younger generations.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   261 31-07-2020   15:43:22



262 Health and Physical Education - XI

It is always advisable to seek the advice of a doctor and 
consume only those medicines that have been prescribed. 
One should never decide one’s own medicines (without 
prescription from a doctor) whatever the ailment be. One 
should not fall prey to false advertisements asserting that 
certain drugs or medicines will help in reducing or gaining 
weight or enhance the stamina or cosmetic beauty.

How to use medicines?
A medicine can be both beneficial and harmful, depending upon 
how it is taken. When a medicine is taken in the manner as 
prescribed by the doctor, it can be beneficial but when a medicine 
is not taken in a manner prescribed by the doctor (overdose) or 
it is taken with some other substances that it should not be 
combined with, it may lead to adverse effects on the body.

Medicines should always be stored in a cool dry place and 
away from direct sunlight. Some of the medicines may also 
need to be stored in the refrigerator. So follow the directions 
on label. 

•• A medicine is anything that is used to diagnose, prevent 
or treat illness in humans.

•• The basic function of medicine is to aid the healing 
process of the body. The medicine acts as a catalyst in 
stimulating the natural healing process of the body.  

•• Medicines should be used to assist the body’s mechanism 
to heal itself. 

•• We should not be too dependent on medicines. It is 
rather important to work towards achieving a physical 
state in which we can regain and recover without or 
with least possible aid of medicines.

•• Prescription drugs and over the counter medicine are 
the ones prescribed by the doctor upon examining the 
patient for treatment of their illness. While over the 
counter medicines are the ones that a patient may buy 
without consulting a doctor. 

•• All medications which are sold without a prescription 
have the potential to cause harm to the body. These 
drugs and medicines may be sold as advertisements to 
help reduce or gain weight, enhance cosmetic beauty, etc.

What precautions should we take before taking 
medicines?
Always follow the dosage of medicine as prescribed by the 
doctor and the time intervals. Follow other instructions 
carefully before consuming any medicine, such as taking 
medicines before or after meals, etc. Medicines should be 
taken with water rather than with tea, milk or juice, etc.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   262 31-07-2020   15:43:22



Safety and Security 263

Doping

Concept of Doping
Doping is not a new trend brought on by the advent of 
modern pharmaceutical agents. History shows that athletes 
in the ancient Olympic Games were willing to take plant Fig. 7.1: Medicine label 

showing date of manufacturing 
extracts in a bid to perform better than their competitors. and expiry date
Performance enhancing drugs and dietary supplements have 
been around since the ancient Olympic Games. Because of 
the ethical considerations relating to unfair advantage during 
competition and the potential for the adverse effect, most Activity 7.4
athletic governing bodies have generated a list of substances Find out when was the doping 

case first recorded in an 
that are banned from national and international competitions. International Competition.
Doping, is a term used for performance enhancing drugs in 
sports and often understood as the use of such drugs which 
are considered helpful to improve athletic performance. Do You Know?

EPO-Erythroproietin, is 
Many drugs have been banned in sports as they are deemed a peptide hormone, i.e., 
to provide an unfair advantage, pose a health risk, or are produced naturally by the 
seen to violate the ‘spirit of sport’. The use of banned drugs human body.
by athletes is referred to as ‘doping’.

Doping is defined by the International Olympics Committee 
(IOC) as, ‘the use of any method or substance that might 
harm the athlete, in a quest to gain an unfair advantage, 
over his or her fellow competitors’. Hence, training at altitude 
to increase the blood’s ability to carry oxygen is allowed, but 
the use of drugs, to achieve the same result is considered 
unethical and prohibited by the authorities.

Rigorous testing procedures have shown many notable 
athletes to be trying to ‘beat the system’ by taking such 
drugs. Most notably, Ben Johnson, in 1988, who won the 
100 m sprint in a new world record time of 9.79s, was tested 
positive for steroids, and lost his gold medal and world 
record. The reasons to ban doping in sports are mainly the 
health risks of performance-enhancing drugs, the equality 
of opportunity for athletes, and the exemplary effect of drug-
free sport for the public. Anti-doping authorities state that 
using performance-enhancing drugs goes against the ‘spirit 
of sport’.

Why Doping?
Most athletes take drugs—

•• to enhance their physical performance in an attempt 
to prevent them falling behind other competitors even 
at the cost of damaging their health and risking their 
sports career.

•• to help them wind down and relax, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   263 31-07-2020   15:43:22



264 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? •• to cope with the pressure and stress associated with 
•• Players are selected for constant battle to win all the time

doping control either via a •• to boost their own self-esteem and confidence, 
random draw conducted by •• to mask the pain of certain sports injuries, 
the Doping Control Officer •• to control and reduce weight,
(DCO), witnessed by the •• to hide the use of any other banned substances.
team or representatives.

•• The World Anti Doping Doping in Sports
Agency (WADA) is a In competitive sports, doping refers to the use of banned 
foundation created through performance-enhancing drugs by competitors, where the 
a collective initiative led by 
the International Olympic term doping is widely used by organisations that regulate 
Committee (IOC). sporting competitions. The use of drugs to enhance 

performance is considered unethical by most international 
sports organisations, including the International Olympic 
Committee. Although, ethicists (World Health Organisation) 
have argued that it is not different from the use of new 
materials in the construction of apparels and sporting 
equipment, which can also aid performance and give 
competitors an unfair advantage.

Classifications of Doping
The technology in our world today is truly amazing. People 
are discovering new and exciting ways everyday to make our 
lives easier and more enjoyable. Doctors and scientists are 
also discovering ways to help us live longer and finding ways 
to cure our bodies from many different illnesses. Medicine 
today is without a doubt much better than in past years. 
Doctors and scientists continue to discover ways to help create 
the ideal athlete in the world. They find ways to use drugs 
that were originally set out for some other function and use 
it to improve the performances of athletes today. Besides the 
other unethical practices used by athletes, the two principal 
categories of performance-enhancing substances considered 
as the main source are:
	 1.	Dietary supplements
	 2.	Injectable supplements—Hormones and Drugs

Dietary Supplements
Dietary supplements are highly refined products that should 
not be confused with food. They may not have any positive 
nutritional value; hence, not referred to as nutritional 
supplements.

Hormones
A variety of endogenously produced hormones are used to 
enhance athletic performance. The most commonly used 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   264 31-07-2020   15:43:22



Safety and Security 265

hormone is ‘testosterone’. This hormone is known to produce 
strength and stimulate the function of skeleton muscles with 
higher level of energy. Hormone produced and secreted by 
different organs of the body are stored and employed by 
athlete as ‘Ergogenic aids’.

Drugs
A drug encompasses substance that changes the body’s 
function. A drug is a chemical substance that, when absorbed 
into the body, can alter normal bodily function.  This includes 
the substances that stimulate hormone secretion. If a 
substance looks like a medicine or is administered differently 
from the way in which foods would be consumed, it may be 
classified as a drug.

Basic Doping Drugs used in Sports
The basic drugs which are used for doping purposes in 
different sports are described below for better understanding 
about the drugs.

Narcotics
Narcotics are used as doping in sports. They are injected 
into a human’s blood stream, or muscles, or under skin. 
Narcotics can also be swallowed. Consumption of narcotics 
reduces, eliminate, and hide pain. Examples of narcotics are 
morphine and methadone. They are also used for moderate 
inflammation. This drug is commonly used in sports with 
less recovery time in between games. Athletes from football 
and hockey games commonly use narcotics.

Side Effects: Narcotics decrease heart rate, causes 
nausea, and vomiting.

Steroids
The well-known doping drugs called anabolic-androgenic 
steroids are a group of powerful chemical compound, 
related to the male sex hormone ‘testosterone’. The original 
purpose of steroids was to help with different diseases. It 
was developed in the 1930’s. Consumption helps to produce 
more hormones in the body.

Side Effects: Consumption can lead to early heart 
attacks, strokes, liver, tumours, kidney failure, and serious 
psychiatric problems. Steroids can be injected with needles, 
which cause risks of infections, such as HIV/AIDS and 
Hepatitis B and C. Physical symptoms include developing 
a very large head, acne flare ups, aggressive behaviour and 
mood swings. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   265 31-07-2020   15:43:22



266 Health and Physical Education - XI

Gene Doping
Gene doping probably began in the year 2001, when the 
International Olympic Committee Medical Commission came 
together to discuss the adverse effects of gene therapy in 
sports. World Anti Doping Agency in 2002 took the action 
immediately and banned gene doping. Genes can be injected 
into muscles to prevent muscle-wasting disorder and this 
camouflages with the other human genes thus making gene 
doping almost impossible to detect.

Side Effects: Gene doping is very dangerous for the 
human body as it leads to abnormal growth, extra muscles 
in the body which needs more blood circulation during 
contraction hence, may lead to lack of blood for other systems 
and may cause serious problems for the user. Gene doping 
is susceptive to extra growth of unwanted hair, heart related 
problems, nervous breakdown and suspecting to cancer at 
an early age.

Blood doping 
Blood doping is a very high intense type of doping. It increases 
red blood cell mass and thereby, delivering more oxygen to 
the muscles. Athletes use this unethical practice with the 
help of pathologist and medical practioners, usually in the 
sports like cross-country, cycling, and swimming, etc. Blood 
doping vastly increases an athlete’s endurance. The red 
blood cells are then separated and stored in a cold area. The 
blood is then fused back into the body about a week prior to 
the athletes’ high endurance event. Blood doping increases 
the capacity of cardiovascular system and helps delaying the 
fatigue. This is all unethical.

Side Effects: EPO is a peptide hormone that is produced 
naturally by the human body. EPO is released from the 
kidneys and acts on the bone marrow to stimulate red blood 
cell production. It is well known that EPO, by thickening the 
blood, leads to an increased risk of several deadly diseases 
such as, heart disease, stroke, and cerebral or pulmonary 
embolism. The misuse of recombinant human EPO may 
also lead to autoimmune diseases with serious health 
consequences. In blood doping, one to four units of blood is 
taken out from the athlete’s body.

Harms of Prohibited Substances
	 1.	Taking doping drugs can have terrible effects on 

your body. The well known doping drug, steroids has 
a number of negative effects on the body. Steroids 
interrupt the normal development of hormones 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   266 31-07-2020   15:43:22



Safety and Security 267

throughout your body. When this happens, human 
body experiences changes that are irreversible. Activity 7.5
Changes such as reduced sperm production, baldness, Make a list of the banned 
breast development in men, breast reduction and substances used by some 

athletes to control body weight 
voice deepening for women. The risk of high blood for a combat sports.
pressure and the risk of heart attacks is very high. If 
a person takes a large amount of steroids, it increases 
irritability and aggression. 

	 2.	The blood doping causes much stress on the heart. The 
reason for this is that the red blood count increases 
which causes the blood in blood stream to become thick. 
The human heart is not used to pumping such thick 
blood. This leads to different kinds of heart diseases. 

	 3.	Narcotics are a street drug and people share the 
needles to inject it. This gives the risk of passing 
different diseases from one person to another. 
Overdosing of narcotics can cause death. Withdrawal 
effects include limited vision, reduced sex drive, 
menstrual problems, chronic constipation, mood 
swings, and muscle twitches. 

	 4.	Lean mass builders such as anabolic steroids can 
cause dangerous increase in the levels of cholesterol, 
heart attack, hypertension, stroke, liver and kidney 
damage, jaundice, depression, aggression, mood 
swings, acne and skin disease, reduced sperm count 
and impotence in males, and amenorrhea in females. 

	 5.	Beta-2 antagonists can cause nausea, headaches, 
dizziness, muscle cramps and heart flutters, whilst 
other lean mass builders such as the human growth 
hormone may be associated with liver problems, heart 
disease and irregularities in the processing of insulin. 

	 6.	Side effects of stimulants such as amphetamines 
include increased heart rate, blood pressure and body 
temperature, stroke, hypertension, agitation, anxiety 
and sudden cardiac death. Strong prescription 
painkillers such as narcotics are also highly addictive 
and can impair the mental abilities. 

	 7.	Relaxants such as alcohol and marijuana cause 
impaired judgement, balance, co-ordination and 
memory, hallucinations and drowsiness. 

	 8.	Side effects of diuretics include dehydration, dizziness, 
cramps, and kidney failure.

	 9.	Those masking drugs used to prevent the detection 
of other banned substances can cause severe allergic 
reactions, nausea and vomiting.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   267 31-07-2020   15:43:22



268 Health and Physical Education - XI

Testing In-competition and  
Out-of-competition
Drug testing has become an increasingly large part of both 
professional and amateur sports. An athlete can be called 
for drug testing at any time, in or out of competition. During 
competition, some sports carry out drug testing only on the 
winning team or top three competitors. Others will be tested 
by random selection amongst all the competitors. There are 
two types of doping control tests: 
	 1.	In-Competition and 
	 2.	Out-of-Competition (OOC) Testing
In-Competition Testing is conducted at a competition venue, 
while Out of Competition Testing occurs with no advance 
notice and can occur at any location and at any time.

Doping Control Procedure
The main purpose of the technical procedures for doping 
control is—
	 1.	to plan for effective testing. 
	 2.	to maintain the integrity and identity of the samples 

collected, from the point when the athlete is notified of 
the test to the point when the samples are transported 
to the laboratory for analysis.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   268 31-07-2020   15:43:23



Safety and Security 269

Assessment

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 How can we prevent the injuries by preparing good sports 

facilities?
	 2.	 What are the safety rules one can observe when buying a 

sports shoe?
	 3.	 What is meant by safety through sports instruments?
	 4.	 How does sports uniform help in safety of the sportspersons?
	 5.	 What precaution can be taken to prevent injuries in the 

gymnasium?
	 6.	 How can you curb the accidents in swimming pool?
	 7.	 Physical fitness may be used as a tool to prevent sports 

injuries. Elaborate.
	 8.	 Write down the myths and facts about substance abuse.
	 9.	 What is doping and what are the side effects of blood doping?
	 10.	 Why do athletes dope? Explain the side effects of prohibited 

substances.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 What is meant by safety measures?
	 2.	 Why is the fabric of T-shirt important for athletes?
	 3.	 Write two safety measures in relation to swimming pool.
	 4.	 Write two ways to prevent sports injury.
	 5.	 Does cigarette smoking raise your status? If no, why?
	 6.	 Why tobacco use is deadly?
	 7.	 What three things should you focus on when buying medicines?
	 8.	 What are the categories of doping?

	III.	 Multiple Choice Questions
	 1.	 Medicine should be purchased_______________.
		  (a)	as per prescription of the doctor
		  (b)	as advised by the chemist on the basis of our health problem
	 	 (c)	after observing the date of manufacture and the date of expiry 
		  (d)	(a) and (c) both
	 2.	 Medicines should be consumed by the patient ______________.
		  (a)	as advised by the doctor
		  (b)	always after the meals 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   269 31-07-2020   15:43:23



270 Health and Physical Education - XI

		  (c)	always before meals
		  (d)	whenever the patient feels like taking the medicine
	 3.	 Which type of surface is used in modern times to play Kabaddi 

that helps to prevent injury?
		  (a)	Synthetic surface
		  (b)	Mud ground
		  (c)	Grassy ground
		  (d)	Cinder surface
	 4.	 How does warming up helps to prevent injury?
		  (a)	Warming up enhances reaction ability
		  (b)	Warming up prepares the player for making smooth 

movements
		  (c)	Proper warming up prepares and athletes mentally and 

physically for sports
		  (d)	All the above

	IV.	 Match the Following
	 1.	 Nicotine which is present in tobacco		  Tar
		  leaf is also found in
	 2.	 Used for making roads					    Insecticides
	 3.	 Tobacco use severely affects					    Smoking
	 4.	 Can cause cancer					     Lungs

	V.	 Projects
	 1.	 Make a table of the various medicines being taken by a sick 

family member.

Name of Dose Timings Expiry date Remarks
Medicine Prescribed on the label 

of package

	 2.	 You would have seen many women smoking beedi or cigarette. 
Some may even be pregnant. Discuss with two such women 
the harmful effects of tobacco use among women, especially 
the pregnant women.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   270 31-07-2020   15:43:23



Safety and Security 271

	 3.	 You would have seen many small shops, including pan shops 
which sell cigarettes and pan masala products to the children. 
Do you know that sale of any tobacco products to children 
and sale of these items within 100 yards of any educational 
institution is banned? It is sometimes very difficult to remove 
these shops. Hold discussion with the Residents Welfare 
Association and Parent-Teacher forum to stop the sale of any 
tobacco product near your school.

	 4.	 Discuss with your class teacher and students’ committee as to 
what actions can be taken to make your school a tobacco-free 
zone.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-7.indd   271 31-07-2020   15:43:23



Health Related 
Physical Fitness 8

Physical fitness directly influences the health of an individual. 
So to keep ourself healthy, fitness sessions should be 
incorporated in our daily routine.

‘Physical fitness is a state of health and well-being. It 
develops your capacity to perform better in sports, your 
job and day-to-day routine work. This is achieved through 
moderate/vigorous physical activities, balanced diet and 
proper recovery.’ 

Regular planned fitness activities like walking, jogging, 
cycling, swimming and yoga improve health and physical 
fitness of an individual. It also reduces the risk of heart 
diseases, diabetes, hypertension and depression. So, we 
can say that physical fitness is related to — ‘well-being’ and 
‘wholesome development’ - of an individual.

There are five components of health related physical 
fitness—
	 1.	Muscular Strength
	 2.	Endurance
	 3.	Flexibility
	 4.	Body Composition
	 5.	Cardiovascular Endurance

Muscular Strength
Muscular strength is directly related to force production. 
Not only in sports but it is related to our each and every 
movement. Movement of our body parts is possible due to 
strength be it flexing a finger or getting up from the bed. 

Paralysed people cannot move their body parts because 
they have lost the capacity to produce strength.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   272 31-07-2020   15:43:52



##8##
Health Related Physical Fitness 273

A new born baby cannot stand up and walk because they 
has less strength. So, we can say that for every movement of Activity 8.1

Compare the strength of 
body part or for moving body from one position to another your classmates with an Arm 
position, strength is required. Wrestling competitor.

Whenever we think about sports performance, the first 
thing which comes into our mind is the muscular strength. 
Normally we use the term strength instead of muscular Do You Know?
strength. If we ask someone a question, do you have the •• Aerobic capacity is the 

capacity to work in the 
strength to do this physical work? He or she will knowingly presence of maximum 
or unknowingly flex his or her muscle and say I have the amount of O2 and the nature 
strength to do this. This shows in itself that somewhere of the work is of longer 
strength is associated with muscles. duration.

Strength is normally understood as the ability of the •• Anaerobic capacity is 
muscle or group of muscles of an individual to exert force capacity to work in less 
against the resistance. If we are talking about exerting force amount of O2 and nature of 
then the question which comes in our mind is, why do we work is of short duration.
want to exert force? For this we have to look into the nature 
of the sports activities. We try to act against the resistance. 
Now the resistance can be of two types. It can be internal 
resistance like your own body weight or it can be external 
resistance like opponent’s body weight. In some of the cases 
we act against the resistance which we cannot conquer and 
in some of the cases we act to overcome that resistance. In 
both the cases we exert force with the help of our muscles.

Muscular strength is thus, ‘the ability of the muscle or 
muscle groups of an individual to exert force on the resistance 
to overcome it or to act against it as per the demand of the 
sports activity’.

Moving further, we look at how the muscular strength 
ability is used according to the nature of sports. We find 
that sometimes we need to apply force against the maximum 
resistance, but it is for shorter duration and sometimes 
we need to apply the force for longer duration. Taking into 
account the nature of sports as far as strength abilities are 
concerned, we can divide the strength abilities into three 
parts—
	 (a)	Maximum Strength: The name itself reflects that we 

are talking about something to its maximum limit. So, 
we can say that when our muscle or muscles group is 
able to generate the force with 100 per cent effort by 
which we are able to tackle the maximum resistance 
in a single contraction, it is called maximum strength 
of an individual. It is the ability which is of great use 
in the sports like weight lifting, throw events in 
athletics, etc. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   273 31-07-2020   15:43:53



274 Health and Physical Education - XI

	 (b)	Explosive Strength: In some of the books, you may 
find this with the name of elastic strength. This is 
the ability where both strength and speed comes into 
play. When the muscle or group of muscles contract 
with high speed to overcome or to act against the 
resistance with 70 per cent to 80 per cent effort, then 
it is called the explosive strength. There are several 
examples where the explosive strength is required 
such as jumping, sprinting in athletics, boxing, etc.

	 (c)	Strength Endurance: As it reflects from the name 
itself that it is related to the work which is done 
for longer duration. It is both strength as well as 
endurance which comes into play. In simple words, 
we can say that when our muscle or a group of 
muscles act against the resistance with 50 per cent 
to 60 per cent effort or try to overcome the resistance 
for longer duration in spite of having fatigue, then 
it is called that the individual is having strength 
endurance. There are many sports where we can 
easily see the use of this ability such as hill running 
in cross country race, cycling, swimming, etc.

		 As we know that strength depends upon the 
contraction of muscles and several other factors. So 
let us have a look on the factors which play major 
role in the liberation of force by the muscles. These 
are as follows—

	 1.	 Neural Control: How much force the muscle will 
generate largely depends upon three major factors.
●● Number of motor units involved in the 

contraction — If the greater number of 
motor units are recruited then more amount 
of force will be generated.

●● Size of the motor units involved in the 
contraction — If the size of the motor units 
is greater, then also, the amount of force 
generated will be higher.

●● Intensity of nerve impulse — If the intensity 
of nerve impulse is faster, then also, the 
force generated by the muscle will be higher.

	 2.	 Muscle Cross-section: It is well known to everyone 
that liberation of force largely depends upon the 
size of the muscles. The more the size, the more 
force it will generate. 

	 3.	 Muscle fibre: Muscles are made up of two types of 
fibres, one is fast twitch fibre (white) and another 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   274 31-07-2020   15:43:53



Health Related Physical Fitness 275

is called slow twitch fibre (red). Both the fibres Activity 8.2
are present in the muscles. The quality of Perform push-ups, pull-ups, sit-
the muscle depends upon the proportion of ups along with your classmates 
the fibres in the particular muscle. If the fast and find who scores highest in 
twitch fibres are more in ratio, then the muscle these activities.
will contract faster and generate more force. 
This type of muscle has anaerobic capacity. 
Whereas, the muscle having slow twitch fibre 
will generate less force in comparison to the 
muscle with fast twitch fibres. 

	 4.	 Energy supply: Muscles get their energy by the 
breakdown of ATP (Adenosine Triphosphate) 
and CP (Creatine Phosphate) which is stored in 
the body. The amount of ATP and CP store is 
very essential for the muscular activities as it 
provides the energy to the muscles. 

	 5.	 Psychological factors: In many of the situations, 
the psychological factors contribute a lot in 
getting more forceful muscular contraction. 
The factors such as anger, aggression, 
motivation, etc., play a very crucial role in 
pushing their mind to develop very strong 
nerve impulse which can lead to activate more 
number of motor units.

Methods of Strength Improvement
Strength is regarded as a very essential part of sports 
performance. It is a conditional ability and can be 
improved to a greater extent by the training. There are 
various methods by which one can achieve the level of 
strength one wants. Whenever we think about improving 
the strength ability of an individual, the first thing which 
comes to our mind is the structure of our activity where 
we are going to use this strength. In some of the activities, 
our own body weight acts as a resistance and in some 
cases, external resistance plays the maximum role. 
For example, in cross country races while running on the 
hill, our own body weight acts as a resistance and in weight 
lifting, external weight acts as the resistance. So, when we 
design resistance training for developing strength ability 
of an individual, we keep both the conditions in our mind. 
We know that countering the resistance again and 
again will help us to improve our strength ability. 
For improving the strength ability, the following methods 
are used.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   275 31-07-2020   15:43:53



276 Health and Physical Education - XI

	 1.	Using our own body weight as a resistance: In this 
method, we design our strength training in such a 
way that our own body weight acts as a resistance, 
for example, rope climbing, hill running, etc. In this, 
the pull of gravity plays a very vital role. We try to 
carry our own body against the gravity which helps 
us to improve our muscular strength. This method 
is very effective for the young athletes.

Sit-ups Lunges Bicycle Crunches

Leg Raises High Knees Turning Kicks

Chin-ups Full Arch

Fig. 8.1: Exercise with own body weight

	 2.	Using external weight as a resistance: In this type 
of training, the athlete uses external weight as a 
resistance. This is a more effective method of improving 
the strength abilities. For example, weight training 
where weight plates, medicine ball, weight belts, etc., 
are used to develop strength ability. The resistance 
is increased or decreased according to the need. 
Along with weight training, several other methods are 
also used for improving the strength where external 
resistance is used. For example, swimming against 
the flow of water in the river, drag running, etc.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   276 31-07-2020   15:43:54



Health Related Physical Fitness 277

Activity 8.3
•• Perform shoulder press, 

bench press and squats and 
find out who scores highest 
in these activities.

•• Compare the body weight of 
Dumbbell Bench Press Leg Curl Cable Pushdown a long distance runner and a 

sprinter in your school and 
see the difference.

Seated Row Dumbbell Shoulder Press Lat Pull Down

Twist Abs Incline Situp Calf Raise

Fig. 8.2: Excercise with external weight as resistance

Endurance
When an individual continues doing physical activity for a 
longer period of time, then he or she is said to have good 
endurance for doing that particular work. By nature, it looks 
like both physiological as well as psychological abilities of an 
individual play a crucial role in determining the endurance 
ability.

As an individual continues doing any work for longer 
duration, after some time he or she may feel physical as well 
as mental fatigue. But in spite of this, if he or she is able to 
continue the work for longer duration then this shows that 
he or she is having good endurance.

Endurance is normally understood as the ability to do any 
work for longer duration. It is task specific in nature. We come 
across many such examples in our daily life which shows 
that this ability is task specific such as we see a teacher who 
stands and continues taking his classes for hours together. If 
the same teacher is asked to run for an hour or more, he or 
she will not be able to do so. At the same time, if you ask a long 
distance runner to run for an hour, he or she will do it easily, 
but you ask the same runner to sit and work in the office for 
long hours, he or she may not be able do it. Mental toughness, 
interest for the task and physiological qualities all have a very 
important role to play when we talk about endurance. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   277 31-07-2020   15:43:57



278 Health and Physical Education - XI

So considering all such things we can say that 
‘endurance is the physiological as well as psychological 
ability of an individual to do some specific type of work 
for longer duration with the desired quality under the 
condition of fatigue’.

Endurance can be divided into three types, as far as 
nature of the activity is concerned.
	 1.	Basic endurance: This type of endurance ability 

makes an individual capable to carry out any type 
of work for longer duration. It is not task specific. 
This type of endurance largely depends upon aerobic 
capacity of an individual. In this type of endurance, 
the pace of the activity is slow. 

	 2.	General endurance: This type of endurance ability 
makes an individual capable to carry out any type 
of work for longer duration with various movement 
patterns and pace. The nature of the pace may change 
according to the demand of the activity.

	 3.	Specific endurance: This type of endurance ability 
makes an individual capable to carry out a specific 
type of work for longer duration with a set type of 
movement patterns and pace. This involves aerobic 
as well as anaerobic qualities of an individual and is 
highly trainable in nature.

Factors determining endurance
Various physiological and psychological factors are involved 
in determining the endurance of an individual. These factors 
are muscle fibre type, aerobic capacity, anaerobic capacity, 
movement pattern and psychological factors.
	 1.	Muscle fibre type: Muscles are made up of two types of 

fibres, namely fast twitch and slow twitch fibre. Both 
types are present in the muscle of an individual. If the 
ratio of slow twitch fibres is more, then an individual 
will possess the aerobic capacity which will enable 
him/her to have endurance ability. In the same 
manner, if there is higher ratio of fast twitch fibres, 
then an individual will possess the anaerobic capacity 
and will dominate in strength and speed activities.

	 2.	Aerobic Capacity: It is the ability of muscle to 
utilise more amount of oxygen while working. 
This type of capacity largely depends upon the 
oxygen uptake, its transportation from atmosphere 
to the working muscles and oxygen consumption. 
Oxygen intake is the amount of oxygen which is 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   278 31-07-2020   15:43:57



Health Related Physical Fitness 279

taken from the atmosphere with the help of nose and 
mouth and is sent to the lungs and from where it 
is transferred to the blood. Transportation of oxygen 
from lungs to the target muscle is very important. 
How much oxygen will be transported depends upon 
the amount of oxygen absorbed by the blood and the 
capacity of the heart which will pump the blood into 
circulation. The amount of oxygen absorbed in blood 
depends upon the amount of haemoglobin present in 
the blood which carries oxygen to the target muscles. 
The capacity of the heart and vascular system of the 
body will determine how fast the blood will reach to 
the target muscle. If the heart is strong and has larger 
chamber size, it will pump more blood in circulation 
which will help the oxygen to reach the target muscle 
in less time. Further, when the oxygen reaches the 
target muscle, it has to be taken up by the muscle 
and then consumed.

	 3.	Anaerobic capacity: It is the ability of the muscle to 
work in the presence of inadequate amount of oxygen. 
During such conditions, two types of energy systems 
work, i.e., splitting of phosphogens and glycolysis 
of glycogens. The phosphogens, i.e., Adenosine 
Triphosphate and Creatine Phosphate (ATP and 
CP) last for 8 to 10 seconds only. The amount of 
phosphogens can be increased by training. The 
increased ratio of lactic acid in the muscle decreases 
the capacity of working muscle, so it is quickly 
pushed into the blood which makes changes in the 
pH value of the blood and makes the blood acidic. 
To avoid this, alkali reserves present in the blood 
neutralise the lactic acid effect. This system is called 
buffer system and it is very helpful for endurance 
performance. Further, an individual’s capacity to 
tolerate lactic acid also plays an important role in 
deciding the endurance capacity. 

	 4.	Movement pattern: Economical movement pattern is 
of great help for saving energy, which in turn helps 
in improving endurance capacity of an individual. 
A good technique can save the wastage of energy.

	 5.	Psychological factors: This has a big role to 
play when it comes to endurance performance. 
Mental toughness to tolerate pain, pushing oneself, 
etc., has a great impact on continuing the long 
duration activities. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   279 31-07-2020   15:43:57



280 Health and Physical Education - XI

Improvement of endurance 
There are various methods by which one can improve his or 
her endurance. This is highly trainable ability. The methods 
by which we can improve our endurance capacity are 
mentioned below.

Fig. 8.3: Improvement of endurance with fast pace

	 1.	Continuous method: The method in which we go for long 
duration activity without any rest or break in between. 
This method can be practiced in various forms.

Fig. 8.4: Improvement of endurance through cross country

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   280 31-07-2020   15:43:59



Health Related Physical Fitness 281

	 a)	 With slow pace: This method is normally used for 
very long duration activity in which the pace is 
slow and helps in developing the aerobic capacity 
of an athlete. This method has a great effect on 
muscles. The major changes which take place are 
— increase in muscle glycogen level, increase of 
capillaries in muscle and increase in the quantity of 
oxidative enzymes. Number and size of mitochondria 
increases, thermo-regulation capacity of the body 
improves and due to long practice, the movement 
pattern also becomes economic.

	 b)	 With fast pace: In this method, the pace is faster. 
The duration of practice depends upon the fitness 
of the athlete. This method is very much effective 
to improve the anaerobic capacity of the athlete.

	 c)	 With changing pace: In this type of method, the 
athlete is trained with change in pace. This is very 
much effective in improving the aerobic as well as 
anaerobic capacity of the athlete. 

	 d)	 Fartlek method: This method is also called ‘speed 
play’. In this method, the change of pace is not 
planned prior to the start of the practice. This 
method is very effective for mature athletes. The 
athlete himself decides the pace and duration as 
per the capacity. This method helps in developing 
both aerobic and anaerobic capacity.

	 2.	 Interval Method: In this type of method, the athlete 
is trained with sub-maximum intensity and with a 
short break in between with incomplete recovery. 
This type of method is very effective and helps in 
improving endurance capacity. In this type of method, 
the training load is decided by monitoring the heart 
rate of the athlete. The interval given in between the 
exercise is also decided by monitoring the heart rate.

	 3.	Repetition Method: In this method, the pace is near 
to or more than the pace of real completion. The 
distance can be decided as per the need. The interval 
in between will be given for complete recovery. This 
method is very much useful for improving the pace 
judgement and anaerobic capacity.

	 4.	Competition method: This method is very much 
effective for learning the tactic of long distance 
running. This method develops specific endurance 
and also helps in improving certain psychological 
factors which play a vital role in carrying out long 
distance activities. Competition method can be of 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   281 31-07-2020   15:43:59



282 Health and Physical Education - XI

great help in checking the performance and deciding 
the future training programme. Participating in 
the matches of respective game/sports is a simple 
example of competition method.

Table 1: Benefits of Endurance Training
System Increases Decreases

Cardio- 1. Heart size and volume 1. Resting heart-rate
respiratory 2. Blood volume and slight increase in 2. Sub-maximal exercise heart rate
System haemoglobin 3. Blood pressure (if high)

3. Stroke volume
4. Cardiac output
5. VO2 max
6. Oxygen interaction with cells
7. Lung volume

Muscular 1. Mitochondria — number and size 1. Chances of injuries
Skeletal System 2. Myoglobin storage

3. Triglyceride storage
4. Oxidative Phosphorylation

Other System 1. Strength of connective tissues 1. Body weight (if overweight)
2. Heat acclimatisation 2. Body fat
3. High-density lipoprotein Cholesterol 3. Total Cholesterol

(HDL) 4. Low Density Lipoprotein 
Cholesterol (LDL)

Flexibility
It may be termed as the ability of an individual to move his 
body parts to its maximum range around the related joint. It is 
measured in degrees, radians or centimetres. This is a motor 
ability which is of great importance for sports performance 
as well as for leading a normal healthy life. It can be passive 
or active in nature.

Fig. 8.5: Passive (Left), Active (Right)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   282 31-07-2020   15:43:59



Health Related Physical Fitness 283

	 1.	Passive flexibility: When the movement around the 
joint is done with external help, then this type of Activity 8.4

Try to stretch your muscles 
flexibility is termed as passive flexibility. Help may be with and without help and see 
taken from another person. the difference.

	 2.	Active flexibility: When the movement around the 
joints is done without the external help, then this type 
of flexibility is termed as active flexibility. Further, 
active flexibility is sub divided into two parts — static 
and dynamic flexibility.

Fig. 8.6: Static flexibility

	 a)	 Static: When the individual is executing movement 
around his joints in sitting or standing position, 
then it is called static flexibility.

	 b)	 Dynamic: When the individual is executing 
movement around his joints while moving, then it 
is called dynamic flexibility.

Fig. 8.7: Dynamic flexibility

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   283 31-07-2020   15:44:00



284 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? Factors determining flexibility
The range of motion will be The range of movement around a joint depends on various 
greater in passive stretching in factors which are as follows:
comparison to active stretching. 	 1.	Anatomical structure of joint: The range of movement 

around joints largely depends on the anatomical 
structure of the joint. For example, ball and socket 
type of joint has the maximum range of motion in 
comparison to other type of joints.

	 2.	Ligaments and muscles stretchability: The bones are 
attached to each other by ligaments. These ligaments 
have a great role to keep the two bones attached to 
each other. Their stretchability has a great impact 
on the movement possible around that joint. The 
stretching ability of muscles around a particular joint 
also plays a major role in their movement.

	 3.	Coordination: Coordination between the agonist and 
antagonist muscles around the joint plays a very crucial 
role in determining the flexibility around the joint.

	 4.	Strength of the muscle: For any movement, the 
muscle should have the basic strength to move 
the associated part or bone. If the muscle is weak, 
then it will not be able to move the bone to its 
maximum limits.

Improvement of flexibility
There are a few methods by which we can improve our 
flexibility, these are:

Fig. 8.8: Ballistic method to improve flexibility

	 1.	Ballistic method: When the flexibility exercises are 
done with rhythmic movements, then it is called 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   284 31-07-2020   15:44:01



Health Related Physical Fitness 285

ballistic method. In this method, the movements 
around the joints are done with a swing. This type 
of method is very much effective in improving the 
range of motion around the joints, e.g., gymnastic 
movements. 

	 2.	Stretch and hold: In this type of method, the athlete 
is asked to stretch to his or her maximum limit and 
hold the position for few seconds, then regain the 
previous position. This type of method is very useful 
for the improvement of flexibility. This can be done 
individually or with the help of another person.

Sky Reach Toe Touch Neck Roll

Shoulder Roll Shoulder Stretch Side Reach

Gastrocnemius Stretch Quadriceps Stretch Cross-thigh Hug
Fig. 8.9: Stretching exercise

	 3.	Post-Isometric Stretch: In this, the muscle is 
isometrically contracted for around 8–10 seconds 
and as it returns to normal condition, muscle is 
stretched to its limit gradually. It is also called as 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   285 31-07-2020   15:44:03



286 Health and Physical Education - XI

proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation (PNF). It 
requires supervision of a trained person and advanced 
methods to practice.

		 Physical fitness is not only required for players 
but also for everyone. One must do various fitness 
activities to keep oneself physically, emotionally and 
mentally healthy.

Fig. 8.10: Stretching exercise with the help of another person and equipment

Body Composition
It is the classification of human body into fat weight and 
lean body weight. It can be assessed using both direct and 
indirect methods. Direct method for evaluating the body 
composition is hydrostatic weighing or under water weighing, 
and assessing body composition by a skin-fold caliper is 
called indirect method.

Cardio-vascular Endurance
It is the ability of heart, lungs and blood vessels to supply 
sufficient amount of oxygen and nutrients to the cells to 
meet the demands of the activity characterised by moderate 
contractions of large muscle groups over prolonged period of 
time. Twelve minutes run/walk test can be used to evaluate 
cardio-vascular endurance.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   286 31-07-2020   15:44:06



Assessment

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 What do you understand by health?
	 2.	 List and explain the components of health related fitness.
	 3.	 Explain muscular strength.
	 4.	 Explain the benefits of endurance training.
	 5.	 Explain flexibility and its types.
	 6.	 Explain the various factors affecting flexibility.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 Define endurance.
	 2.	 What is physical fitness?
	 3.	 What is interval method?
	 4.	 What is Post-Isometric Stretch?
	 5.	 List down the four motion factors responsible for range of motion.
	 6.	 What is the full form of PNF?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 Force is produced ______________________.
	 2.	 _____________ component helps in improving the number and 

size of mitochondria.
	 3.	 ________________ is a swedish method to develop the endurance.
	 4.	 ______________ method has incomplete recovery in endurance.
	 5.	 Body weight _________________ with endurance traning.
	 6.	 _____________________ is responsible for great range of motion.
	 7.	 Flexibility movements done with rhythmic movements are 

called as ___________.
	 8.	 Universally practised stretching method is ______________.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 Passive flexibility training is done with internal help.
	 2.	 The bones are attached to each other by ligaments.
	 3.	 Muscles are made up of two types of fibres namely, fast twitch 

and slow twitch fibre.
	 4.	 Physical fitness indirectly influences the health of an individual.
	 5.	 The ability of muscles to consume oxygen while working is 

known as aerobic capacity.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-8.indd   287 31-07-2020   15:44:06



##9##
Measurement and  
Evaluation

9
Activity 9.1 Everybody is interested in knowing about what, how and 
Discuss with your classmates why the things and activities near their surroundings are 
about the need of test, happening. Because, our day-to-day life is largely associated 
measurement and evaluation with all these terms to know the status or level, attitude or 
programme. skill, cause or effect of someone’s effort. To know the answer 

of any query or assumption, we use test, measurement and 
Do You Know? evaluation. 
Measurement is a score 
generally known as data. What are Test, Measurement  

and Evaluation?
Any idea or thought cannot take constructive shape without 
evaluation and it is based on measurement which cannot 
start without using an appropriate test. Basically test, 
measurement and evaluation are interrelated, interdependent 
and follow a continuous process.

Test
Test is a tool to obtain information to determine the specific 
characteristics or qualities of an individual regarding 
knowledge, physical abilities, skill abilities, etc. For example, 
unit test, annual examinations, physical fitness or body 
measurement (height, weight).

Measurement
Measurement can be quantitative, qualitative or both. It is 
a score or data in numerical/grading values, indicating the 
capacity or ability of an individual, which is obtained on 
the basis of applied test. Students score in their test and 
examination either on the field or in the classroom is called 
measurement. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   288 31-07-2020   15:44:38



Measurement and Evaluation 289

Evaluation Activity 9.2
It is the process of interpreting the collected data to measure Make a list of Physical Fitness 
and make the professional judgement of value or worth. Components and discuss it 
After giving the test, everyone wants to know the feedback or with classmates.
effectiveness of the measures, which can be gathered through 
evaluation. Evaluation may be formative or summative 
evaluative process used three steps- process education, 
objectives, learning experiences and change of behaviour. 
These steps are performed in sequence.

Measurement and Evaluation programme is very useful 
for teachers, students and parents in the field of health and 
physical education, either to check academics as well as 
the level of fitness. TME process is useful for achievement, 
diagnosis, prescription, improvement, classification, grading, 
motivational purpose and also helpful for the prediction of 
performance.

Measurement and Evaluation of Selected 
Physical Fitness Components
Here we will discuss about measurement and evaluation of 
the major components of physical fitness:
	 (i)	Muscular Strength: Push-ups, Abdominal Curls and 

Squat Thrust
	 (ii)	Muscular Endurance: 1000 meter run/walk test
	 (iii)	Flexibility: Sit and Reach Test
	 (iv)	Assessment of Body Mass Index (BMI)
	 (v)	The Waist-Hip Ratio or Waist-to-Hip Ratio (WHR)

Muscular Strength
As discussed in the previous chapter, muscular strength 
refers to the ability of the muscle or group of muscles of 
an individual to overcome or to act against the resistance. 
It largely depends upon a few things such as physiological 
factors like cross-section of the muscle, ratio of slow and 
fast twitch fibers in muscle, coordination between muscles 
(agonist and antagonist), ATP and CP store, which plays an 
important role in providing energy to the active muscle or 
group of muscles. The psychic factors or the present state of 
mind such as anger, aggression, motivation, emotional state, 
etc., have positive as well as negative correlation in muscular 
strength.

For measuring the strength of the muscle or group of 
muscles, we must have the knowledge of muscles and also of 
the particular exercise for particular muscle and supportive 
muscles. For example, while performing the pull ups, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   289 31-07-2020   15:44:38



290 Health and Physical Education - XI

Activity 9.3 an individual lifts his body, the deltoid, latissimus dorsi, 
Discuss the types of tests to trapezius and biceps contract and produce power whereas 
measure leg strength. the triceps stretch and play the supportive role.

Now if we want to measure the strength of upper limb 
(arms), then pull-ups can be one of the test items, but if we 
want to measure the strength of lower limbs (legs), then we 
have to think of other exercises.

Muscular strength can be measured with the help of 
one’s own body weight or with the help of equipment such 
as dynamometer, tensiometer, weight plates and barbell, etc.

Tests related to Muscular Strength
There are different types of tests to measure muscular strength.

Push-up
The push-up or press up fitness test measures the upper 
limb muscular strength and muscular endurance.

There are many variations of the push-up test, such 
as different placement of the hands, how far to dip, the 
duration of the test and the method of counting the number 
of completed push-ups.

Fig. 9.1: Good push-ups (above), bad push-ups (below)

This helps in identifying and assessing muscular strength 
and endurance of the upper body. 

Depending on which protocol is to be used, you may need 
a floor mat, metronome, beat drum, audio tape, clapping or 
stopwatch.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   290 31-07-2020   15:44:39



Measurement and Evaluation 291

Procedure Activity 9.4
A standard push-up begins with the hands and toes touching •• Perform and count 
the floor, the upper body and legs should be in a straight line, the push-ups with 
feet slightly apart, the arms at shoulder width apart extended your classmates and 
and at a right angle to the body. Push-ups can be started compare who can do 
from a plank position. Align your body with your hands on more accurately.
the floor. Keeping the back and knees straight, lower the body •• Make a list of different 
to a predetermined point, to touch some other object, or until type of tests to measure 
there is a 90 degree angle at the elbows, then return back abdominal strength 
to the starting position with the arms extended. This action and endurance.
is repeated, and the test continues until the exhaustion or 
until individual is unable to perform it in rhythm or have 
reached the target number of push-ups. Body should be in 
straight line from head to ankles.

As you are going down, elbows should come to 90 degrees. 
Hold this position and go up, hold the upward position.
Scoring
Maximum number of correct push-ups done by the 
participants at a specific given rate or time will be the score.

Abdominal Curl
Abdominal curl test helps to identify and assess muscular 
strength and endurance of abdominal muscles. For this test, 
floor mat and stopwatch are required.
Procedure
The individual has to lie in a supine position with flexed knees 
and elbows. Fingers of both the hands are clubbed with each 
other and are kept behind the head. Individual is asked to 
raise his or her upper body and then come back to his initial 
position repeatedly till the given set of time duration ends.
Score
Number of curl ups done by the participants at a specified 
rate or in specific time will be their score.

Fig. 9.2: Abdominal curl test

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   291 31-07-2020   15:44:39



292 Health and Physical Education - XI

Squat thrust
This test enables an individual to identify and assess 
muscular strength and endurance of the lower body.
Procedure
For this test, follow the given steps—
	 (a)	Start from a standing position. 
	 (b)	Go down achieving low squat position and place both 

palms on the floor. 
	 (c)	Take both legs back quickly as shown in the figure 

and achieve plank position. Quickly come back to 
the original standing position.

Score
Maximum number of successive squat thrusts performed by 
an individual in 1 minute will be the score.

(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)

Fig. 9.3: Steps of squat thrust

Muscular Endurance
Muscular endurance is the ability of your muscles to perform 
muscular activity over a period of time or it is the duration 
upto which you can apply your muscular strength. Muscular 
endurance is related with the time and duration of the activity. 
Slow twitch fiber in muscles is responsible for the activities 
of muscular endurance. Sometimes, the term stamina is also 
used in place of endurance.

Tests related to Muscular Endurance
There are many tests to measure muscular endurance. 1000 
metre run or walk test is the most common test, which is 
discussed below.

1000 Metre Run or Walk Test
Through this test, one can identify and assess cardio-
vascular endurance.

For this test, one needs running track and a stopwatch.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   292 31-07-2020   15:44:40



Measurement and Evaluation 293

Procedure
Participants or students should start running from the 
starting line on the command of teacher. They have to cover 
the distance of 1000 metre in shortest possible time. Walking 
is also allowed.
Scoring
The score of this test will be given on the basis of recorded 
time to cover 1000 meters (in a minute and second).

Fig. 9.4: 1000 metre run or walk test

Flexibility
As discussed in the previous chapter, flexibility is the range 
of motion around the various joints. Flexibility is the ability 
of our joints and muscles to perform movements with greater 
range. Good flexibility helps to execute the movement with 
less muscle tension.

Test related to flexibility
Sit and Reach Test: Sit and reach test helps in the 
measurement of flexibility of the lower back muscles and 
hamstring muscle group. For this test, a sit and reach box, 
and mat are required.
Procedure
The person is asked to sit in a long sitting position placing 
both feet against the box with sole touching the box. The 
knees should be straight, legs should be grounded and palm 
facing downward on top of each other at same level above the 
box (Fig. 9.5).

The person is asked to bend forward sliding the hand on 
the scale without any jerky movement.
Scoring
Score is recorded in centimeters.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   293 31-07-2020   15:44:40



294 Health and Physical Education - XI

(1) Measure how far your (2) Stretch forward and 
fingers are from the box measure again.

Fig. 9.5: Sit and reach test

Difference between measurements
Poor Fair Good Very Good Excellent
6 in 10 in 12 in 14 in 16 in

(15 cm) (25 cm) (30 cm) (35 cm) (40 cm)

Body Mass Index (BMI)
This assessment gives the information of an individual’s 
level of obesity. BMI is calculated by dividing the weight of a 

Fig. 9.6: Measurement of body person by the square of his/her height.
weight

Measurement of Body Weight
Activity 9.5 It can be done with the help of a weighing machine.
If there is no Anthropometer 
or Stadiometer, how can you Procedure
measure the height? Discuss it The individual is asked to stand on the weighing machine. 
in class. The readings of the machine should be noted. While taking 

the weight, the individual should wear minimum garments. 
Reading of the weight should be noted down in Kilograms.

Measurement of Height
It can be done with the help of an Anthropometer or 
Stadiometer.
Procedure
The subject is asked to stand straight against the wall, with 
the back and head touching the wall, looking in forward 
direction. The measuring bar of anthropometric rod should 
be touched at the highest point of the subject’s head (vertex 
point). The reading should be noted down in centimeters.

Weight in Kg
BMI Formula Calculator:

2
(Height in meters)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   294 31-07-2020   15:44:41



Measurement and Evaluation 295

BMI Calculation Activity 9.6
BMI is a simple mathematical calculation which helps us to Check in which BMI category 
find out if an individual is normal weighted, over weighted or do you fall. For reference check 
obese.  BMI is calculated by dividing the weight of an individual the textbook of Class IX.
by the square of the height which is expressed in kg/metre². 
World Health Organization (WHO) has recommended norms 
for categorising an individual as normal weighted, under 
weighted or over weighted.

Table 1: BMI Calculation
Category BMI (kg/m2)

From To

Very severely underweight - 15

Severely underweight 15 16

Underweight 16 18.5

Normal (healthy weight) 18.5 24

Overweight 25.0 29.9

Obesity 30 and above

BMI for children aged between 2 to 20 years is calculated 
in same way and with the same formula, but not judged on 
the basis of norms mentioned in the above table. Whatever 
the result comes after calculating the BMI is compared after 
preparing the percentile table of all the children falling under Fig. 9.7: Measurement of  

the same sex and age category. body height

Less then 5 percentile is under-weight, 5 to 85 percentile 
is normal, 85 to 95 percentile is over-weight and above 95 
percentile is obese.

Waist-to-hip ratio (WHR)
The waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) helps us to find out the fat 
distribution by which we can help in evaluating the overall 
health of an individual. One who carries more weight around 
the middle than the hip may have higher risk of developing 
several health issues.

This is the ratio of the circumference of the waist and the 
circumference of the hip of an individual. This is calculated 
by dividing waist measurement with the hip measurement 
of an individual (W ÷ H). For example, if the measurement of 
the persons waist and hip is 76 cm and 97 cm respectively 
then his waist-hip ratio will be 0.78.

World Health Organisation (WHO) has recommended  the 
given norms for WHR:

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   295 31-07-2020   15:44:41



296 Health and Physical Education - XI

Men Women Health risk level
.95 or less .80 or less Low risk
.96 to 1.0 .81 to .85 Moderate risk
1.0 or higher .85 or higher High risk

Measurement procedure
While taking the measurement of an individual’s waist, he/ 
she should be asked to stand straight and breathe out. 
Then place the tape around the waist just above his or her 
belly button and take the measurement in centimetres. In the 
same manner, place the tape around the hip of an individual, 
where his or her hip is widest then take the measurement.

Somato Types (Endomorphy, Mesomorphy 
and Ectomorphy)
In the 1940s, American Psychologist William Herbert Sheldon 
developed a theory that there are three body types, or somato 
types — Endomorph, Mesomorph and Ectomorph. The 
names were given after the three germ layers of embryonic 
development; the endoderm (develops into the digestive tract), 
the mesoderm (becomes muscle, heart and blood vessels), 
and the ectoderm (forms the skin and nervous system). Each 
somato type has its own distinct physical characteristics and 
supposedly distinet personality as well. The unique physical 
characteristics of each body type are still widely used as an 
important factor while designing workout routines for the 
individual.

Endomorph Mesomorph Ectomorph
Fig. 9.8: Three body types

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   296 31-07-2020   15:44:42



Measurement and Evaluation 297

	 1.	Endomorph: An endomorphic individual typically 
has short arms and legs and a large amount of mass 
on their frame. Their mass hampers their ability to 
compete in sports requiring high levels of agility or 
speed and perform sustained weight bearing aerobic 
activities such as running. Sports of pure strength, 
like power lifting, are perfect for an endomorph. They 
can gain weight easily and lose condition quickly if 
the training stops. Such individuals have:

	 (i)	 a pear shaped body
	 (ii)	 a rounded head
	 (iii)	 wide hips and shoulders
	 (iv)	 wider front to back rather than side to side
	 (v)	 a lot of fat on the body, upper arms and thighs
	 (vi)	 Such individuals are good for sports such as 

rugby where bulk is useful, provided it can be 
moved powerfully. They tend to have large lung 
capacity which can make them suited to sports 
such as rowing. They can increase muscle mass 
much more easily than ectomorphs.

	 2.	Mesomorph: A mesomorphic individual excels in 
strength, agility, and speed related games/sports. 
Their medium structure and height, along with their 
tendency to gain muscle and strength easily makes 
them a strong candidate for a top athlete in any sport. 
They can sustain low body fat levels and find it easy 
to lose and gain weight. They have: 

	 (i)	 a wedge shaped body
	 (ii)	 a cubical head
	 (iii)	 wide broad shoulders
	 (iv)	 muscled arms and legs
	 (v)	 narrow hips
	 (vi)	 narrow from front to back rather than side to side
	 (vii)	 minimum amount of fat
	 (viii)	 Such individuals have sport benefits. They can 

respond well to cardiovascular and resistance 
training and can sustain low body fat levels. All 
the muscle groups can be used by them to derive 
positive training adoption.

	 (ix)	 Depending on the sport’s needs, they can easily 
gain or lose weight

	 3.	Ectomorph: A predominantly ectomorphic individual 
is long, slender and thin, and therefore power and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   297 31-07-2020   15:44:42



298 Health and Physical Education - XI

strength sports are perhaps not suitable as they 
are more susceptible to injuries. While they can 
easily get lean and hard, their lack of musculature, 
severely limits their chances in sports requiring 
mass. Ectomorphs dominate endurance sports and 
gymnastics. They can archive low levels of body fat 
which can be detrimental to health and for females 
in endurance sports, it can result in a cessation of 
periods and iron deficiency. Such individuals have:

	 (i)	 a high forehead
	 (ii)	 receding chin
	 (iii)	 narrow shoulders and hips
	 (iv)	 a narrow chest and abdomen
	 (v)	 thin arms and legs
	 (vi)	 little muscle and fat
		  One can conclude that every individual should try 

to find out by using these tests to see what types 
of activities should be done to remain healthy 
and fit.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   298 31-07-2020   15:44:42



Assessment

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 List and explain the tests related to muscular strength.
	 2.	 List and explain the tests related to muscular endurance.
	 3.	 Write down the procedure of Abdominal Curl-up test.
	 4.	 Explain the waist-hip ratio in detail.
	 5.	 Explain the three somato types in detail.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 What is test?
	 2.	 What is measurement?
	 3.	 What is evaluation?
	 4.	 What is flexibility?
	 5.	 Write down two characteristics of each somato type.

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 _____________ is calculated by dividing weight by the square of 

height.
	 2.	 _____________ is a tool.
	 3.	 Measurement can be ___________ or __________ both.
	 4.	 Two types of flexibility are ___________ flexibility and _________ 

flexibility.

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 BMI stands for body measurement index.
	 2.	 Flexibility is range of motion around the various joints.
	 3.	 Anthropometer or stadiometer is used for measuring weight.
	 4.	 The objective of squat thrust is to identify and assess muscular 

strength and endurance of the lower body.
	 5.	 The objective of abdominal curl-up test is to identify and assess 

the muscular strength and endurance of back muscles.
	 6.	 The objective of push-up test is to identify and assess muscular 

strength and endurance of the upper body.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-9.indd   299 31-07-2020   15:44:42



Tournaments  
and  

Competitions 10
Activity 10.1 You may have heard about tournaments that are organised 
Collect information about the for different sports at different levels. Have you read or heard 
types of tournaments played at about world cup tournaments for Cricket, Hockey, Football 
school level in different games or Kabaddi? Such tournaments are also held at national and 
and sports. state level and even at local level. You or your friends may 

have participated in inter-school or other open tournaments 
for Kabaddi, Kho-Kho, Football, Volleyball, Basketball and 
Cricket organised at the zone, district or local levels.

A tournament is a competition held among different teams 
in a particular game or sport according to a fixed schedule 
where a winner is decided. Different types of tournaments 
are — Knock-out or Elimination Tournament (Single Knock-
out or Single Elimination, Consolation Type I and Type II, C 
Double Knock-out or Double Elimination), League or Round 
Robin Tournament (Single League, and Double League), 
Combination Tournament (Knock-out cum Knock-out, 
Knock-out cum League, League cum Knock-out, League cum 
League) and Challenge Tournament (Ladder, and Pyramid).

While deciding the type of tournament to be conducted, 
the season, time of disposal, play fields and equipment, type 
of activity, officials, and finance/budget must be taken into 
consideration.

Different types of tournaments with their merits and 
demerits, and the method of drawing fixtures have been 
described in this chapter.

Knock out or Elimination Tournament

Single Knock out or Single Elimination
In single knock out tournament, the teams once defeated, 
are eliminated and not given another chance to play. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   300 31-07-2020   15:46:00



##10##
Tournaments and Competitions 301

Total number of matches in the tournament = N – 1, 
where N is the number of teams competing.

For example, if N = 13
Total number of matches = 13 –1 =12

Method of Drawing Fixtures
	 1.	Drawing fixture for a certain number of teams competing 

is decided by the power of two, viz. 2, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 
… etc., i.e., 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, … respectively.

	 2.	Suppose 16 teams have entered for a tournament, 
there will be no byes i.e. 16 – 16 = 0.

	 3.	 If the number of teams participating is not a power of 
2, the byes will be given to a specific number of teams 
in the first round.

	 4.	The number of ‘Byes’ to be given is decided by 
subtracting the number of teams from its next 
higher number which is the power of two. For 
example, if 13 teams entered for a competition, 
number of Byes = 16 – 13 = 3 and for 25 teams, number 
of Byes = 32 – 25 = 7

Seeding
Single Knock out Fixture for 8 Teams

Round I	 I RRd.oundI IIIR	 d. RouIInIdR IdI.I
1

2
Upper
Half

3

4

5

6
Lower
Half 7

8

N 8
Upper Half = = = 4 Teams

2 2

N 8
Lower Half = = = 4 Teams

2 2

No.. off mattches = N–-1 = 8-–1  =  7

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   301 31-07-2020   15:46:01



302 Health and Physical Education - XI

Single Knock out Fixture for 10 Teams
Round I	 Round II	 Round III

Single Knock out Fixture for 11 Teams
Round I	 Round II	 Round III	 Round IV

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   302 31-07-2020   15:46:02



Tournaments and Competitions 303

Procedure of giving byes Activity 10.2
Ist Bye	 —	 Bottom of the lower half •• Draw a fixture of nine 
IInd Bye	 —	 Top of the upper half teams for a Single 
IIIrd Bye	 —	 Top of the bottom half Knock-out tourament 
IVth Bye	 —	 Bottom of the upper half and show it to your 

teacher.
This process continues in case the number of byes are more 
than four. •• Collect information 

about the rules and 
A knock-out fixture is usually drawn by lots and if it is drawn regulations for drawing 
purely on the basis of lots without considering the standards fixtures in Inter School 
of the teams, strong teams may meet each other in the earlier Competitions.
rounds, hence allowing the weaker teams reaching upto 
semifinals resulting in unfair and uninteresting competition. 
To avoid this, seeding is done. Seeding is sorting of strong 
teams and fitting them into the fixtures so that these teams 
do not meet in the earlier rounds.

If there is no marked difference in the standard of the 
seeded teams, then these teams are distributed in the fixture 
by lots among them.

Table 1: Number of Teams in each Quarter

Dividend No. of teams in each quarter
and Divisor Remainder

I II III IV
N ÷ 4 0 Q Q Q Q
N ÷ 4 1 Q + 1 Q Q Q
N ÷ 4 2 Q + 1 Q Q + 1 Q
N ÷ 4 3 Q + 1 Q + 1 Q + 1 Q

(N = No. of Teams,  Q = Quotient)

No. of Teams/entries		  5 to 8
					     = 2×2×2 = 23

					     = 3 Rounds
No. of Teams/entries		  9 to 16

					     = 2×2×2×2 = 24

					     = 4 Rounds
No. of Teams/entries		  17 to 32

					     = 2×2×2×2×2 = 25

					     = 5 Rounds
No. of Teams/entries 		  33 to 64
					     = 2×2×2×2×2×2 = 26

					     = 6 Rounds
No. of Teams/entries		  65 to 129

					     = 2×2×2×2×2×2×2 = 27

					     = 7 Rounds

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   303 31-07-2020   15:46:02



304 Health and Physical Education - XI

Merits and Demerits of Single Knock out or Elimination 
Tournament
Merits
	 (i)	Tournament finishes in a short time.
	 (ii)	There will be economy of expenditure.
	 (iii)	The competition will be keen and intense due to the 

fear of elimination of a team from the tournament, 
when defeated.

Demerits
	 (i)	A team may be eliminated by chance and will not get 

another chance to play.
	 (ii)	 If the fixture is drawn purely by lots, there is a 

possibility of matches between strong teams in the 
earlier rounds, which would get eliminated, thus 
weaker teams reaching Semifinals or the Finals.

	 (iii)	Winner of a match/round may have to wait for the 
winner of another match to play the next round. 

Special Seeding
When some top ranking players or teams participate in 
a tournament, the fixtures are generally drawn in such a 
manner that these players or teams play directly at Quarter 
Finals or Semifinals stage. 

A fixture of 24 teams participating in a tournament 
including 4 teams, i.e., 1, 12, 13 and 24, are given special 
seeding direct at the Quarter Finals stage.

For deciding the number of byes for the fixture of 
special seeding, first subtract the number of teams that are 
given special seeding (4) from the total number of teams 
participating (24), i.e., 24 – 4 = 20.

Now, Number of Byes = 32 – 20 = 12 Byes.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   304 31-07-2020   15:46:02



Tournaments and Competitions 305

Single Knock out Fixture for 24 Teams
(Special Seeding 4 teams)
I Rd. II Rd.III Rd.IV Rd. V Rd.VI Rd.

Rd. I      Rd. II      Rd. III      Rd. IV      Rd. V      Rd. VI
1 Seeded 2

2 Bye
Activity 10.3

3 Prepare a Single Knock out 
Fixture for 47 teams with 

4 specially seeding four teams 
directly into Quarter Finals.

5 Bye

6 Bye

7 Bye

8

9

10 Bye

11 Bye

12 Seeded 4

13 Seeded 3

14 Bye

15

16

17 Bye

18 Bye

19 Bye

20

21

22 Bye

23 Bye

24 Seeded 1

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   305 31-07-2020   15:46:02

Lower Half Upper Half

IV Quarter III Quarter II Quarter I Quarter



306 Health and Physical Education - XI

Consolation Tournament
In single knock out or elimination tournament, a team may 
be eliminated by chance and will not have another chance to 
play. To avoid this, consolation tournaments are advocated. 
Consolation indicates that defeated teams would play again 
to show their worth and win subsidiary honours. Greater 
number of matches are possible in this tournament, and 
hence it’s superior to single knock out tournament. 

Consolation tournament is of two types—
•• I Type of Consolation Tournament   
•• II Type of Consolation Tournament

I Type of Consolation Tournament 
	 1.	Each team will have a chance to play atleast twice.
	 2.	Teams first play a regular knock out tournament. 
	 3.	Teams that are eliminated in the first match in the 

regular round will play among themselves in the 
consolation round for subsidiary honours.

Fixture for 13 teams
Regular Round

I Rd. II Rd. III Rd. IV Rd.

Round I       Round II        Round III       Round IV
1 1

2
2

2
3 3

4
4

2
5 5

6
6 6

7 7 Bye 7

2 Winner
8

8
9 9

8
10 10 Bye 10

13
11 11

12
12

13

13 Bye 13

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   306 31-07-2020   15:46:02

Losers in their Match



Tournaments and Competitions 307

Consolation Round (for losers)
Round I       Round II       Round III

I Rd. II Rd. III Rd.

5

3
3

3
1

10
10

11

9
9

7 11

11 Bye 11

II Type of Consolation Tournament
In II type of consolation tournament, every loser of the regular 
round will have a chance to play in the consolation round to 
win subsidiary honours.
Method 1

Fixture for 16 teams (without byes)
I Rd. II Rd. III RdR. eIgVuRlda.r round

Round I       Round II       Round III        Round IV
1

2
2

2
3

4
4

2
5

6
6

8
7

8
8

2 RW
9

10
10

10
11

12
12

10
13

14
14

16
15

16
16

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   307 31-07-2020   15:46:02



308 Health and Physical Education - XI

LOSERS
Round I		  Round II	 Round III	 Round IV
  1			    4		    8		  10
  3			    6		  16
  5			  12
  7			  14
  9
11
13
15

Consolation Round
1

3 14 14
3

5 8 8
5

5 12 5
7

8 10 10 CW

9
9 6 6

11
13 16 13

13
13 4 13

15

RW — Regular Winner		  CW — Consolation Winner

Fixture of 11 teams (with byes)
Regular Round

Round II R   d .   RounIId RIId  .      RIIoIuRndd. III I  V   R  dR.ound IV 
1

1
2

3
3 Bye 3

4 3

4
5 6

6 Bye 6

9 RW
7

7
8

9
9 Bye

9

10 Bye
11

11 Bye 9

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   308 31-07-2020   15:46:02



Tournaments and Competitions 309

LOSERS
Round I 		  Round II 	 Round III 	 Round IV 
2			     1		    6		  3
5			     4		  11
8			     7

			   10
Consolation Round

2
2

10
2 6

6
Upper 5

5
Half 1

7 3 3 CW

Lower 8

Half 4
4 7

7 11

                    7 Bye 7

From the two methods of drawing fixtures for the II type of 
consolation tournaments, the first method is recommended. 

Total number of matches to be played in consolation type 
II = 2 N – 3, where N is the number of participating teams. 

Double Knock out or Double Elimination Tournament 
•• A team must be defeated twice to be eliminated. 
•• Tournament is continued until all the teams are 

defeated twice except one team. 
•• It is superior to single knock-out and consolation 

tournament because it decides the true winners. 
•• Double elimination is an extension of consolation type II.
•• Regular winner plays with the consolation winner to 

decide the champion. 
•• Total number of matches in this tournament shall be 

(2n – 2) or (2n – 1).
Fixture for 10 Teams (consolation round)

10 RW
2

2 10 Champion
4 2 3 3

7 Bye 7 1 5 5

1
1

8 1 6 1

9 Bye 9

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   309 31-07-2020   15:46:03



310 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fixture for 10 Teams (Regular Round)
RouInRd dI.        IRI Roud.nd II   I I  I  RRdo.undIV IIRI d  .     Round IV 

1 Bye 1

2 3
3

3 5

4 Bye 4 5
5 Bye 5

10 (RW)
6

6
7

6
8 Bye 8

10

9 Bye 9 10
10 Bye 10

(If number 5 wins instead of number 10, then they will 
have to play again to decide the champion because both the 
numbers 5 and 10 have been defeated only once.)

Bagnall-wild Elimination Tournament

This tournament can truly decide the first three places.
Fixture for 12 Teams (regular round)

1 Bye 1

2 1
3

3
1

4
5

5 5

6 Bye 6
1 I Place

7 Bye 7

8 7
9

9 7

10
10

11 10

12 Bye 12

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   310 31-07-2020   15:46:03



Tournaments and Competitions 311

Fixture for 12 Teams (consolation round)
3

5 7 7 II Place

5

9

9 5 5 III Place

10

In the above fixture of 12 teams, the first 3 places are 
decided as follows—

First place: Winners of the regular knock out tournament 
gets first place. 

Second place: All the teams defeated by first place winner 
except the defeated finalist play among themselves on knock 
out basis and their winner plays with the defeated finalist. 
The winner of this match gets second place. 

Third place: All the teams defeated by the runner ups of 
the regular tournament play among themselves on knock out 
basis and the winner plays with the loser of the final round 
for second place. The winner of this match gets third place.

Note: If number 5 gets second place instead of number 7. 
Third place will automatically be accorded to number 7 
(without any further matches).

League or Round Robin Tournament
	 (a)	Single League: In Single League tournaments, each 

team play once with every other team.
N(N 1)

		 Total no. of Matches in Single League = , here 
2

N is number of teams.
			  For example, if 7 teams are competing, the total 

7(7 1)
number of matches will be = = 21

2

Merits
	 (i)	 It decides the true winner.
	 (ii)	Teams play more number of matches.
	 (iii)	 It helps in ranking the participating teams. 
	 (iv)	The teams need not wait for the completion of other 

matches or rounds.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   311 31-07-2020   15:46:03



312 Health and Physical Education - XI

Demerits
	 (i)	 It requires a lot of time and facilities. 
	 (ii)	Teams that get defeated often will lose interest in the 

game.
	 b.	Double League: In double league, every team plays 

twice with every other team. 
		 Total number of matches in Double League = N (N – 1), 
		 where N is the number of teams participating in a 

tournament.
Method of Drawing Fixture for Single League
Cyclic Method

Fixture of 5 teams
N(N 1) 5(5 1)

No. of Matches = = = 10
2 2

      RI dR.d I.           RIIdR. IdI .          IRIId.R IdII.          IRVd.R IdV.          RVdR. dV.

5 Bye 4 Bye 3 Bye 2 Bye 1 Bye

4 1 3 5 2 4 1 3 5 2

3 2 2 1 1 5 5 4 4 3
    

Fixture of 6 teams
     RIdR. dI .           IRIdR. dII.          I RIIdR. dII.I         I VRdR. dIV.           VRdR.d V.

6 1 5 1 4 1 3 1 2 1

5 2 4 6 3 5 2 4 6 3

4 3 3 2 2 6 6 5 5 4
    

For drawing fixture by Cyclic Method, fix number. 1 in case 
of even number of teams and fix Bye in case of odd number 
of teams and rotate the other numbers clockwise as shown 
in the above fixture. 

Total number of rounds for even number of teams = N – 1 
rounds

Total number of rounds for odd number of teams = N 
rounds,

where N is the number of teams 
Tabular Method
In this method, the fixtures are drawn in a tabular form. 
The numbers of columns to be drawn horizontally as well as 
vertically are—
	 a)	For even number of teams, N+1 columns
	 b)	For odd number of teams, N+2 columns 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   312 31-07-2020   15:46:04



Tournaments and Competitions 313

Procedure for entering the numbers inside the squares 
indicating the rounds—
	 (i)	 In the squares of the horizontal columns immediately 

below the teams, enter the numbers serially from 
number 1 onwards.

	 (ii)	 In each vertical column except the last one, enter the 
numbers serially starting from the number next to 
that round at the teams. 

Fixture of 8 teams

A B C D E F G H

A 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

B 3 4 5 6 7 2

C 5 6 7 1 4

D 7 1 2 6

E 2 3 1

F 4 3

G 5

H

N(N 1) 8(8 1)
No. of Matches = = = 28

2 2

Rd. I Rd. II Rd. III Rd. IV Rd. V Rd. VI Rd. VII
AB AC AD AE AF AG AH
DF BH BC BD BE BF BG
CG DG EG CH CD CE CF
EH EF FH FG GH DH DE

	 (iii)	Note the number entered in the top square of the 
last vertical column. In the next square, enter 2. 
Then precede entering numbers in the other squares 
every time adding 2, i.e., 4, 6, etc., until the number 
becomes 1 less than the number at the top-most 
square.

	 (iv)	After this, enter number 1, 3, 5, etc., i.e., by 2 every 
time until the bottom-most square is filled up.

	 (v)	The number of bottom-most square will be 2 less than 
the number of the top-most square.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   313 31-07-2020   15:46:04



314 Health and Physical Education - XI

Fixture of 7 teams

A B C D E F G Bye

A 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

B 3 4 5 6 7 2

C 5 6 7 1 4
Activity 10.4
•• Prepare a fixture for D 7 1 2 6

Classes VI to IX for 
Single League Inter E 2 3 1
Class tournament and 
show it to your teacher. F 4 3

•• Collect information G 5
about a game played 
on Single League basis. Bye
Also try to understand 
the rules to decide the 
winner and discuss it N(N 1) 7(7 1)
without your teacher. No. of Matches = = = 21

2 2

Rd. I Rd. II Rd. III Rd. IV Rd. V Rd. VI Rd. VII
AB AC AD AE AF AG DE
CG DG BC BD BE BF BG
DF EF EG FG CD CE CF

E Bye B Bye F Bye C Bye G Bye D Bye A Bye
Staircase Method

Fixture of 7 teams by staircase method

1 — 2
1 — 3 2 — 3
1 — 4 2 — 4 3 — 4
1 — 5 2 — 5 3 — 5 4 — 5
1 — 6 2 — 6 3 — 6 4 — 6 5 — 6
1 — 7 2 — 7 3 — 7 4 — 7 5 — 7 6 — 7

Drawbacks of staircase method
	 (i)	 It does not indicate the number of rounds to be played.
	 (ii)	 It is not easy to fix the matches of rounds.
Method of deciding winners in league tournaments 
The winners in league tournaments are generally decided on 
the basis of points scored by the respective teams.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   314 31-07-2020   15:46:04



Tournaments and Competitions 315

Generally, points awarded are:
		  Win = 2 points
		  Loss = 0 points
		  Draw = 1 points to each team
Team getting maximum number of points is declared the 

winner. 
In case of a tie between two or more number of teams, 

the ranking is established according to rules and regulations 
of the International/National Federation of that game 
or as decided by the Tournament Authorities prior to the 
commencement of the tournament.

Combination Tournament 
•• Combination tournaments are usually conducted 

whenever the matches are to be played on group basis 
or zonal basis. 

•• Combination tournaments are highly recommended 
for conducting Inter-School tournaments in a district, 
state or zone to save time and money.

a. Knock-out cum Knock-out
(Four zones or Groups A, B, C, D)

Zonal or Group Knock out
1

2
A Winner of Zone A

3

4

1

2
B Winner of Zone B

3

4

1

2
C Winner of Zone C

3

4

1

2
D Winner of Zone D

3

4

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   315 31-07-2020   15:46:05



316 Health and Physical Education - XI

Inter Zonal or Group Knock out
Winner of A

Winner of B
Winner of D

Winner of C

Winner of D

b. Knock-out cum League
(Four zones or Groups A, B, C, D)

Zonal or Group Knock out
1

2
A Winner of Zone A

3

4

1

2
B Winner of Zone B

3

4

1

2
C Winner of Zone C

3

4

1

2
D Winner of Zone D

3

4

Inter Zonal or Inter Group League
	 AB	
	 AC	 BC
	 AD	 BD	 CD

c. League-cum-League
(For Zones or Groups A, B, C, D)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   316 31-07-2020   15:46:05



Tournaments and Competitions 317

Zonal or Group League
1 — 2

A 1 — 3 2 — 3 Winner of Zone A

1 — 4 2 — 4 3 — 4

1 — 2

B 1 — 3 2 — 3 Winner of Zone B

1 — 4 2 — 4 3 — 4

1 — 2

C 1 — 3 2 — 3 Winner of Zone C

1 — 4 2 — 4 3 — 4

1 — 2

D 1 — 3 2 — 3 Winner of Zone D

1 — 4 2 — 4 3 — 4

Inter Zonal or Inter Group League
A — B 	
A — C		  B — C
A — D		  B — D		 C — D

d. League-cum-Knock-out
(For Zones or Groups A, B, C, D)

Zonal or Group League
1 — 2

A 1 — 3 2 — 3 Winner of Zone A

1 — 4 2 — 4 3 — 4

1 — 2

B 1 — 3 2 — 3 Winner of Zone B

1 — 4 2 — 4 3 — 4

1 — 2

C 1 — 3 2 — 3 Winner of Zone C

1 — 4 2 — 4 3 — 4

1 — 2

D 1 — 3 2 — 3 Winner of Zone D

1 — 4 2 — 4 3 — 4

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   317 31-07-2020   15:46:05



318 Health and Physical Education - XI

Inter Zonal or Inter Group Knock out

Winner of A

Winner of B
Champion

Winner of C

Winner of D

Challenge Tournaments
•• Challenge tournaments are usually conducted for 

games like Badminton, Table Tennis, Squash, etc. 
•• Challenge tournaments can be carried out during any 

specified period of time without any fixed schedule. 
•• This tournament helps in selecting the best players in 

individual or dual games. 
Two common types of challenge tournaments are:

	 (a)	Ladder Tournament 
	 (b)	Pyramid Tournament
Ladder Tournament
Before starting the ladder tournament, the players shall be 
arranged in a ladder arbitrarily. Certain rules are followed in 
the conduct of the tournaments.
	 1.	The period within which the tournament is to be 

finished is specified. 
	 2.	A player can challenge only the player immediately 

X above him. For example, N can challenge any one of 
the two or three players above him.

Z
	 3.	Challenge must be accepted and played only in the 

C order they are made. 
B 	 4.	The time to play the accepted challenge should be 

specified.
A 	 5.	After the challenge match, if the challenger has 
M defeated the player he challenged, the challenger 

is placed above the loser in the ladder. If not, their 
N original position remains in the ladder. 
R 	 6.	The players who have already played a challenge shall 

not be allowed to play or challenge again. 
S 	 7.	No excuse after the challenge for a failure is accepted. 
Z 	 8.	At the end of the specified period of the tournament, 

the player remaining on the top of the ladder is 
declared the winner or the best. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   318 31-07-2020   15:46:05



Tournaments and Competitions 319

Pyramid Tournament
	 1.	Pyramid tournament is a modified form of ladder 

tournament. 
	 2.	Players are arranged in the form of a pyramid 

arbitrarily. 
	 3.	Players of a particular rank can challenge any one 

of the players in the rank immediately above him 
provided he has challenged the players of his own 
rank and won. For example, H in rank 4 can challenge 
C or M or L in rank 3 only after he has challenged and 
won against K or F or S in his own rank.

1 A

2 D G

3
C M L

4 H K F S

Competitions
Participation in international sports competitions like 
Olympic Games, Asian Games and Commonwealth Games 
help people to know each other and provide opportunities to 
the participants to see others. It promotes friendship among 
people of all the continents. 

Importance of sports participation in international 
competitions
	 1.	Participation in sports develops unity of mind and 

body by which optimum health is achieved.
	 2.	 It helps in promoting social peace and justice.
	 3.	 It helps in promoting social democracy. 
	 4.	 It helps in breaking the barriers between social classes 

and nations.
There are different types of competitions being organised 

at International, National, State or Zone and University 
levels. These competitions are being discussed here.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   319 31-07-2020   15:46:05



320 Health and Physical Education - XI

Ancient Olympic Games
First Ancient Olympic Games were held in 776 B.C. These 
games were regularly held once in four years. A sequence 
of 293 Olympics was terminated in 394 A.D. by the Roman 
Emperor Theodosius.

Modern or Summer Olympic Games
Baron Pierre de Coubertin was the founder of the Modern 
Olympic Games. Modern Olympic Games are also held once 
in four years and were first held in Athens (Greece) in 1896. 
But during the two world wars, the Olympic Games (i.e., 
VIth, XIIth  and XIIIth Olympiads respectively in the year 
1916,1940 and 1944) were not held. 

International Olympic Committee is the supreme 
controlling body of the Modern Olympic Games which was 
formed in Paris on 25th June 1894 with its headquarter in 
Lausanne (Switzerland). IOC is a permanent and self-elected 
body, which has at least one member from each country that 
has National Olympic Committee. From India, Sir Dorabji 
Jamshedji Tata, G.D. Sondhi and Raja Bhalindera Singh had 
the honour of being members of IOC.

India first participated in the Olympic Games in 1900 
with Norman Pitchard winning two Silver Medals in 200 
m and 200 m hurdles. Indian Men’s Hockey team has won 
8 gold medals (six successive gold from 1928–1956, 1964 
and 1980), 1 silver medal (1960 Rome Olympic games) and 
2 bronze medals (1968, Mexico and 1972, Munich Olympic 
games).

In 1952 Helsinki (Finland) Olympic Games, Khashaba 
Jadhav won bronze medal in Men’s Freestyle Bantamweight 
category in Wrestling. In 1996 Atlanta (USA) Olympic Games, 
Leander Paes won bronze medal in Men’s Singles event in 
tennis.

In 2000 Sydney (Australia) Olympic Games, Karnam 
Malleswari won bronze medal in Women’s Weightlifting 69 
kg weight category. In 2004 Athens (Greece) Olympic Games, 
Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore won Silver medal in men’s 
double trap in Shooting. In 2008 Beijing (China) Olympics, 
India won 1 gold medal (Abhinav Bindra in Men’s 10 m 
Air Rifle Shooting) and  2 bronze (Vijender Singh in Middle 
weight, 75 kg category in Boxing and Sushil Kumar in Men’s 
freestyle, 66 kg category in Wrestling).

In 2012 London (Britain) Olympic Games, India won 2 
silver medals (Vijay Kumar in Men’s 25 m rapid fire pistol 
in Shooting and Sushil Kumar in Men’s freestyle 66 kg weight 
category in Wrestling) and 4 bronze medals (Gagan Narang 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   320 31-07-2020   15:46:05



Tournaments and Competitions 321

in Men’s 10 m Air Rifle Shooting, Saina Nehwal in Women’s Activity 10.5
Singles in Badminton, Mary Kom in Women’s Flyweight category Collect photographs of Summer 
in Boxing and Yogeshwar Dutt in Men’s Freestyle 60 kg weight and Paralympic medal winners 
category in Wrestling). In 2016 Reo de Janeiro (Brazil), India of India. Prepare a collage with 
won 1 silver medal (Pusarla Venkata Sindhu in Women’s Singles caption. Share it with your 
event in Badminton) and 1 bronze medal (Sakshi Malik in classmates.
Women’s freestyle 58 kg in Wrestling). In 2020, Olympic Games 
will be held at Tokyo (Japan), 2024 Games at Paris (France) and 
2028 Games will be held at Los Angeles (USA).

Winter Olympic Games
The Winter Olympic Games started in Chamonix (France) 
in 1924. Winter sports like Figure Skating, Ice Hockey, Ski 
Jumping, Speed Skating, Alpine Skiing, Freestyle Skating are 
included in Winter Olympic Games. In 2018, Winter Olympic 
Games were held at Pyeongchang (Korea) and 2022 Winter 
Olympic Games will be held at Beijing (China).

Paralympic Games 
Paralympic Games are the international competitions specially 
organised for para atheletes. In other words, we can say that 
“These are the special Olympic Games organised for para 
athletes. Paralympic Games started in Rome (Italy) in 1960. 
In Paralympic sports, athletes who participate are grouped 
into different categories, based on their type of disability such 
as Physical Impairment, Visual Impairment and Intellectual 
Disability. In 2016 Paralympic Games in Reo de Janeiro (Brazil), 
India won 2 gold medals (Mariyappan Thangavelu in Men’s 
High Jump and Devendra Jhajharia in Men’s Javelin), 1 silver 
medal (Deepa Malik in Women’s Shot Put) and 1 bronze medal 
(Varun Singh Bhati in Men’s High Jump). The International 
Paralympic Committee (IPC) is the global governing body of the 
paralympic movement. Its purpose is to organise the summer 
and winter Paralympic Games and act as the International 
Federation for ten sports, supervising and coordinating World 
Championships and other competitions.”

Founded on 22 September, 1989 as a non-profit 
organisation, it is based in Bonn, Germany and aims to develop 
sports opportunities for all the people with impairment from 
the beginner to elite level.

Till 2016, the Summer Paralympic Games included 22 
sports and 526 medal events, and the Winter Paralympic 
Games included 5 sports and disciplines and about 72 
events. The number and types of events change from one 
Paralympic Game to another.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   321 31-07-2020   15:46:05



322 Health and Physical Education - XI

Commonwealth Games 
Melville Marks Robinson was the founder of the 
Commonwealth games. The First Commonwealth games 
were held in 1930 in Hamilton (Canada). Since then, the 
Commonwealth Games have been conducted every four 
years except for 1942 and 1946 due to World War II. From 
1930 to 1950, the games were known as the British Empire 
Games. From 1954 to 1966, the games were called the British 
Empire and Commonwealth Games and from 1970 to 1974, 
the games were termed as the British Commonwealth Games. 
It was from 1978 Edmonton (Canada) Games onwards, these 
are known as the Commonwealth Games.

India’s Performance in Commonwealth Games
Medals

Year Edition Venue Rank
Gold Silver Bronze Total

2018 XXI Gold Coast 
(Australia) 26 20 20 66 3rd

2014 XX Glasgow  
(Scotland) 15 30 19 64 4th

2010 XIX Delhi 
(India) 38 27 36 101 3rd

2006 XVIII Melbourne 
(Australia) 22 17 11 50 4th

2002 XVII Manchester 
(England) 30 22 17 69 4th

Kuala 
1998 XVI Lumpur 7 10 8 25 7th

(Malaysia)

1994 XV Victoria  
(Canada) 6 11 7 24 6th

Auckland 
1990 XIV (New  13 8 11 32 5th

Zealand)

1986 XIII Edinburgh 
(Scotland) Did not participate

1982 XII Brisbane  
(Australia) 5 8 3 16 6th

1978 XI Edmonton 
(Canada) 5 5 5 15 6th

Christchurch 
1974 X (New  4 8 3 15 6th

Zealand)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   322 31-07-2020   15:46:05



Tournaments and Competitions 323

1970 IX Edinburgh 
(Scotland) 5 3 4 12 6th

1966 VIII Kingston 
(Jamaica) 3 4 3 10 8th

1962 VI Perth 
(Australia) Did not participate

1958 VI Cardiff 
(Wales) 2 1 0 3 8th

1954 V Vancouver 
(Canada) 0 0 0 - -

Auckland 
1950 IV (New Did not participate

Zealand)
1946

Not held due to World War II
1942

1938 III Sydney 
(Australia) 0 0 0 - -

1934 II London 
(England) 0 0 1 1 12th

1930 I Hamilton 
(Canada) Did not participate

Asian Games
The inaugural Asian Games were held in New Delhi, India 
in 1951. The Asian Games, also known as Asiad are held 
every four years. 2018 Asian Games were held at Palembang, 
Jakarta (Indonesia). 2022 Asian Games will be conducted in 
Hangzhou (China).

India’s Performance in Asian Games
Medals

Year Edition Venue Rank
Gold Silver Bronze Total

Palembang, 
2018 XVIII Jakarta 15 24 30 69 8th

(Indonesia)

2014 XVII Incheon 
(Korea) 11 9 37 57 8th

2010 XVI Guangzhou 
(China) 14 17 34 65 6th

2006 XV Doha 
(Qatar) 10 17 26 53 8th

2002 XIV Busan 
(South Korea) 11 12 14 37 7th

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   323 31-07-2020   15:46:06



324 Health and Physical Education - XI

1998 XIII Bangkok 
(Thailand) 7 11 17 35 9th

1994 XII Hiroshima 
(Japan) 4 3 16 23 8th

1990 XI Beijing 
(China) 1 8 14 23 11th

Seoul 
1986 X (South  5 9 23 37 5th

Korea)

1982 IX New Delhi 
(India) 13 19 25 57 5th

1978 VIII Bangkok 
(Thailand) 11 10 7 28 6th

1974 VII Tehran 
(Iran) 4 12 11 27 7th

1970 VI Bangkok 
(Thailand) 6 9 10 25 5th

1966 V Bangkok 
(Thailand) 7 3 11 21 5th

1962 IV Jakarta 
(Indonesia) 10 9 11 30 3rd

1958 III Tokyo 
(Japan) 5 4 5 14 7th

1954 II Manila 
(Philippines) 5 4 8 17 5th

1951 I New Delhi 
(India) 17 17 18 52 2nd

National Games
Early National Games termed as Indian Olympic Games 
started in 1924 at Lahore. The games were held every two 
years. Indian Olympic Games were renamed as National 
Games from the IX Games in Bombay in 1940. National Games 
on the lines of the Olympic Games started in 1985 in Delhi. 
Last National Games were held at Thiruvananthapuram 
(Kerala) in 2015.

National Championships
National Sports Associations and Federations conduct the 
National Championships in their game or sport every year. 
National Federations conduct National Championships 
in Mini, Sub Junior, Junior, Youth, Senior and Veteran 
categories in boys/men as well as girls/women section. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   324 31-07-2020   15:46:06



Tournaments and Competitions 325

National Championships in different individual games like 
Badminton, Table Tennis, etc., are conducted for individual 
events as well as team events. In games like Wrestling, Judo, 
etc., National Championships are conducted in different 
weight categories by the concerned National Associations or 
Federations.

Inter University Tournaments
Inter University Tournaments in India started in 1941. 
Sports Department of Indian Universities allocates the 
tournaments to different universities for organising inter-
university tournaments in different games and sports for 
participation of University students. The tournaments are 
organised annually on all India basis/4 zone basis and played 
on Knock-out/League/League cum Knock-out basis. Only 
member universities/institutes of the association are eligible 
to enter their teams to participate in the Inter University 
tournaments, with only one team from each university.

SGFI Games
School Games Federation of India (SGFI) is a voluntary 
organisation which was formed in December, 1954 to 
promote games and sports for boys and girls at National 
and International level. Different States and affiliated units 
participate in National School Games organised every year. 
It conducts competitions at National level for various games 
and sports like Athletics, Badminton, Football, Wrestling, 
Kabaddi, Table Tennis, etc. Competitions are organised for 
different age groups i.e. (U-14, U-17 and U-19). Only school 
boys and girls below 19 years can participate in these games. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   325 31-07-2020   15:46:06



Assessment

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Draw a fixture for Single Knock-out Tournament with 11 

teams.
	 2.	 Draw a fixture of 5 teams for Single League Tournament using 

Tabular Method.
	 3.	 Draw a fixture of Single League Tournament with 7 teams 

using Cyclic Method.
	 4.	 Write the merits and demerits of Single League Tournament.
	 5.	 Draw a fixture for Single League Tournament with 6 teams 

using Staircase Method.
	 6.	 List and explain different types of competitions that are being 

organised at International level.
	 7.	 List and explain different types of competitions that are being 

organised in India.
	 8.	 Explain in detail about the Olympic and Paralympic Games.

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 What is a tournament?
	 2.	 List different types of tournaments.
	 3.	 What is the full form of the SGFI Games?
	 4.	 What were the early National Games called?
	 5.	 Where were the inaugural Asian Games held?
	 6.	 Who was the founder of Commonwealth Games?
	 7.	 Where and when were the Winter Olympic Games started?
	 8.	 Who was the founder of Modern Olympic Games?
	 9.	 When were the first Ancient Olympic Games held?

	III.	 Fill in the Blanks
	 1.	 Knock-out tournament is also termed as _____________.
	 2.	 In Single Knock-out tournament, total number of matches 

with 16 teams will be _____________.
	 3.	 Staircase Method is a type of _____________ tournament.
	 4.	 Number of byes in Single Elimination Tournament with 29 

teams will be _____________.
	 5.	 No. of byes in a Single Knock-out Tournament for 51 teams 

with special seeding for 4 teams will be _____________.
	 6.	 Olympic Games were started in_________________.
	 7.	 Paralympic Games were started in________________.
	 8.	 Commonwealth games were founded by _____________________.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   326 31-07-2020   15:46:06



Tournaments and Competitions 327

	 9.	 National games in India are held at an interval of _____________ 
years.

	 10.	 School games in India are organised by ____________________ .

	IV.	 State whether True or False
	 1.	 There will be no byes in a Single Knock-out tournament having 

32 teams.
	 2.	 League tournament is also termed as Round Robin Tournament. 


	 3.	 Total number of matches in a Single League Tournament with 

6 teams will be 15.
	 4.	 Number of matches in the first round in a Single Knock-out 

Tournament with 27 teams will be 12.
	 5.	 Total number of matches in Double League Tournament with 7 

teams will be 21.
	 6.	 School games in India are organised by SGFI.
	 7.	 Abhinav Bindra won gold medal in Shooting in 2016 Reo de 

Janeiro (Brazil) Olympic Games.
	 8.	 Sakshi Malik won Olympic medal in Wrestling.
	 9.	 Devendra Jhajharia won medal in Paralympic Games, Reo de 

Janeiro (Brazil), in Javelin event.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-10.indd   327 31-07-2020   15:46:06



##11##
Adventure Sports

11
Adventure sports are extraordinary activities performed by 
individuals who are in search of excitement, extra enthusiasm 
and have the desire to explore nature. These sports are 
invented out of adventurous interest of individuals who want 
to explore nature out of curiosity. During the exploration, 
different types of adventure sports were discovered, such as, 
rafting, surfing, mountaineering, trekking, etc. Participation 
in such sports also helps to fulfil the purpose of satisfying 
robust human behaviour. These sports are classified as—

1. Adventure water sports
2. Adventure land sports
3. Adventure air sports
Further, the adventure sports in all three categories 

are also divided separately for water (rafting, surfing, etc.), 
land (mountaineering, trekking, etc.) and air (paragliding, 
jumping, etc.). The camping has already been discussed in 
the Class IX book. Here, in this chapter, paragliding and 
surfing are explained for understanding as these are most 
exciting and classical adventure sports.

Fig. 11.1: Paragliding

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-11.indd   328 31-07-2020   15:46:36



Adventure Sports 329

Paragliding
Paragliding is the recreational and competitive adventure 
sport for flying paragliders. Paragliding is engine less or 
motor free sport and practised by the adventurous people. 
This type of sports need courage and need to be decisive. 

Historical Development of Paragliding
Domina C. Jalbert, in 1954, invented advanced governable 
gliding parachutes with multi-cells and controls for lateral 
glide.

In one of the articles, in Flight magazine, Walter Neumark 
predicted that a glider pilot would be able to launch himself 
by running over the edge of a cliff or down a slope. French 
engineer Pierre Lemoigne produced improved parachute 
designs that led to the Para-commander. 

David Barish, during 1965, developed the ‘sail wing’ 
that was used to sail slope-soaring as a summer activity for 
ski resorts.

In the year 1985, Canadian authors Patrick Gilligan and 
Bertrand Dubois from Switzerland, wrote the first flight 
manual with the title ‘The Paragliding Manual’, officially 
coining the word ‘Paragliding’.

Classification of Paragliding
Paragliding is classified as—
	 1.	Light-weight gliding
	 2.	Free flying glider 
	 3.	Foot-launched glider: Foot launched glider is like an 

aircraft with no rigid primary structure. 

Sitting Position
The paraglider (pilot) sits in a harness, suspended below a 
fabric wing comprising a large number of interconnected 
baffled cells. Wing shape is maintained by the suspension 
lines. Despite not using an engine, paragliders, flight can last 
many hours and cover hundreds of kilometers. Though, the 
norms for flight of one to two hours that covers around some 
tens of kilometers are considered valid for gliding purposes. 
By skillful exploitation of sources on lift, the pilot may gain 
height, often climbing to altitudes of a few thousand meters.

First World Championship 1989
The first official Paragliding World Championship was held 
in Austria, in 1989. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-11.indd   329 31-07-2020   15:46:37



330 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? Strength of Paraglider Structure
Canadian Domina Jalbert Paraglider lines are usually made from spectra that are 
invented and patented (in 1963) immensely strong. For example, a single 0.66 mm diameter 
parafoil in an aerofoil shape; line (about the thinnest used) can have a breaking strength 
an open leading edge and a of 56 kg.  Paraglider wings typically have an area of 20–35 
closed trailing edge, inflated by square meters (220–380 sq ft) with a span of 8–12 meters 
passage through the air. (26–39 ft) and weigh 3–7 kilograms (6.6–15.4 lb). Combined 

weight of wing, harness, reserve, instruments, helmet, etc., 
weigh around 12–22 kilograms (26–49 lb).

Speed of Paragliders
The speed range of paragliders is typically 20–75 kilometres 
per hour (12–47 mph).

Carrying Capacity and Storage of Paragliders
For storage and carrying, the wing is usually folded into a 
stuff-sack (bag), which can then be stowed in a large back-
pack along with the harness. The complete equipment packs 
into a rucksack that can be carried easily on the pilot’s back, 
in a car, or on public transport. 

Instruments
Instruments used in paragliding are—
	 1.	Variometer: The main purpose of a variometer is to 

help a pilot find and stay in the ‘core’ of a thermal 
to maximise height gain and, conversely, to indicate 
when a pilot is in sinking air and needs to find rising 
air. A variometer also indicates the climb rate or sink-
rate with short audio signals (beeps, which increase 
in pitch and tempo during ascent, and a droning 
sound, which gets deeper as the rate of descent 
increases) or a visual display. It also shows altitude 
— either above takeoff, above sea level or flight level at 
higher altitudes.

	 2.	Radio: Radio communications are used in training 
to communicate with other pilots, or to report where 
and when they intend to land. These radios normally 
operate on a range of frequencies in different 
locations. In rare cases, pilots use radios to talk 
to airport control towers or air traffic controllers. 
Many pilots carry a cell phone so they can call for 
pickup if they land away from their intended point of 
destination.

	 3.	GPS (Global Positioning System): GPS is a necessary 
accessory while flying in competitions. The recorded 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-11.indd   330 31-07-2020   15:46:37



Adventure Sports 331

GPS track of a flight can be used to analyse the flying 
technique or can be shared with other pilots. GPS 
is also used to determine drift due to the prevailing 
wind when flying at altitude, providing position 
information to allow restricted airspace to be avoided 
and identifying one’s location to aid the retrieval 
teams after landing out in unfamiliar territory. 

Flying Techniques
There are different ways of flying as with all the aircrafts, 
launching and landing are done into wind. Paragliders, like 
hang gliders do not ‘jump’ at any time. There is one assisted 
launch technique used in flatland areas and two launching 
techniques used on the higher ground.
	 1.	Forward launch: In low winds, the wing is inflated with 

a forward launch, where the pilot runs forward with 
the wing behind so that the air pressure generated by 
the forward movement inflates the wing.

	 2.	Reverse launch: In higher winds, a reverse launch is 
used, with the pilot facing the wing to bring it up into 
a flying position, then turning around under the wing 
and running to complete the launch. Reverse launches 
have a number of advantages over the forward launch. 

Landing
Landing a paraglider, as with all unpowered aircrafts which 
cannot abort a landing, involves some specific techniques 
and traffic patterns. Paragliding pilots most commonly lose 
their height by flying a figure of 8 in over landing zone until 
the correct height is achieved, then line up into the wind and 
give the glider full speed. Once the correct height (about a 
meter above ground) is achieved the pilot will ‘stall’ (pause) 
the glider in order to land.

Control through Speed Bar Mechanism
Paraglider can be controlled with the help of breaks and 
accelerator attached with the paraglider. These are the speed 
bar mechanism called control breaks, which are held in 
pilot’s hand. Breaks are used to adjust the speed of the glider.

Types of Competitions
	 1.	Cross-country flying is the classical form of paragliding 

competitions with championships in club, regional, 
national and international levels.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-11.indd   331 31-07-2020   15:46:37



332 Health and Physical Education - XI

Do You Know? 	 2.	Aerobatic competitions demand the participants to 
George Freeth (8 November perform certain manoeuvres. Competitions are held 
1883–7 April 1919) is often for individual pilots as well as for pairs that show 
credited as being the ‘Father of synchronous performances. This form is the most 
Modern Surfing’. He is thought spectacular for spectators on the ground to watch.
to have been the first modern 	 3.	 In Bivouac flying competitions, a certain route has to be 
surfer. flown or hiked, which may take over several days.

Sky Parachutes have the maximum resemblance with 
paragliders but the sports are very different. Whereas with 
sky-diving, the parachute is ‘only’ a tool to safely return to 
earth after free fall, the paraglider allows longer flights and the 
use of thermals.

Surfing
The term surfing refers to the act of riding a wave, regardless 
of whether the wave is ridden with a board or without a board, 
and regardless of the stance used. Surfing is an event to be 
inducted in the Olympic Games from the year 2020. Surfing 
is a surface water sport in which the wave rider, referred to as 
a surfer, rides on the forward or deep face of a moving wave, 
which carries the surfer towards the shore. Waves suitable 
for surfing are primarily found in the ocean, but waves can 
also be found in lakes or rivers in the form of standing wave 
or tidal bore. However, surfers can also utilise artificial waves 
such as those from boat and the waves created in artificial 
wave pools.

Fig. 11.2: Surfing-1

Historical Development of Surfing
For centuries, surfing was a central part of ancient Polynesian 
culture. Surfing may have first been observed by the British 
explorers at Tahiti in 1767. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-11.indd   332 31-07-2020   15:46:38



Adventure Sports 333

Governing Body
The highest governing body for surfing sport is known as 
International Surfing Association. It is played all over the 
world. In 1975, professional contests started. That year, 
Margo Oberg became the first female professional surfer. 

Types of Surfing

Fig. 11.3: Surfing-2

	 1.	Stand-up Surfing: The modern-day definition of 
surfing, most often refers to a surfer riding a wave 
standing up on a Surfboard; this is also referred to 
as stand-up surfing. Long surf-boarding and short 
surf-boarding are the two types of stand-up surfing. 
Both long and short surf-boarding have several major 
differences, including the board design and length, 
the riding style, and the kind of wave that is ridden.

	 2.	Body Surfing or Body Boarding: The surfer riding a 
wave on a body board, either by lying on the belly, or 
drop knee, is called body surfing. In body surfing, the 
wave is surfed without a board, using the surfer’s own 
body to catch and ride the wave, this is very common 
and considered to be the purest form of surfing. 

	 3.	Surf Matting: An other type of surfing that is surfed in 
inflatable mats, using foils, is called surf matting. 

	 4.	Tow-surfing: Tow-surfing is most often associated 
with big wave surfing with a motorised water vehicle, 
such as a personal watercraft, which tows the surfer 
into the wave front. Water-craft help the surfer to 
match a large wave’s speed, which is generally higher 
than a self-propelled surfer can produce. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-11.indd   333 31-07-2020   15:46:38



334 Health and Physical Education - XI

Types of Surfboard
A long board  (10 feet) causes more friction with the water, 
and is slower than a smaller lighter board (6 feet). Longer 
boards are good for beginners, who need help in balancing. 
Smaller boards are good for more experienced surfers who 
want to have more control and manoeuverability.

Dangers during Surfing
Seabed
The seabed can pose danger for surfers. If a surfer falls 
while riding a wave, the wave tosses and tumbles the surfer 
around, often in a downwards direction. At reef breaks and 
beach breaks, surfers have been seriously injured and even 
killed because of a violent collision with the sea bed, the 
water above which can sometimes be very shallow, especially 
at beach breaks or reef breaks during low tide. 
Rip currents
Rip currents are water channels that flow away from the 
shore. Under the wrong circumstances, these currents can 
endanger both experienced and inexperienced surfers. Since 
a rip current appears to be an area of flat water, tired or 
inexperienced swimmers or surfers may enter one and be 
carried out beyond the breaking waves. Although many rip 
currents are much smaller, the largest rip currents have a 
width of forty or fifty feet. However, by paddling parallel to 
the shore, a surfer can easily exit a rip current.

Surfing related Sports
Surfing-related sports, such as, paddle boarding and sea 
kayaking do not require waves. Other water related sports 
such as kite surfing and wind-surfing rely primarily on wind 
for power, yet all of these platforms may also be used to ride 
waves. Recently the use of V-drive boats wave surfing, in 
which one surfs on the wave of a boat, has emerged.

Safety and Security in Paragliding and Surfing
The security and safety of the gliders and surfers have to 
be kept in mind as there is high risk involved during these 
adventure sports. Safety measure should be followed and 
observed by the individuals taking adventure sports.
	 1.	A paraglider should be certified and highly skillful 

before taking adventure sports.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-11.indd   334 31-07-2020   15:46:38



Adventure Sports 335

	 2.	A paraglider should keep all type of safety instruments 
before going for paragliding. These instruments are 
Virometer, Global Positioning System and Radio to 
get update about all kinds of dangers. 

	 3.	During practice, proper safety equipments like helmet, 
knee guards, chest guards and other protective 
equipment should be worn.

	 4.	Gliding should not be permitted without proper 
assistance (licensed personnel).

	 5.	A surfer should recognise the wave current flowing in 
sea for keeping himself in the safe zone.

	 6.	A surfer should also be able to recognise the deep face 
of the moving wave that can be dangerous sometimes 
to the surfer.

	 7.	Surfer should practise his surfing skills in the 
artificially created waves before introducing himself 
in the deep sea.

	 8.	Paragliders should inspect their paraglide breaks and 
other necessary lining for safety measures regularly.

	 9.	Enough practice should be done before taking long 
route paragliding.

	 10.	Fitness standard (physical and mental) should be 
maintained, which is considered as the key factor 
that helps in meeting out and taking quick decision 
during any untoward situation.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-11.indd   335 31-07-2020   15:46:38



Assessment

	 I.	 Long Answer Questions
	 1.	 Write down the use of Variometer in paragliding.
	 2.	 Explain ‘tow- surfing’.
	 3.	 Discuss the safety measures to keep in mind during paragliding.
	 4.	 Briefly explain Sea beds and Rip Currents.
	 5.	 How does Global Positioning System work?

	II.	 Short Answer Questions
	 1.	 Name the person who invented paragliding. 
	 2.	 Name the two flying techniques in paragliding.
	 3.	 Classify the categories of adventure sports.
	 4.	 In which year, the first world championship for surfing was 

held?
	 5.	 What are the different types of surfing?

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-11.indd   336 31-07-2020   15:46:38



Feedback Questionnaire

Please give your comments on the textbook by filling this 
feedback questionnaire. Please send the duly filled questionnaire 
to the undersigned. 

Department of Education in Social Sciences, NCERT, Sri 
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi-110016.

While answering a question if you find the space inadequate, 
please attach a separate sheet. All questions are meant both for 
teachers and students. You can provide your feedback in English 
or Hindi. Even parents if desite can respond.

Teacher/Student/Parent
Name                                                        
School Address _________                                     
                                                             
                                                             
	 1.	 Do you find the textbook is easy to understand? Yes/No
	 2.	 Point out the chapters/pages where the language is difficult 

to understand.
		  Chapter No.	 Page No.	 Lines
		___________	___________	___________   
		___________	___________	___________   
		___________	___________	___________   
	 3.	 Do you think the content of the book is adequate to meet the 

requirements of the syllabus? Yes/No
	 4.	 (i) Point out the chapters which are lengthy.
		                                                           
		                                                           
		                                                           
		  (ii) Point out the chapters which are too sketchy.
		                                                           
		                                                           
		                                                           
	 5.	 Point out the illustrations which are not helpful in 

understanding the content.
		  Page No.	 Illustration	 Caption
		___________	___________	___________   
		___________	___________	___________   
		___________	___________	___________   

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-11.indd   337 31-07-2020   15:46:39



338 Health and Physical Education - XI

6.	 (i)	 Certain practical activities and games have been 
suggested. How many activities and games have you 
undertaken in your class? Mention them.

		                                                        
		                                                        
			  _______________________________________________________
	 (ii)	What difficulties did you face in organising these activities 

and games?
		                                                        
		                                                        
		                                                        
	 (iii)	 Would you like to suggest any activity(ies). Mention these.
			                                                        
			                                                        
			                                                        

	 7.	 Certain questions have been given in boxes in the text of the 
chapters.

	 (i)	 Did you try to find out their answers? Yes/No
	 (ii)	Are these helpful in understanding the text of the 

chapter? Yes/No
	 (iii)	Do you find these questions interesting? Yes/No
8.	 (i)	 Do you find the exercise given at the end of each chapter 

in the textbook interesting? Yes/No
	 (ii)	Point out the exercise which according to you should be 

modified.
				    Page No.				    Exercise No.
				_________________			_________________      
				_________________			_________________      
				_________________			_________________      
	 9.	 Point out the printing errors, if any.
				    Page/Para No.			   Error
				_________________			_________________      
				_________________			_________________      
				_________________			_________________      
	10.	 Any specific comments/suggestions for overall improvement 

of the textbook.
		                                                           
		                                                           
		                                                           

Reprint 2025-26

Chap-11.indd   338 31-07-2020   15:46:39