Computer Chapter 
System 1 

In this chapter
»» Introduction to 

##1##
Computer System

“A computer would deserve to be called »» Evolution of Computer 
»» Computer Memory 

intelligent if it could deceive a human into 
»» Software

believing that it was human.” 

— Alan Turing

1.1	 Introduction to Computer System

A computer is an electronic device that can be 
programmed to accept data (input), process it and 
generate result (output). A computer along with 
additional hardware and software together is called a 
computer system. 

A computer system primarily comprises of a central 
processing unit, memory, input/output devices, and 
storage devices. All these components function together 
as a single unit to deliver the desired output. A computer 
system comes in various forms and sizes. It can vary 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   1 19-Jul-19   3:05:06 PM



2 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Secondary from a high-end server to a personal 
Storage Devices desktop, laptop, tablet computer, or 

smartphone.
Primary 
Memory Figure 1.1 shows the block diagram 

of a computer system. The directed 
Input Control Unit Output lines represent the flow of data and 
Device (CU) Device signal between the components. 

Arithmetic Logic 1.1.1	 Central Processing Unit (CPU)
Unit (ALU) It is the electronic circuitry of a 

Central Processing computer that carries out the actual 
Unit (CPU)

Figure 1.1:	Components of a Computer System processing and is usually referred to 
as the brain of the computer. It is also 

commonly called 'processor' also. Physically, a CPU can 
be placed on one or more microchips called integrated 
circuits (IC). The ICs comprise semiconductor materials. 

The CPU is given instructions and data through 
programs. The CPU then fetches the program and data 
from the memory and performs arithmetic and logical 
operations as per the given instructions and stores the 
result back to memory.

While processing, the CPU stores the data as well 
as instructions in its local memory, 'called' registers. 
Registers are part of the CPU chip and they are limited 
in size and number. Different registers are used for 
storing data, instructions or intermediate results. 

Other than the registers, the CPU has two main 
components — Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU) and Control 
Unit (CU). ALU performs all the arithmetic and logic 
operations that need to be done as per the instruction in a 

Keyboard program. CU controls sequential instruction execution, 
interprets instructions and guides data flow through the 
computer’s memory, ALU and input or output devices. 
CPU is also popularly known as microprocessor. 

Mouse
1.1.2	Input Devices
The devices through which control signals are sent 
to a computer are termed as input devices. These 

Scanner devices convert the input data into a digital form that is 
acceptable by the computer system. Some examples of 
input devices include keyboard, mouse, scanner, touch 
screen, etc., as shown in Figure 1.2. Specially designed 

Touch Screen braille keyboards are also available to help the visually 
impaired for entering data into a computer. Besides, we 

Figure 1.2:	Input Devices can now enter data through voice, for example, we can 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   2 19-Jul-19   3:05:07 PM



Computer System 3

use Google voice search to search the web where we can 
input the search string through our voice.

Data entered through input device is temporarily 
stored in the main memory (also called RAM) of the 

Display monitor
computer system. For permanent storage and future use, 
the data as well as instructions are stored permanently 
in additional storage locations called secondary memory.
1.1.3	Output Devices Speaker

The device that receives data from a computer system 
for display, physical production, etc., is called output 
device. It converts digital information into human-
understandable form. For example, monitor, projector, Printer
headphone, speaker, printer, etc. Some output devices 
are shown in Figure 1.3. A braille display monitor is 
useful for a visually challenged person to understand 
the textual output generated by computers. 3D printer

A printer is the most commonly used device to get 
output in physical (hardcopy) form. Three types of Figure 1.3:	Output Devices
commonly used printers are inkjet, laserjet and dot 
matrix. Now-a-days, there is a new type of printer 
called 3D-printer, which is used to build physical 
replica of a digital 3D design. These printers are being 
used in manufacturing industries to create prototypes 
of products. Their usage is also being explored in the 
medical field, particularly for developing body organs.

1.2	E volution of Computer

From the simple calculator to a modern day powerful 
data processor, computing devices have evolved in a 
relatively short span of time. The evolution of computing 
devices is shown through a timeline at Figure 1.5.

The Von Neumann architecture is shown in Figure 
1.4. It consists of a Central Processing Unit (CPU) 
for processing arithmetic and logical instructions, a 
memory to store data and programs, input and output 
devices and communication channels to send/receive 
the output data. Electronic Numerical Integrator And 
Computer (ENIAC) is the first 
binary programmable computer 
based on Von Neumann 
architecture. 

During the 1970s, Large Scale 
Integration (LSI) of electronic Figure 1.4:	Von Neumann Architecture for the 
circuits allowed integration of Computer 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   3 19-Jul-19   3:05:07 PM



4 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Pascaline EDVAC/ENIAC
John Von Neumann introduced 

Blaize Pascal invented a the concept of stored program 
mechanical calculator known computer which was capable of 

as Pascal calculator or storing data as well as program 
Pascaline to do addition and in the memory. The EDVAC and 
subtraction of two numbers then the ENIAC computers were 

directly and multiplication and developed based on this concept.
division through repeated 
addition or subtraction.

Tabulating Machine Integrated Circuit
 Herman Hollerith designed An Integrated Circuit (IC) is 

a tabulating machine for a silicon chip which contains 
1642 summarising the data stored 1945 entire electronic circuit on a 

on the punched card. It is very small area. The size of 
considered to be the first computer has drastically 

step towards programming. reduced because of ICs.  

1890 1970

1834 1947

Analytical Engine Transistor
Charles Babbage  invented Vaccum tubes were 

analytical engine, a  replaced by transistors 
500 BC mechanical computing device 1937 developed at Bell Labs, 

for inputting, processing, using semiconductor 
storing and displaying the materials.

output, which is considered 
to form the basis of modern 

computers.

Abacus Turing Machine
Computing is attributed to The Turing machine concept was a 
the invention of ABACUS general purpose programmable 
almost 3000 years ago. It machine that was capable to solve 
was a mechanical device any problem by executing the 
capable of doing simple program stored on the punched 

arithmetic calculations only. cards.

Figure 1.5:	Timeline Showing Key Inventions in Computing Technology

complete CPU on a single chip, called microprocessor. 
Moore’s Law predicted exponential growth in number 
of transistors that could be assembled in a single 
microchip. In 1980s, the processing power of computers 
increased exponentially by integrating around 3 million 
components on a small-sized chip termed as Very 

A punched card is a Large Scale Integration (VLSI). Further advancement in 
piece of stiff paper that technology has made it feasible to fabricate high density 
stores digital data in 
the form of holes at of transistors and other components (approx 106 

predefined positions. components) on a single IC called Super Large Scale 
Integration (SLSI) as shown in Figure 1.6. 

IBM introduced its first personal computer (PC) for 
the home user in 1981, Apple introduced Macintosh 
machines in 1984. The popularity of the PC surged 
by the introduction of Graphical User Interface (GUI) 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   4 19-Jul-19   3:05:07 PM



Computer System 5

10,000,000,000
1,000,000,000 Core 2 DUO Core i7

100,000,000 Intel Microprocessors
Pentium II Pentium I V

10,000,000 Pentium III
Pentium 

1,000,000 486
486

100,000 Invention of the 386
10,000 Transistor 286

8086
1,000 4004

100 Doubles every 2 years
10

1
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020

Figure 1.6:	Exponential Increase in Number of Transistors used in ICs Over Time
based operating systems by Microsoft and others in 
place of computers with only command line interface, 
like UNIX or DOS. Around 1990s, the growth of world 
wide web (WWW) further accelerated mass usage of 
computers and thereafter computers have become an 
indispensable part of everyday life.

Further, with the introduction of laptops, personal 
computing was made portable to a great extent. This In 1965, Intel co-
was followed by smartphones, tablets and other founder Gordon Moore 
personal digital assistants. These devices have introduced Moore’s 
leveraged the technological advancements in processor Law which predicted 
miniaturisation, faster memory, high speed data and that the number of 

transistors on a chip 
connectivity mechanisms. would double every two 

The next wave of computing devices includes years while the costs 
wearable gadgets such as smart watch, lenses, would be halved. 
headbands, headphones, etc. Further, smart appliances 
are becoming a part of the Internet of Things (IoT), by 
leveraging the power of artificial intelligence.

1.3	C omputer Memory

A computer system needs memory to store the data and 
instructions for processing. Whenever we talk about 
the “memory” of a computer system, we usually talk 
about the main or primary memory. The secondary 
memory (also called storage device) is used to store 
data, instructions and results permanently and for Think and Reflect
future use. How do different 

components of a 
1.3.1	Units of Memory computer communicate 
A computer system uses binary numbers to store and with each other?
process data. The binary digits 0 and 1, which are the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   5 19-Jul-19   3:05:07 PM

Number of Transistors
per Integrated Circuit



6 Informatics Practices – Class XI

basic units of memory, are called bits. Further, these 
bits are grouped together to form words. A 4-bit word 
is called a Nibble. Examples of nibble are 1001, 1010, 
0010, etc. A two nibble word, i.e., 8-bit word is called a 
byte, for example, 01000110, 01111100, 10000001, etc.

Like any other standard unit, bytes are grouped 
Table 1.1	 Measurement units for digital data together to make 

Unit Description Unit Description bigger chunks or units 
of memory. Table 

KB (Kilobyte) 1 KB = 1024 Bytes PB (Petabyte) 1 PB = 1024 TB 1.1 shows different 
MB (Megabyte) 1 MB = 1024 KB EB (Exabyte) 1 EB = 1024 PB measurement units for 
GB (Gigabyte) 1 GB = 1024 MB ZB (Zettabyte) 1 ZB = 1024 EB digital data stored in 
TB (Terabyte) 1 TB = 1024 GB YB (Yottabyte) 1 YB = 1024 ZB computer memories.

1.3.2	Types of Memory
Human beings memorise many things over a lifetime, 
and recall from memory to make a decision or take 
some action. However, we cannot rely on our memory 
completely, so we make notes and store important 
data and information using other mediums such as 
notebook, manual, journal, document etc. for a long-
term storage. Similarly, computers have two types of 
memories namely —primary memory and secondary 
memory. 
(A)	 Primary Memory
The primary memory is an essential component of a 
computer system. Program and data are loaded into the 
primary memory before processing. The CPU interacts 
directly with the primary memory to perform read/
write operation. It is of two types viz. i) Random access 
memory (RAM), and ii) Read only memory (ROM).

RAM is volatile i.e. as long as the power is supplied to 
the computer, it retains the data in it. But as soon as the 
power supply is turned off, all the contents of RAM are 

Think and Reflect wiped out. It is used to store data temporarily while the 
Suppose there is a computer is working. Whenever the computer is started 
computer with RAM 
but no secondary or a software application is launched, the required 
storage. Can we install program and data are loaded into RAM for processing. 
a software on that RAM is usually referred to as main memory and it is 
computer? faster than the secondary memory or storage devices.

On the other hand, ROM is non-volatile, means its 
contents are not lost even when the power is turned off. 
It is used as a small but faster permanent storage for 
the contents which are rarely changed. For example, the 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   6 19-Jul-19   3:05:07 PM



Computer System 7

startup program (boot loader) that loads the operating 
system into RAM is stored in a ROM.
(B)	 Cache Memory
RAM is faster than secondary storage, but not as fast as 
a computer processor. So, because of RAM, a CPU may Pen 
have to slow down. To speed up the operations of the Drive
CPU, a very high speed memory is placed between the 
CPU and the primary memory known as cache. It stores 
the copies of the data from frequently accessed primary 
memory locations, thus, reducing the average time 
required to access data from primary memory. When 
the CPU needs to access memory, it first examines the 
cache. In case the requirement is met, it is read from 
the cache, otherwise the primary memory is accessed.
(C)	 Secondary Memory
Primary memory has limited storage capacity and 
is either volatile (RAM) or read-only (ROM). Thus, a 
computer system needs auxiliary or secondary memory 
to permanently store the data or instructions for 
future use. The secondary memory is non-volatile and 
has larger storage capacity than primary memory. It 
is slower and cheaper than the main memory. But, it 
cannot be accessed directly by the CPU. Contents of 
secondary storage need to be first brought into the main Figure 1.7:	Storage Devices 
memory for the CPU to access. Examples of secondary 
memory devices include Hard Disk Drive (HDD), CD/
DVD, Memory Card, etc., as shown in Figure 1.7.

However, these days, there are secondary storage 
devices like Solid-State Drive (SSD) which support very 
fast data transfer speed as compared to earlier HDDs. 
Also, data transfer between computers have become 
easier and simpler due to the availability of small sized 
and portable flash/pen drives. 
1.3.3	Data Capturing, Storage, and Retrieval
To process the data, we need to first input or capture 
the data. This is followed by its storage in a file or a 
database so that it can be used in the future. Whenever 
data is to be processed, it is first retrieved from the file/
database so that we can perform further actions on it. Activity 1.1
(A)	 Data Capturing List all secondary 
It involves the process of gathering data from different storage devices available 
sources in digital form. Data may be coptured using, in your school or home.
keyboard bar code readers (Used at shopping outlets as 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   7 19-Jul-19   3:05:07 PM



8 Informatics Practices – Class XI

shown in Fig. 1.8 (Figure 1.8)), remore sensors on earth 
orbiting satellites etc. comments/ports over multiple 
social media are also captured as data. Sometimes, 
heterogeneity among data sources makes data capturing 
a complex task.

Figure 1.8:	Capturing Data (B)	 Data Storage 
using Barcode Reader It is the process of storing the captured data for 

processing later. Now-a-days data is being produced at 
a very high rate, and therefore data storage has become 
a challenging task. However, the decrease in the cost 
of digital storage devices has helped in simplifying 
this task. There are numerous digital storage devices 
available in the market as shown in Figure 1.7.

Data keeps on increasing with time. Hence, the 
storage devices also require to be upgraded periodically. 

Activity 1.2 In large organisations, computers with larger and 
faster storage called data servers are deployed to store 

Visit some of the places 
like bank, automobile vast amount of data. Such dedicated computers help 
showroom, shopping in processing data efficiently. However, the cost (both 
mall, tehsil office, etc., hardware and software) of setting up a data server as 
and find out 2–3 names well as its maintenance is high, especially for small 
of tools/instruments 
used to capture data in organisations and startups.
digital format. (C)	 Data Retrieval 

It involves fetching data from the storage devices, for its 
processing as per the user requirement. As databases 
grow, the challenges involved in search and retrieval of 
the data in acceptable time, also increase. Minimising 
data access time is crucial for faster data processing.
1.3.4	Data Deletion and Recovery
One of the biggest threats associated with digital data is 
its deletion. The storage devices can malfunction or crash 
down resulting in the deletion of the stored data. Users 
can accidentally erase data from storage devices, or a 
hacker/malware can delete the digital data intentionally.

Deleting digitally stored data means changing the 
details of data at bit level, which can be very time-
consuming. Therefore, when any data is simply deleted, 

Activity 1.3 its address entry is marked as free, and that much 
Explore possible ways space is shown as empty to the user, without actually 
of recovering deleted deleting the data. 
data or data from a 
corrupted device. In case data gets deleted accidentally or corrupted, 

there arises a need to recover the data. Recovery of the 
data is possible only if the contents/memory space 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   8 19-Jul-19   3:05:08 PM



Computer System 9

marked as deleted have not been overwritten by some 
other data. Data recovery is a process of retrieving 
deleted, corrupted and lost data from secondary 
storage devices. 

There are usually two security concerns associated 
with data. One is its deletion by some unauthorised 
person or software. These concerns can be avoided 
by limiting access to the computer system and using 
passwords for user accounts and files, wherever 
possible. There is also an option of encrypting files to 
protect them from unwanted modification.

The other concern is related to unwanted recovery 
of data by unauthorised user/software. Many a times, 
we discard our old, broken or malfunctioning storage Activity 1.4
devices without taking care to delete data. We assume 
that the contents of deleted files are permanently Create a test file and 

then delete it using 
removed. However, if these storage devices fall into the Shift+Delete from 
hands of mischief-mongers, they can easily recover the keyboard. Now 
data from such devices; this poses a threat to data recover the file using 
confidentiality. This concern can be mitigated by using the methods you have 
proper tools to delete or shred data before disposing off explored at Activity 1.3.

any old or faulty storage device.

1.4	 Software 
Till now, we have studied about the physical 
components or the hardware of the computer system. 
But the hardware is of no use on its own. Hardware 
needs to be operated by a set of instructions. These 
sets of instructions are referred to as software. It is that 
component of a computer system, which we cannot 
touch or view physically. It comprises of the instructions 
and data to be processed using the computer hardware. 
The computer software and hardware complete any 
task together. Hardware refers to the 

The software comprises of set of instructions which physical components 
on execution deliver the desired outcome. In other of the computer system 
words, each software is written for some computational which can be seen and 

touched. For example, 
purpose. Some examples of software include operating RAM, keyboard, 
systems like Ubuntu or Windows 7/10, word processing printer, monitor, CPU 
tools like LibreOffice Writer or Microsoft Word, video etc. On the other hand, 
player like VLC Player, photo editors like Paint and software is a set of 
LibreOffice Draw. A document or image stored on the instructions and data 

that makes hardware 
hard disk or pen drive is referred to as a softcopy. Once functional to complete 
printed, the document or an image is called a hardcopy. the desired task. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   9 19-Jul-19   3:05:08 PM



10 Informatics Practices – Class XI

1.4.1	Need of Software 
The sole purpose of a software is to make computer 
hardware useful and operational. A software knows 
how to make different hardware components of a 
computer work and communicate with each other as 
well as with the end user. We cannot talk to or instruct 
the hardware of a computer directly. Hence, software 
acts as an interface between human users and 
the hardware.

Depending on the mode of interaction with hardware 
and functions to be performed, software can be broadly 
classified into three categories viz. i) System software 
ii) Programming tools and iii) Application software. The 
categorisation of software is shown in Figure 1.9.
1.4.2	System Software
The software that provides the basic functionality 
to operate a computer by interacting directly with its 
constituent hardware is termed as system software. A 
system software knows how to operate and use different 
hardware components of a computer. It provides services 
directly to the end user, or to some other software. 
Examples of system software include operating systems, 
system utilities, device drivers, etc.

(A)	 Operating System
As the name implies, operating system is a system 
software that operates the computer. An operating 
system is the most basic system software, without 
which other software cannot work. The operating system 
manages other application programs and provides 
access and security to the users of the system. Some 
of the popular operating systems are Windows, Linux, 
Macintosh, Ubuntu, Fedora, Android, iOS, etc. 

(B)	 System Utilities
Software used for maintenance and configuration of the 
computer system is called system utility. Some system 
utilities are shipped with the operating system, for 
example disk defragmentation tool, formatting utility, 
system restore utility, etc. Another set of utilities are 
those which are not shipped with the operating system 
but are required to improve the performance of the 
system, for example, anti-virus software, disk cleaner 
tool, disk compression software, etc.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   10 19-Jul-19   3:05:08 PM



Computer System 11

(C)	 Device Drivers
As the name signifies, the purpose 
of a device driver is to ensure 
proper functioning of a particular 
device. When it comes to the overall 
working of a computer system, the 
operating system does the work. 
But everyday new devices and 
components are being added to a 
computer system. It is not possible 
for operating system alone to 
manage all of the existing and new 
peripherals, where each device 
has diverse characteristics. The 
responsibility for overall control, 
operation, and management of a Figure 1.9:	 Categorisation of Software

particular device at the hardware level is delegated to 
its device driver.

The device driver acts as an interface between the 
device and the operating system. It provides required 
services by hiding the details of operations performed 
at the hardware level of the device. Just like a language Activity 1.5
translator, a device driver acts as a mediator between Ask your teacher to 
the operating system and the attached device. help you locate any two 
1.4.3	Application Software device drivers installed 

on your computer.
The system software provides the core functionality of 
the computer system. However, different users need the 
computer system for different purposes depending upon 
their requirements. Hence, a new category of software 
is needed to cater to different requirements of the end- A computer system 
users. This specific software that works on top of the can work without 
system software is termed as application software. There application software, 
are again two broad categories of application software: but it cannot work 

without system 
general purpose and customised application software. software. For example, 
(A)	 General Purpose Software we can use a computer 

even if no word 
The application software developed for generic processing software 
applications, to cater to a bigger audience in general is installed, but if no 
are called general purpose software. Such ready-made operating system is 
application software can be used by end users as per installed, we can not 
their requirements. For example, spreadsheet tool work on the computer. 

In other words, the use 
LibreOffice Calc can be used by any computer user to of computer is possible 
do calculation or to create an account sheet. Adobe in the absence of 
Photoshop, GIMP, Mozilla web browser, iTunes, etc. fall application software.
in the category of general purpose software.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   11 19-Jul-19   3:05:08 PM



12 Informatics Practices – Class XI

(B)	 Customised Software
These are custom or tailor-made application software, 

Activity 1.6 that are developed to meet the requirements of a specific 
organisation or an individual. They are better suited to 

With the help of your 
teacher, install one the needs of an individual or an organisation, considering 
application software in that they are designed as per special requirements. Some 
your computer. examples of user-defined software include websites, 

school management software, accounting software, etc. 
It is similar to buying a piece of cloth with specific color 
and fabric and get it stitched as desired.
1.4.4	Proprietary or Free and Open Source Software 
Developers of some software allow public to freely use 
their software along with source code with an aim to 
improve further with each other’s help. Such software is 
known as Free and Open Source Software (FOSS). For 
example, the source code of operating system Ubuntu is 
freely accessible for anyone with the required knowledge 
to improve/add new functionality. More examples of 
FOSS include Python, Libreoffice, Openoffice, Mozilla 
Firefox, etc. Sometimes, software are freely available 
for use but source code may not be available. Such 
software is called freeware. Examples of freeware are 
Skype, Adobe Reader etc. 

When software to be used has to be purchased from 
the vendor who has the copyright of the software, then 
it is a proprietary software. Examples of proprietary 
software include Microsoft Windows, Tally, Quickheal 
etc. A software can be freeware or open source or 
proprietary software depending upon the terms and 
conditions of the person or group who has developed 
and released that software.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   12 19-Jul-19   3:05:08 PM



Computer System 13

Summary Notes
•	 A computing device, also referred as computer 

processes the input data as per given instructions 
to generate desired output. 

•	 Computer processes data to generate information 
whose further analysis and interpretation yields 
knowledge.

•	 Computer system has four physical components 
viz. i) CPU ii) Primary memory iii) Input device and 
iv) Output device. They are referred to as hardware 
of computer.

•	 Computer system has two types of primary 
memories viz. i) RAM the volatile memory and ii) 
ROM the non-volatile memory.

•	 Software is a set of instructions written to achieve 
the desired task and are mainly categorised as 
system software, programming tools and application 
software. 

•	 Hardware of a computer cannot function on its own. 
It needs software to be operational or functional.

•	 Operating system is an interface between the user 
and the computer and supervises the working of 
computer system i.e. it monitors and controls the 
hardware and software of the computer system.

Exercise
1.	 Name the software required to make a computer 

functional. Write down its two primary functions.
2.	 What is the need of RAM? How does it differ from ROM?
3.	 What is the need for secondary memory?
4.	 Draw the block diagram of a computer system. Briefly 

write about the functionality of each component.
5.	 Differentiate between proprietary software and freeware 

software. Name two software of each type.
6.	 Mention any browsers used for browsing the internet.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   13 19-Jul-19   3:05:08 PM



14 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 7.	 Name the input/output device used to do the following:
a)	 To output audio 
b)	 To enter textual data
c)	 To make hard copy of a text file
d)	 To display the data/information 
e)	 To enter audio-based command
f)	 To build 3D models 
g)	 To assist a visually impaired individual in entering 

data
8.	 Identify the category (system, application, programming 

tool) of the following software: 
a)	 Compiler
b)	 Assembler
c)	 Ubuntu
d)	 Text editor

9.	 Convert the following into bytes: 
a)	 2 MB
b)	 3.7 GB
c)	 1.2 TB

10.	 What is the security threats involved when we throw 
away electronic gadgets that are non-functional? 

11.	 Write down the type of memory needed to do the following:
a)	 To store data permanently
b)	 To execute the program
c)	 To store the instructions which can not be overwritten.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   14 19-Jul-19   3:05:08 PM



Emerging Chapter 
Trends 2 

In this chapter
»» Introduction to 

##2##
Emerging Trends

“Computer science is no more about »» Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
»» Big Data 

computers than astronomy is about 
»» Internet of Things (IoT)

telescopes” 
»» Cloud Computing 
»» Grid Computing

— Edsger Dijkstra »» Blockchains 

2.1	 Introduction to Emerging Trends

Computers have been around for quite some time 
now. New technologies and initiatives emerge 
with each passing day. In order to understand the 
existing technologies and have a better view of the 
developments around us, we must keep an eye on 
the emerging trends. Many new technologies are 
introduced almost every day. Some of these do not 
succeed and fade away over time. Some of these 
new technologies prosper and persist over time, 
gaining attention from users. Emerging trends 
are the state-of-the-art technologies, which gain 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   15 19-Jul-19   3:06:47 PM



16 Informatics Practices – Class XI

popularity and set a new trend among users. In this 
chapter, we will learn about some emerging trends 
that will make a huge impact (in the future) on digital 
economy and interaction in digital societies.

2.2	 Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
Have you ever wondered how maps in your smartphone 
are able to guide you to take the fastest route to your 
destination by analysing real time data, such as traffic 
congestion? On uploading a photo on a social networking 
site, has it ever happened that your friends in the 
photograph were recognised and tagged automatically? 
These are some of the examples of application of 
Artificial Intelligence. The intelligent digital personal 
assistants like Siri, Google Now, Cortana, Alexa are 
all powered by AI. Artificial Intelligence endeavours to 
simulate the natural intelligence of human beings into 
machines, thus making them behave intelligently. An 

A knowledge base is intelligent machine is supposed to imitate some of the 
a store of information cognitive functions of humans like learning, decision-

consisting of facts, making and problem solving. In order to make machines 
assumptions and perform tasks with minimum human intervention, they 
rules which an AI are programmed to create a knowledge base and make 
system can use for 
decision making. decisions based on it. AI system can also learn from 

past experiences or outcomes to make new decisions.
2.2.1	Machine Learning
Machine Learning is a subsystem of Artificial 
Intelligence, wherein computers have the ability to learn 
from data using statistical techniques, without being 
explicitly programmed by a human being. It comprises 
algorithms that use data to learn on their own and make 
predictions. These algorithms, called models, are first 
trained and tested using a training data and testing 
data, respectively. After successive trainings, once these 
models are able to give results to an acceptable level of 
accuracy, they are used to make predictions about new 
and unknown data.
2.2.2	Natural Language Processing (NLP) 

Activity 2.1 The predictive typing feature of search engine that 
helps us by suggesting the next word in the sentence 

Find out how NLP is 
helping differently- while typing keywords and the spell checking features 
abled persons? are examples of Natural Language Processing (NLP). 

It deals with the interaction between human and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   16 19-Jul-19   3:06:47 PM



Emerging Trends 17

computers using human 
spoken languages, such as 
Hindi, English, etc.

In fact it is possible to 
search the web or operate or 
control our devices using our 
voice. All this has been possible 
by NLP. An NLP system can 
perform text-to-speech and Figure 2.1:	Use of natural language processing
speech-to-text conversion as 
depicted in Figure 2.1. 

Machine translation is a rapidly emerging field where 
machines are able to translate texts from one language 
to another with fair amount of correctness. Another 
emerging application area is automated customer 
service where a computer software can interact with 
customers to serve their queries or complaints.
2.2.3	Immersive Experiences 
With the three-dimensional (3D) videography, the 
joy of watching movies in theatres has reached to 
a new level. Video games are also being developed to 
provide immersive experiences to the player. Immersive 
experiences allow us to visualise, feel and react by 
stimulating our senses. It enhances our interaction and 
involvement, making them more realistic and engaging. 
Immersive experiences have been used in the field of 
training, such as driving simulators (Figure 2.2), flight Figure 2.2:	Driving Simulator
simulator and so on. Immersive experience can be 
achieved using virtual reality and augmented reality.
(A)	 Virtual Reality 
Everything that we experience in our reality is perceived 
through our senses. From this came the idea that 
if we can present our senses with made-up or non-
real information, our perception of reality would also 
alter in response to that. Virtual Reality (VR) is a 
three-dimensional, computer-generated situation that 
simulates the real world. The user can interact with and 
explore that environment by getting immersed in it while 
interacting with the objects and other actions of the user. 
At present, it is achieved with the help of VR Headsets. 
In order to make the experience of VR more realistic, it 
promotes other sensory information like sound, smell, 
motion, temperature, etc. It is a comparatively new field Figure 2.3:	VR Headset

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   17 19-Jul-19   3:06:48 PM



18 Informatics Practices – Class XI

and has found its applications in gaming (Figure 2.3), 
Unlike Virtual Reality, military training, medical procedures, entertainment, 
the Augmented Reality 

does not create something social science and psychology, engineering and 
new, it just alters or other areas where simulation is needed for a better 

augments the perception understanding and learning.
of the underlying physical 
world through additional (B)	 Augmented Reality 

information. The superimposition of computer generated perceptual 
information over the existing physical surroundings is 
called as Augmented Reality (AR). It adds components 
of the digital world to the physical world, along with 
the associated tactile and other sensory requirements, 
thereby making the environment interactive and 
digitally manipulable. Users can access information 
about the nearest places with reference to their current 
location. They can get information about places and 
choose on the basis of user reviews. With thet help of 
location-based AR App, travellers can access real-time 
information of historical places just by pointing their 

Figure 2.4:	Location based camera viewfinder to subjects as depicted in Figure 2.4. 
Augmented Reality Location-based AR apps are major forms of AR apps. 

2.2.4	Robotics 
A robot is basically a machine capable of carrying out one 
or more tasks automatically with accuracy and precision. 
Unlike other machines, a robot is programmable, which 
means it can follow the instructions given through 

Activity 2.2 computer programs. Robots were initially conceptualised 
Find out what role are for doing repetitive industrial tasks that are boring or 
robots playing in the stressful for humans or were labour-intensive. Sensors 
medical field? are one of the prime components of a robot. Robot can 

be of many types, such as wheeled robots, legged robots, 
manipulators and humanoids. Robots that resemble 
humans are known as humanoids. Robots are being 
used in industries, medical science, bionics, scientific 
research, military, etc. Some examples are: 

Robotics is an •	 NASA’s Mars Exploration Rover (MER) mission is 
interdisciplinary branch a robotic space mission to study about the planet 
of technology requiring Mars (Figure 2.5).

applications of mechanical 
engineering, electronics, •	 Sophia is a humanoid that uses artificial intelligence, 
and computer science, visual data processing, facial recognition and also 

among others. Robotics is imitates human gestures and facial expressions, as 
primarily concerned with 
the design, fabrication, shown in Figure 2.6.

operation, and application •	 A drone is an unmanned aircraft which can be 
of robots. remotely controlled or can fly autonomously through 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   18 19-Jul-19   3:06:48 PM



Emerging Trends 19

Figure 2.5:	NASA’s Mars Figure 2.6:	Sophia : a Figure 2.7:	an unmanned 
Exploration Rover (MER) Humanoid aircraft
software-controlled flight plans in their embedded 
systems, working in conjunction with onboard 
sensors and GPS (Figure 2.7). Drones are being 
used in many fields, such as journalism, filming Think and Reflect
and aerial photography, shipping or delivery at short Can a drone be helpful 
distances, disaster management, search and rescue in the event of a 
operations, healthcare, geographic mapping and natural calamity?
structural safety inspections, agriculture, wildlife 
monitoring or pooching, besides law-enforcement and 
border patrolling.

2.3	 Big Data 
With technology making 
an inroad into almost every 
sphere of our lives, data 
is being produced at a 
colossal rate. Today, there 
are over a billion Internet 
users, and a majority of 
the world’s web traffic is 
coming from smartphones. 
Figure 2.8 shows that at 
the current pace, around 
2.5 quintillion bytes of data 
are created each day, and 
the pace is increasing with 
the continuous evolution of 
the Internet of Things (IoT).

This results in the 
generation of data sets 
of enormous volume and 
complexity called Big 
Data. Such data cannot 
be processed and analysed 
using traditional data Figure 2.8:	Sources of big data (numbers are approximate)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   19 19-Jul-19   3:06:50 PM



20 Informatics Practices – Class XI

processing tools as the data is not only voluminous, 
but also unstructured like our posts, instant messages 
and chats, photographs that we share through various 
sites, our tweets, blog articles, news items, opinion 

Think and Reflect polls and their comments, audio/video chats, etc. 
How are your digital Big data not only represents voluminous data, it also 
activities contributing 
to generation of Big involves various challenges like integration, storage, 
data? analysis, searching, processing, transfer, querying and 

visualisation of such data. Big data sometimes hold rich 
information and knowledge which is of high business 
value, and therefore there is a keen effort in developing 
software and methods to process and analyse big data.
2.3.1	Characteristics of Big Data
Big data exhibits following five characteristics shown in 
Figure 2.9, that distinguish it from traditional data.
(A)	 Volume
The most prominent characteristic of big data is its 
enormous size. If a particular data set is of such large 
size that it is difficult to process it with traditional DBMS 
tools, it can be termed as big data.
(B)	 Velocity
It represents the rate at which the data under 
consideration is being generated and stored. Big data 
has an exponentially higher rate of generation than 
traditional data sets. 
(C)	 Variety
It asserts that a data set has varied data, such as 
structured, semi-structured and unstructured data. 

Figure 2.9:	Characteristics Some examples are text, images, videos, web pages and 
of big data so on. 

(D)	 Veracity
Big data can be sometimes inconsistent, biased, noisy 
or there can be abnormality in the data or issues 
with the data collection methods. Veracity refers to 
the trustworthiness of the data because processing 
such incorrect data can give wrong results or mislead 
the interpretations.
(E)	 Value
Big data is not only just a big pile of data, but also 
possess to have hidden patterns and useful knowledge 
which can be of high business value. But as there is cost 
of investment of resources in processing big data, we 
should make a preliminary enquiry to see the potential 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   20 19-Jul-19   3:06:50 PM



Emerging Trends 21

of the big data in terms of value discovery or else our 
efforts could be in vain.
2.3.2	Data Analytics 
Data analytics is the process of examining data sets 
in order to draw conclusions about the information 
they contain, with the aid of specialised systems 
and software.

Data analytics technologies and techniques are 
becoming popular day-by-day. They are used in 
commercial industries to enable organisations to make 
more informed business decisions. In the field of science 
and technology, it can be useful for researchers to verify 
or disprove scientific models, theories and hypotheses. 
Pandas is a library of the programming language 
Python that can be used as a tool to make data analysis 
much simpler.

2.4	 Internet of Things (IoT)
The term computer network that we commonly use is 
the network of computers. Such a network consists of a 
laptop, desktop, server, or a portable device like tablet, 
smartphone, smartwatch, etc., connected through Activity 2.3

wire or wireless. We can communicate between these Explore and list a few 
devices using Internet or LAN. Now imagine what if IoT devices available in 

the market. 
our bulbs, fans and refrigerator also became a part of 
this network. How will they communicate with each 
other, and what will they communicate?  Think about 
the advantages and tasks that can be accomplished 
if all these devices with smart connectivity features 
are able to communicate amongst themselves and 
we are also able to communicate 
with them using computers 
or smartphones!

The ‘Internet of Things’ is a 
network of devices that have an 
embedded hardware and software 
to communicate (connect and 
exchange data) with other 
devices on the same network 
as shown in Figure 2.10. At 
present, in a typical household, 
many devices have advanced 
hardware (microcontrollers) and 
software. These devices are used Figure 2.10:	Internet of Things (IoT)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   21 19-Jul-19   3:06:50 PM



22 Informatics Practices – Class XI

in isolation from each other, with maximum human 
intervention needed for operational directions and 
input data. IoT tends to bring together these devices to 
work in collaboration and assist each other in creating 
an intelligent network of things. For example, if a 
microwave oven, an air conditioner, door lock, CCTV 
camera or other such devices are enabled to connect to 
the Internet, we can access and remotely control them 
on-the-go using our smartphone.
2.4.1	Web of Things (WoT) 
Internet of Things allows us to interact with different 
devices through Internet with the help of smartphones 
or computers, thus creating a personal network. But to 
interact with ‘n’ number of different devices, we need 

Activity 2.4 to install ‘n’ different apps. Wouldn’t it be convenient 
We use GPS to to have one interface to connect all the devices? The 
navigate outdoors. VPS web is already being used as a system to communicate 
is another emerging with each other. So, will it be possible to use the web 
trend that uses 
Augmented Reality. in such a way that all things can communicate with 
Explore and find its each other in the most efficient manner by integrating 
other utilities. them together? Web of Things (WoT) allows the use of 

web services to connect anything in the physical world, 
besides human identities on web. It will pave way for 
creating smart homes, smart offices, smart cities and 
so on.
2.4.2	Sensors 
What happens when you hold your mobile vertically 
or horizontally? The display also changes to vertical or 
horizontal with respect to the way we hold our mobile. 
This is possible with the help of two sensors, namely 
accelerometer and gyroscope (gyro). The accelerometer 
sensor in the mobile phones detects the orientation of 
the phone. The gyroscope sensors tracks rotation or 
twist of your hand and add to the information supplied 
by the accelerometer.

Sensors are very commonly used for monitoring 
and observing elements in real world applications. The 
evolution of smart electronic sensors is contributing in 
a large way to the evolution of IoT. It will lead to creation 
of new sensor-based, intelligent systems.

A smart sensor is a device that takes input from 
the physical environment and uses built-in computing 
resources to perform predefined functions upon 
detection of specific input and then process data before 
passing it on.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   22 19-Jul-19   3:06:50 PM



Emerging Trends 23

2.4.3	Smart Cities 
With rapid urbanisation, the load on our cities is Think and Reflect
increasing day-by-day, and there are challenges in What are your ideas of 

transforming your city 
management of resources like land water, waste, air into a smart city?
pollution, health and sanitation, traffic congestions, 
public safety and security, besides the overall city 
infrastructures including road, rail, bridge, electricity, 
subways, disaster management, sports facilities, etc. 
These challenges are forcing many city planners around 
the world to look for smarter ways to manage them and 
make cities sustainable and livable.

The idea of a 
smart city as shown 
in Figure 2.11 makes 
use of computer 
and communication 
technology along with 
IoT, WoT  to manage and 
distribute resources 
efficiently. The smart 
building shown here 
uses sensors to detect 
earthquake tremors 
and then warn nearby 
buildings so that they 
can prepare themselves 
accordingly. The smart 
bridge uses wireless 
sensors to detect 
any loose bolt, cable 
or crack. It alerts Figure 2.11:	Smart City
concerned authorities through SMS. The smart tunnel 
also uses wireless sensors to detect any leakage or 
congestion in the tunnel. This information can be sent 
as wireless signals across the network of sensor nodes 
to a centralised computer for further analysis.

Every sphere of life in a city like transportation 
systems, power plants, water supply networks, waste 
management, law enforcement, information systems, 
schools, libraries, hospitals and other community 
services work in unison to optimise the efficiency of city 
operations and services. 

2.5	C loud Computing

Cloud computing is an emerging trend in the field of 
information technology, where computer-based services 
are delivered over the Internet or the cloud, for the case 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   23 19-Jul-19   3:06:50 PM



24 Informatics Practices – Class XI

of their accessibility form any where using any smart 
device. The services comprise software, hardware 
(servers), databases, storage, etc. These resources are 
provided by companies called cloud service providers 
and usually charge on pay per use basis, like the way 
we pay for electricity usage. We already use cloud 
services while storing our pictures and files as backup 
on Internet, or host a website on the Internet. Through 
cloud computing, a user can run a bigger application 
or process a large amount of data without having the 
required storage or processing power on their personal 
computer as long as they are connected to the Internet. 
Besides other numerous features, cloud computing 
offers cost-effective, on-demand resources. A user can 
avail need-based resources from the cloud at a very 
reasonable cost. 
2.5.1	Cloud Services 
A better way to understand the cloud is to interpret 
everything as a service. A service corresponds to any 
facility provided by the cloud. There are three standard 
models to categorise different computing services 
delivered through cloud as shown in Figure 2.12. These 
are Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a 
Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS). 
(A)	 Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
The IaaS providers can offer different kinds of computing 
infrastructure, such as servers, virtual machines (VM), 
storage and backup facility, network components, 

operating systems or any other 
hardware or software. Using 
IaaS from the cloud, a user can 
use the hardware infrastructure 
located at a remote location to 
configure, deploy and execute 
any software application on 
that cloud infrastructure. They 
can outsource the hardware 
and software on demand basis 
and pay as per the usage, 
thereby they can save the cost 
of software, hardware and other 
infrastructures as well as the 
cost of setting up, maintenance 

Figure 2.12:	Cloud Computing Services and security.
Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   24 19-Jul-19   3:06:50 PM



Emerging Trends 25

(B)	 Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
Through this service, a user can install and execute 
an application without worrying about the underlying Activity 2.5
infrastructure and their setup. That is, PaaS provides 
a platform or environment to develop, test, and deliver Name a few data 
software applications. Suppose we have developed a centers in India along 

with the major services 
web application using MySQL and Python. To run this that they provide. 
application online, we can avail a pre-configured Apache 
server from cloud having MySQL and Python pre-
installed. Thus, we are not required to install MySQL 
and Python on the cloud, nor do we need to configure 
the web server (Apache, nginx). In PaaS, the user has 
complete control over the deployed application and its 
configuration. It provides a deployment environment 
for developers at a much reduced cost lessening the 
complexity of buying and managing the underlying 
hardware and software.

(C)	 Software as a Service (SaaS)
SaaS provides on-demand access to application software, 
usually requiring a licensing or subscription by the 
user. While using Google doc, Microsoft Office 365, 
Drop Box, etc., to edit a document online, we use SaaS 
from cloud. A user is not concerned about installation 
or configuration of the software application as long 
as the required software is accessible. Like PaaS, a 
user is provided access to the required configuration 
settings of the application software, that they are using 
at present.

In all of the above standard service models, a user can 
use on-demand infrastructure or platform or software 
and is usually charged as per the usage, thereby 
eliminating the need of a huge investment upfront for 
a new or evolving organisation. In order to utilise and 
harness the benefits of cloud computing, Government 
of India has embarked upon an ambitious initiative — 
‘GI Cloud’ which has been named as ‘MeghRaj’ (https://
cloud.gov.in). 

2.6	G rid Computing

A grid is a computer network of geographically 
dispersed and heterogeneous computational resources 
as shown in Figure 2.13. Unlike cloud, whose primary 
focus is to provide services, a grid is more application 
specific and creates a sense of a virtual supercomputer 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   25 19-Jul-19   3:06:50 PM



26 Informatics Practices – Class XI

with an enormous processing power and storage. The 
Think and Reflect constituent resources are called nodes. These different 

How can some of nodes temporarily come together to solve a single large 
the emerging trends task and to reach a common goal.
discussed in this Nowadays, countless computational nodes ranging 
chapter be used as 
assistive tools for from hand-held mobile devices to personal computers and 
people with disabilities? workstations are connected to Local Area Network (LAN) 

or Internet. Therefore, it is economically feasible to 
reuse or utilise their resources like memory as well as 
processing power. The grid provides an opportunity to 
solve computationally intense scientific and research 
problems without actually procuring a costly hardware.

Grid can be of two types — (i) Data grid, used to 
manage large and distributed data having the required 
multi-user access, and (ii) CPU or Processor grid, where 
processing is moved from one PC to another as needed 
or a large task is divided into subtasks, and allotted to 
various nodes for parallel processing.

Grid computing is different from IaaS cloud 
Users sharing their resources service. In case of IaaS cloud service, there 

is a service provider who rents the required 
infrastructure to the users. Whereas in grid 
computing, multiple computing nodes join 
together to solve a common computational 
problem.

Grid Resource
Management To set up a grid, by connecting numerous 

System nodes in terms of data as well as CPU, a 
middleware is required to implement the 
distributed processor architecture. The Globus 
toolkit (http://toolkit.globus.org/toolkit) is 
one such software toolkit used for building 
grids, and it is as open source. It includes 

Users sharing their resources software for security, resource management, 
Figure 2.13:	Grid computing data management, communication, fault 

detection, etc.

2.7	 Blockchains

Traditionally, we perform digital transactions by storing 
data in a centralised database and the transactions 
performed are updated one by one on the database. That 
is how the ticket booking websites or banks operate. 
However, since all the data is stored on a central 
location, there are chances of data being hacked or lost.

The blockchain technology works on the concept of 
decentralised and shared database where each computer 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   26 19-Jul-19   3:06:51 PM



Emerging Trends 27

has a copy of the database. A block can be thought 
as a secured chunk of data or valid transaction. Each 
block has some data called its header, which is visible 
to every other node, while only the owner has access to 
the private data of the block. Such blocks form a chain 
called blockchain as shown in Figure 2.14. We can 
define blockchain as a system that allows a group of 
connected computers to maintain a single updated and 
secure ledger. Each computer or node that participates 
in the blockchain receives a full copy of the database. It 
maintains an ‘append only’ open ledger which is updated 
only after all the nodes within the network authenticate 
the transaction. Safety and security of the transactions 
are ensured because all the members in the network 
keep a copy of the blockchain and so it is not possible 
for a single member of the network to make changes or 
alter data.

The request is 
Someone requests broadcast to all 

a transaction nodes in the 
network

If verified by all nodes, 
The transaction the block get added in the 

is complete already existing chain of 
blocks

Figure 2.14:	Block chain technology

The most popular application of blockchains 
technology is in digital currency. However, due to its 
decentralised nature with openness and security, 
blockchains are being seen as one of the ways to ensure 
transparency, accountability and efficiency in business 
as well as in governance systems.

For example, in healthcare, better data sharing 
between healthcare providers would result in a higher Think and Reflect
probability of accurate diagnosis, more effective Name any two areas 
treatments, and the overall increased ability of healthcare other than those given 
organisations to deliver cost-effective care. Another where the concept of 
potential application can be for  land registration records, blockchain technology 
to avoid various disputes arising out of land ownership can be useful.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   27 19-Jul-19   3:06:51 PM



28 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes claims and encroachments. A blockchain based voting 
system can solve the problem of vote alterations and 
other issues. Since everything gets stored in the ledger, 
voting can become more transparent and authentic. The 
blockchain technology can be used in diverse sectors, 
such as banking, media, telecom, travel and hospitality 
and other areas.

Summary
•	 Artificial Intelligence endeavours to simulate the 

natural intelligence of human beings into machines 
thus making them intelligent.

•	 Machine learning comprises of algorithms that use 
data to learn on their own and make predictions.

•	 Natural language processing (NLP) facilitates 
communicating with intelligent systems using a 
natural language.

•	 Virtual reality allows a user to look at, explore, and 
interact with the virtual surroundings, just like one 
can do in the real world.

•	 The superimposition of computer-generated 
perceptual information over the existing physical 
surroundings is called augmented reality.

•	 Robotics can be defined as the science primarily 
associated with the design, fabrication, theory, and 
application of robots.

•	 Big data holds rich information and knowledge which 
can be of high business value. Five characteristics 
of big data are: Volume, Velocity, Variety, Veracity, 
and Value.

•	 Data analytics is the process of examining data sets 
in order to draw conclusions about the information 
they contain.

•	 The Internet of Things (IoT) is a network of devices 
that have an embedded hardware and software to 
communicate (connect and exchange data) with 
other devices on the same network.

•	 A sensor is a device that takes input from the 
physical environment and uses built-in computing 
resources to perform predefined functions upon 
detection of specific input and then processes data 
before passing it on.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   28 19-Jul-19   3:06:51 PM



Emerging Trends 29

•	 Cloud computing allows resources located at Notes
remote locations to be made available to anyone 
anywhere. Cloud services can be Infrastructure as 
a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and 
Software as a Service (SaaS).

•	 Block chair technology uses a shared data base of 
chaired blocks where copies of data base exist on 
multiple computers.

Exercise
1.	 List some of the cloud-based services that you are using 

at present.
2.	 What do you understand by the Internet of Things? List 

some of its potential applications.
3.	 Write a short note on the following:

a)	 Cloud computing 
b)	 Big data and its characteristics

4.	 Explain the following along with their applications.
a)	 Artificial Intelligence
b)	 Machine Learning

5.	 Differentiate between cloud computing and grid 
computing with suitable examples.

6.	 Justify the following statement-
‘Storage of data is cost effective and time saving in cloud 
computing.’

7.	 What is on-demand service? How it is provided in cloud 
computing?

8.	 Write examples of the following:
a)	 Government provided cloud computing platform
b)	 Large scale private cloud service providers and the 

services they provide
9.	 A company interested in cloud computing is looking for a 

provider who offers a set of basic services such as virtual 
server provisioning and on-demand storage that can be 
combined into a platform for deploying and running 
customised applications. What type of cloud computing 
model fits these requirements?
a)	 Platform as a Service
b)	 Software as a Service
c)	 Infrastructure as a Service

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   29 19-Jul-19   3:06:51 PM



30 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 10.	 Which is not one of the features of IoT devices?
a)	 Remotely controllable
b)	 Programmable
c)	 Can turn themselves off if necessary
d)	 All of the above 

11.	 If Government plans to make a smart school by 
applying IoT concepts, how can each of the following 
be implemented in order to transform a school into IoT 
enabled smart school?
a)	 e-textbooks
b)	 Smart boards
c)	 Online tests
d)	 Wifi sensors on classrooms doors
e)	 Sensors in buses to monitor their location
f)	 Wearables (watches or smart belts) for attendance 

monitoring
12.	 Five friends plan to try a startup. However, they have 

a limited budget and limited computer infrastructure. 
How can they avail the benefits of cloud services to 
launch their startup?

13.	 Governments provide various scholarships to students 
of different classes. Prepare a report on how blockchain 
technology can be used to promote accountability, 
transparency and efficiency in distribution of 
scholarships?

14.	 How IoT and WoT are related?
15.	 Match the following:

Column A Column B

You got a reminder to take Smart Parking
medication
You got a sms alert that you Smart Wearable
forgot to lock the door

You got the sms alert that Home Automation
parking space is available near 
your block
You turned off your LED TV Smart Health
from your wrist watch

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   30 19-Jul-19   3:06:51 PM



Brief Overview Chapter 
of Python 3 

In this chapter
»» Introduction to Python
»» Python Keywords

“Don't you hate code that's not properly »» Identifiers 
indented? Making it [indenting] part of »» Variables
the syntax guarantees that all code is »» Data Types

properly indented.” »» Operators
»» Expressions

—  G. van Rossum »» Input and Output
»» Debugging
»» Functions
»» if..else Statements

##3##
3.1	 Introduction to Python »» for Loop

An ordered set of instructions or commands to be »» Nested Loops
executed by a computer is called a program. The 
language used to specify those set of instructions 
to the computer is called a programming language 
for example Python, C, C++, Java, etc.

This chapter gives a brief overview of Python 
programming language. Python is a very popular 
and easy to learn programming language, created 
by Guido van Rossum in 1991. It is used in a 
variety of fields, including software development, 
web development, scientific computing, big  data 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   31 19-Jul-19   3:16:31 PM



32 Informatics Practices – Class XI

and Artificial Intelligence. The programs given in this book 
are written using Python 3.7.0. However, one can install 
any version of Python 3 to follow the programs given.

Download Python 3.1.1	Working with Python 
The latest version of To write and run (execute) a Python program, we need 

Python is available on the to have a Python interpreter installed on our computer 
official website: or we can use any online Python interpreter. The 

https://www.python. interpreter is also called Python shell. A sample screen 
org/ of Python interpreter is shown in Figure 3.1. Here, the 

symbol >>> is called Python prompt, which indicates 
that the interpreter is ready to receive instructions. 
We can type commands or statements on this prompt 
for execution.

Figure 3.1:	Python Interpreter or Shell

3.1.2	Execution Modes 
There are two ways to run a program using the Python 
interpreter:

a)	 Interactive mode 
b)	 Script mode

(A)	 Interactive Mode
In the interactive mode, we can type a Python statement 
on the >>> prompt directly. As soon as we press enter, 
the interpreter executes the statement and displays the 
result(s), as shown in Figure 3.2.

Working in the interactive mode is convenient for 
testing a single line code for instant execution. But in 
the interactive mode, we cannot save the statements for 

Figure 3.2:	Python Interpreter in Interactive Mode

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   32 19-Jul-19   3:16:32 PM



Brief Overview of Python 33

future use and we have to retype the statements to run 
them again.
(B)	 Script Mode
In the script mode, we can write a Python program in 
a file, save it and then use the interpreter to execute 
the program from the file. Such program files have 
a .py extension and they are also known as scripts. 
Usually, beginners learn Python in interactive mode, IDLE : Integrated  
but for programs having more than a few lines, we Development and  
should always save the code in files for future use. Learning Environment 
Python scripts can be created using any editor. Python 
has a built-in editor called IDLE which can be used 
to create programs. After opening the IDLE, we can 
click File>New File to create a new file, then write our 
program on that file and save it with a desired name. 
By default, the Python scripts are saved in the Python 
installation folder. 

Figure 3.3:	Python Code in Script Mode (prog3-1.py)

To execute a Python program in script mode,  
a)	 Open the program using an editor, for example 

IDLE as shown in Figure 3.3.
b)	 In IDLE, go to [Run]->[Run Module] to execute the 

prog3-1.py as shown in Figure 3.4.
c)	 The output appears on shell as shown in Figure 

3.5. 

Figure 3.4:	Execution of Python in Script mode using IDLE

Figure 3.5:	Output of a Program prog 3-1.py executed in Script Mode

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   33 19-Jul-19   3:16:32 PM



34 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 3.2	 Python Keywords

Keywords are reserved words. Each keyword has a 
specific meaning to the Python interpreter. As Python 
is case sensitive, keywords must be written exactly as 
given in Table 3.1.

Table 3.1 Python keywords
False class finally is return
None continue for lambda try
True def from nonlocal while
and del global not with
as elif if or yield
assert else import pass  
break except in raise  

3.3	 Identifiers
In programming languages, identifiers are names used 
to identify a variable, function, or other entities in a 
program. The rules for naming an identifier in Python 
are as follows: 
•	 The name should begin with an uppercase or a 

lowercase alphabet or an underscore sign (_). This 
may be followed by any combination of characters 
a-z, A-Z, 0-9 or underscore (_). Thus, an identifier 
cannot start with a digit.

•	 It can be of any length. (However, it is preferred to 
keep it short and meaningful). 

•	 It should not be a keyword or reserved word given in 
Table 3.1.

•	 We cannot use special symbols like !, @, #, $, %, etc. 
in identifiers.
For example, to find the average of marks obtained 

by a student in three subjects namely Maths, English, 
Informatics Practices (IP), we can choose the identifiers 
as marksMaths, marksEnglish, marksIP and avg 
rather than a, b, c, or A, B, C, as such alphabets do not 
give any clue about the data that variable refers to.

avg = (marksMaths + marksEnglish + marksIP)/3

3.4	 Variables

Variable is an identifier whose value can change. For 
example  variable age can have  different  value for 
different person. Variable name should be unique in a 
program. Value of a variable can be string (for example, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   34 19-Jul-19   3:16:32 PM



Brief Overview of Python 35

‘b’, ‘Global Citizen’), number (for example 10,71,80.52) 
or any combination of alphanumeric (alphabets and Comments are used 
numbers for example ‘b10’) characters. In Python, we to add a remark or 
can use an assignment statement to create new variables a note in the source 
and assign specific values to them. code. Comments 

are not executed by 
gender   = 'M' interpreter. They 
message  = "Keep Smiling" are added with the 
price    = 987.9 purpose of making 

the source code 
Variables must always be assigned values before easier for humans 

they are used in the program, otherwise it will lead to understand. They 
to an error. Wherever a variable name occurs in the are used primarily 
program, the interpreter replaces it with the value of to document the 
that particular variable. meaning and purpose 

of source code.
	 In Python, a single 

Program 3-2	 Write a Python program to find the sum line comment starts 
of two numbers. with # (hash sign). 

Everything following 
#Program 3-2 the # till the end of 

that line is treated 
#To find the sum of two given numbers as a comment and 
num1 = 10 the interpreter 
num2 = 20 simply ignores it 
result = num1 + num2 while executing the 
print(result) statement.

#print function in python displays the output
Output:

30
Program 3-3	 Write a Python program to find the area 

of a rectangle given that its length is 10 
units and breadth is 20 units.

#Program 3-3 
#To find the area of a rectangle
length = 10
breadth = 20
area = length * breadth
print(area)

Output:
200

3.5	D ata Types 
Every value belongs to a specific data type in Python. 
Data type identifies the type of data which a variable 
can hold and the operations that can be performed on 
those data. Figure 3.6 enlists the data types available 
in Python.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   35 19-Jul-19   3:16:32 PM



36 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Dictionaries

Figure 3.6:	Different Data Types in Python
3.5.1	Number
Number data type stores numerical values only. It is 
further classified into three different types: int, float 
and complex.

Table 3.2 Numeric data types
Type/ Class Description Examples

int integer numbers -12, -3, 0, 123, 2
float floating point numbers -2.04, 4.0, 14.23

complex complex numbers 3 + 4i, 2 - 2i

Boolean data type (bool) is a subtype of integer. It 
is a unique data type, consisting of two constants, True 
and False. Boolean True value is non-zero. Boolean 
False is the value zero.

Let us now try to execute few statements in interactive 
mode to determine the data type of the variable using 
built-in function type().
Example 3.1	

>>> quantity = 10
>>> type(quantity)
<class 'int'>

>>> Price = -1921.9
>>> type(price)
<class 'float'>

Variables of simple data types like integer, float, boolean 
etc. hold single value. But such variables are not useful 
to hold multiple data values, for example, names of the 
months in a year, names of students in a class, names 
and numbers in a phone book or the list of artefacts in a 
museum. For this, Python provides sequence data types like 
Strings, Lists, Tuples, and  mapping data type Dictionaries.
3.5.2	Sequence
A Python sequence is an ordered collection of items, 
where each item is indexed by an integer value. Three 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   36 19-Jul-19   3:16:32 PM



Brief Overview of Python 37

types of sequence data types available in Python are Notes
Strings, Lists and Tuples. A brief introduction to these 
data types is as follows:
(A)	 String 
String is a group of characters. These characters may be 
alphabets, digits or special characters including spaces. 
String values are enclosed either in single quotation 
marks (for example ‘Hello’) or in double quotation marks 
(for example “Hello”). The quotes are not a part of the 
string, they are used to mark the beginning and end of 
the string for the interpreter. For example,  

>>> str1 = 'Hello Friend'
>>> str2 = "452"

We cannot perform numerical operations on strings, 
even when the string contains a numeric value. For 
example str2 is a numeric string.
(B)	 List 
List is a sequence of items separated by commas and 
items are enclosed in square brackets [ ]. Note that 
items may be of different date types.

Example 3.2	
#To create a list
>>> list1 = [5, 3.4, "New Delhi", "20C", 45] 	
#print the elements of the list list1	
>>> list1     
[5, 3.4, 'New Delhi', '20C', 45]

(C)	 Tuple 
Tuple is a sequence of items separated by commas and 
items are enclosed in parenthesis ( ). This is unlike list, 
where values are enclosed in brackets [ ]. Once created, 
we cannot change items in the tuple. Similar to List, 
items may be of different data types.
Example 3.3	

#create a tuple tuple1
>>> tuple1 = (10, 20, "Apple", 3.4, 'a')    
#print the elements of the tuple tuple1
>>> print(tuple1)   
(10, 20, "Apple", 3.4, 'a')

3.5.3	Mapping
Mapping is an unordered data type in Python. Currently, 
there is only one standard mapping data type in Python 
called Dictionary. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   37 19-Jul-19   3:16:32 PM



38 Informatics Practices – Class XI

(A)	 Dictionary 
Dictionary in Python holds data items in key-value pairs 
and Items are enclosed in curly brackets { }. dictionaries 
permit faster access to data. Every key is separated from 
its value using a colon (:) sign. The key value pairs of 
a dictionary can be accessed using the key. Keys are 
usually of string type and their values can be of any data 
type. In order to access any value in the dictionary, we 
have to specify its key in square brackets [ ].
Example 3.4	

#create a dictionary
>>> dict1 = {'Fruit':'Apple', 
'Climate':'Cold', 'Price(kg)':120}   
>>> print(dict1)
{'Fruit': 'Apple', 'Climate': 'Cold', 
'Price(kg)': 120}
#getting value by specifying a key

Python compares two >>> print(dict1['Price(kg)'])
strings lexicographically 120

(According to the 
theory and practice of 3.6	O perators
composing and writing 
dictionary), using ASCII An operator is used to perform specific mathematical or 
value of the characters. logical operation on values. The values that the operator 
If the first character of works on are called operands. For example, in the 
both strings are same, 
the second character is expression 10 + num, the value 10, and the variable num 
compared, and so on. are operands and the + (plus) sign is an operator. Python 

supports several kind of operators, their categorisation 
is briefly explained in this section.
3.6.1	Arithmetic Operators
Python supports arithmetic operators (Table 3.3) to 
perform the four basic arithmetic operations as well as 
modular division, floor division and exponentiation.

'+' operator can also be used to concatenate two 
strings on either side of the operator.

>>> str1 = "Hello"
>>> str2 = "India"
>>> str1 + str2
'HelloIndia'

'*' operator repeats the item on left side of the 
operator if first operand is a string and second operand 
is an integer value.

>>> str1 = 'India'
>>> str1 * 2
'IndiaIndia'

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   38 19-Jul-19   3:16:32 PM



Brief Overview of Python 39

Table 3.3 Arithmetic operators in Python
Operator Operation Description Example (Try in Lab)

+ Addition Adds two numeric values on >>> num1 = 5
either side of the operator >>> num2 = 6

>>> num1 + num2
11

- Subtraction Subtracts the operand on the >>> num1 = 5
right from the operand on the left >>> num2 = 6

>>> num1 - num2
-1

* Multiplication Multiplies the two values on both >>> num1 = 5
sides of the operator >>> num2 = 6

>>> num1 * num2
30

/ Division Divides the operand on the left >>> num1 = 5
by the operand on the right of the >>> num2 = 2
operator and returns the quotient >>> num1 / num2

2.5
% Modulus Divides the operand on the left >>> num1 = 13

by the operand on the right and >>> num2 = 5
returns the remainder >>> num1 % num2

3
// Floor Division Divides the operand on the left >>> num1 = 5

by the operand on the right and >>> num2 = 2
returns the quotient by removing >>> num1 // num2
the decimal part. It is sometimes 2
also called integer division. >>> num2 // num1

0
** Exponent Raise the base to the power of the >>> num1 = 3

exponent. That is, multiply the >>> num2 = 4
base as many times as given in >>> num1 ** num2
the exponent 81

Operators (+) and (*) work in similar manner for other 
sequence data types like list and tuples. 
3.6.2	Relational Operators
Relational operator compares the values of the operands 
on its either side and determines the relationship among 
them. Conside the given Python variables num1 = 10, 
num2 = 0, num3 = 10, str1 = "Good", str2 = 
"Afternoon" for the following examples in Table 3.4:

Table 3.4 Relational operators in Python
Operator Operation Description Example (Try in Lab)

>>> num1 == num2

== Equals to If values of two operands are False
equal, then the condition is True, 
otherwise it is False. >> str1 == str2

False

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   39 19-Jul-19   3:16:32 PM



40 Informatics Practices – Class XI

>>> num1 != num2
If values of two operands are not True

!= Not equal to equal, then condition is True, >>> st r1 != str2
otherwise it is False True

>>> num1 != num3
False

If the value of the left operand is >>> num1 > num2

> Greater than greater than the value of the right True
operand, then condition is True,  >>> st r1 > str2
otherwise it is False. True
If the value of the left operand is 

< Less than less than the value of the right >>> num1 < num3
operand, the condition is true False
otherwise it is False

Similarly, there are other relational operators like <= 
and >=.
3.6.3	Assignment Operators
Assignment operator assigns or changes the value of 
the variable on its left, as shown in Table 3.5.

Table 3.5 Assignment operators in Python
Operator Description Example (Try in Lab)

= Assigns value from right side operand to left >>> num1 = 2
side operand >>> num2 = num1

>>> num2
2
>>> country = 'India'
>>> country
'India'

+= It adds the value of right side operand to the left >>> num1 = 10
side operand and assigns the result to the left >>> num2 = 2
side operand. >>> num1 += num2
Note: x+ = y  is same as x = x + y >>> num1

12
>>> num2
2

-= It subtracts the value of right side operand >>> num1 = 10
from the left side operand and assigns the >>> num2 = 2
result to left side operand. >>> num1 -= num2
Note: x− = y is same as x = x − y >>> num1

8

Similarly, there are other assignment operators like 
*=, /=, %=, //=, and **=.
3.6.4	Logical Operators
There are three logical operators (Table 3.6) supported 
by Python. These operators (and, or, not) are to be 
written in lower case only. The logical operator evaluates 
to either True or False based on the logical operands 
on its either side. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   40 19-Jul-19   3:16:33 PM



Brief Overview of Python 41

Table 3.6 Logical operators in Python
Operator Operation Description Example (Try in Lab)

and Logical AND If both operands are True, >>> num1 = 10 
then condition becomes >>> num2 = -20
True >>> num1 == 10 and num2 == -20

True
>>> num1 == 10 and num2 == 10
False

or Logical OR If any of the two operands >>> num1 = 10 
are True, then condition >>> num2 = 2
becomes True >>> num1 >= 10 or num2 >= 10

True
>>> num1 <= 5 or num2 >= 10
False

not Logical NOT Used to reverse the logical >>> num1 = 10
state of its operand >>> not (num1 == 20)

True
>>> not (num1 == 10)
False

3.6.5	Membership Operators
Membership operator (Table 3.7) is used to check if a 
value is a member of the given sequence or not.

Table 3.7 Membership operators in Python
Operator Description Example (Try in Lab)

in Returns True if the variable or value is found in the >>> numSeq = [1,2,3]
specified sequence and False otherwise >>> 2 in numSeq

True
>>> '1' in numSeq
False
#'1' is a string while 
#numSeq contains number 1. 

not in Returns True if the variable/value is not found in >>> numSeq = [1,2,3]
the specified sequence and False otherwise >>> 10 not in numSeq

True
>>> 1 not in numSeq
False

3.7	E xpressions 
An expression is defined as a combination of constants, 
variables and operators. An expression always evaluates 
to a value. A value or a standalone variable is also 
considered as an expression but a standalone operator 
is not an expression. Some examples of valid expressions 
are given below.
 (i) num – 20.4  (iii) 23/3 -5 * 7(14 -2)
(ii) 3.0 + 3.14   (iv) "Global"+"Citizen"

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   41 19-Jul-19   3:16:33 PM



42 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 3.7.1	Precedence of Operators
So far we have seen different operators and examples 
of their usage. When an expression contains more than 
one operator, their precedence (order or hierarchy) 
determines which operator should be applied first. 
Higher precedence operator is evaluated before the 
lower precedence operator. In the following example, '*' 
and '/' have higher precedence than '+' and '-'.
Note:

a)	 Parenthesis can be used to override the precedence of 
operators. The expression within () is evaluated first.

b)	 For operators with equal precedence, the expression 
is evaluated from left to right.

Example 3.5	 How will Python evaluate the following 
expression? 

         20 + 30 * 40
       Solution:
                       #precedence of * is more than that of + 
             = 20 + 1200     	     #Step 1
             = 1220         	     #Step 2
Example 3.6	 How will Python evaluate the following 

expression? 
         (20 + 30) * 40

       Solution:
      	 = (20 + 30) * 40          	 # Step 1 
	 #using parenthesis(), we have forced  
	 precedence of + to be more than that of * 
	 = 50 * 40                          	 # Step 2
 	 = 2000                                 	 # Step 3
Example 3.7	 How will the following expression be 

evaluated?
	       15.0 / 4.0 + (8 + 3.0)

       Solution:
               	 = 15.0 / 4.0 + (8.0 + 3.0) 	 #Step 1
       	 = 15.0 / 4.0 + 11.0 	 #Step 2
  	 =  3.75 + 11.0                  	 #Step 3
           	= 14.75                	 #Step 4

3.8	 Input and Output 
Sometimes, we need to enter data or enter choices into 
a program. In Python, we have the input() function 
for taking values entered by input device such as a 
keyboard. The input() function prompts user to enter 
data. It accepts all user input (whether alphabets, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   42 19-Jul-19   3:16:33 PM



Brief Overview of Python 43

numbers or special character) as string. The syntax for Notes
input() is: 

variable = input([Prompt])
Prompt is the string we may like to display on the 

screen prior to taking the input, but it is optional. The 
input() takes exactly what is typed from the keyboard, 
converts it into a string and assigns it to the variable on 
left hand side of the assignment operator (=). 
Example 3.8	

>>> fname = input("Enter your first name: ")
Enter your first name: Arnab
>>> age = input("Enter your age: ")
Enter your age: 19

The variable fname gets the string ‘Arnab’ as input. 
Similarly, the variable age gets '19' as string. We can 
change the datatype of the string data accepted from 
user to an appropriate numeric value. For example, the 
int() function will convert the accepted string to an 
integer. If the entered string is non-numeric, an error 
will be generated.
Example 3.9	

#function int() to convert string to integer
>>> age = int(input("Enter your age: "))
Enter your age: 19
>>> type(age)
<class 'int'>

Python uses the print() function to output data 
to standard output device — the screen. The function 
print() evaluates the expression before displaying it 
on the screen. The syntax for print() is: 

print(value)

Example 3.10	
Statement Output

print("Hello") Hello
print(10*2.5) 25.0

3.9	D ebugging
Due to errors, a program may not execute or may 
generate wrong output. : 

i)	 Syntax errors
ii)	 Logical errors
iii)	 Runtime errors

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   43 19-Jul-19   3:16:33 PM



44 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 3.9.1	Syntax Errors
Like any programming language, Python has rules that 
determine how a program is to be written. This is called 
syntax. The interpreter can interpret a statement of a 
program only if it is syntactically correct. For example, 
parentheses must be in pairs, so the expression (10 + 
12) is syntactically correct, whereas (7 + 11 is not due 
to absence of right parenthesis. If any syntax error is 
present, the interpreter shows error message(s) and 
stops the execution there. Such errors need to be 
removed before execution of the program.
3.9.2	Logical Errors 
A logical error/bug (called semantic error) does not stop 
execution but the program behaves incorrectly and 
produces undesired /wrong output. Since the program 
interprets successfully even when logical errors are 
present in it, it is sometimes difficult to identify these 
errors. 

For example, if we wish to find the average of two 
numbers 10 and 12 and we write the code as 10 + 12/2, 
it would run successfully and produce the result 16, 
which is wrong. The correct code to find the average 
should have been (10 + 12) /2 to get the output as 11.
3.9.3	Runtime Error
A runtime error causes abnormal termination of 
program while it is executing. Runtime error is when the 
statement is correct syntactically, but the interpreter 
can not execute it. 

For example, we have a statement having division 
operation in the program. By mistake, if the denominator 
value is zero then it will give a runtime error like “division 
by zero”. 

The process of identifying and removing logical 
errors and runtime errors is called debugging. We need 
to debug a program so that is can run successfully and 
generate the desired output.

3.10 Functions

A function refers to a set of statements or instructions 
grouped under a name that perform specified tasks. 
For repeated or routine tasks, we  define a function. A 
function is defined once and can be reused at multiple 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   44 19-Jul-19   3:16:33 PM



Brief Overview of Python 45

places in a program by simply writing the function Notes
name, i.e., by calling that function. 

Suppose we have a program which requires to 
calculate compound interest at multiple places. Now 
instead of writing the formula to calculate the interest 
every time, we can create a function called CalcCompInt 
and inside that function we write the code to take 
inputs (like interest rate, duration, principle), calculate 
interest, and display output. We can simply call the 
function by writing the function name CalcCompInt 
whenever compound interest is to be computed and 
thus reuse the code to save time and efforts. 

Python has many predefined functions called built‑in 
functions. We have already used two built-in functions 
print() and input(). A module is a python file in 
which multiple functions are grouped together. These 
functions can be easily used in a Python program by 
importing the module using import command. Use 
of built‑in functions makes programming faster and 
efficient. To use a built‑in function we must know the 
following about that function:
•	 Function Name — name of the function. 
•	 Arguments — While calling a function, we may pass 

value(s), called argument, enclosed in parenthesis, 
to the function. The function works based on these 
values. A function may or may not have argument(s).

•	 Return Value − A function may or may not return one 
or more values. A function performs operations on the 
basis of argument (s) passed to it and the result is 
passed back to the calling point. Some functions do 
not return any value. 
Let us consider the following Python program using 

three built-in functions input(), int() and print():
#Calculate square of a number
num = int(input("Enter the first number"))
square = num * num
print("the square of", num, " is ", square)  

Observe:
•	 Two built‑in functions are used in the first statement, 

int() and input(). The third line has a function 
print(). 

•	 The input function accepts an argument, “Enter your 
name”. Argument(s) is the value(s) passed within 
the parenthesis. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   45 19-Jul-19   3:16:33 PM



46 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes •	 Similarly the print function has four arguments "the 
square of", num, "is", square separated by 
commas.

•	 The int function in the first line takes as argument 
the value entered by the user from the keyboard and 
converts it into a string and returns it. Thus the 
return value from the int() function is an integer. 
Some of the most commonly used built‑in 

functions in Python are listed in Table 3.8 under four 
broad categories.

Table 3.8 Some commonly used built-in functions in 
Python

Input/ Datatype Mathematical Other 
Output Conversion Functions Functions

input() bool() abs() __import__()
print() chr() divmod() len()

dict() max() range()
float() min() type()
int() pow()
list() sum()
ord()
set()
str()
tuple()

3.11 if..else Statements

Usually statements in a program are executed one after 
another. However, there are situations when we have 
more than one option to choose from, based on the 
outcome of certain conditions. This can be done using if..
else conditional statements. Conditional statements let 
us write program to do different tasks or take different 
paths  based on the outcome of the conditions. 

There are three ways to write if..else statements:
•	 if statement — executes the statement(s) inside if 

when the condition is true. ‘
Example 3.11	  

age = int(input("Enter your age "))

if age >= 18: # use ‘:’ to indicate end of 
condition.
    print("Eligible to vote")

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   46 19-Jul-19   3:16:33 PM



Brief Overview of Python 47

•	 if...else statement executes the statement(s) 
inside if when the condition is true, otherwise 
executes the statement(s) inside else (when the Python uses 

indentation for block 
condition is false) as well as for nested 
#Program to subtract smaller number from the block structures. 
#larger number and display the difference. Leading whitespace 
num1 = int(input("Enter first number: ")) (spaces and tabs) 

at the beginning 
num2 = int(input("Enter second number: ")) of a statement is 
if num1 > num2: called indentation. 
     diff = num1 - num2 In Python, the same 

level of indentation 
else: associates statements 
     diff = num2 - num1 into a single block of 
print("The difference of",num1,"and",num2, code. The interpreter 
"is",diff) checks indentation 

levels very strictly 
Output: and throws up syntax 

Enter first number: 5 errors if indentation 
Enter second number: 6 is not correct. It is 

a common practice 
The difference of 5 and 6 is 1 to use a single tab 

•	 if...elif....else is use dot check multiple for each level of 
conditions and execute statements accordingly. indentation.

Meaning of elif is elseif. We can also write elseif 
instead of elif for more clarity.

Example 3.12	 Check whether a number is positive, 
negative, or zero.

number = int(input("Enter a number: ")
if number > 0:
     print("Number is positive")
elif number < 0:
     print("Number is negative")
else:
     print("Number is zero")

When the conditional statements appear, the 
Python interpreter executes code inside one block that 
is selected based on the condition. Number of elif is 
dependent on the number of conditions to be checked. 
If the first condition is false, then the next condition 
is checked, and so on. If one of the conditions is true, 
then the corresponding indented block executes, and 
the if statement terminates. After that, the statements 
outside the if..else are executed or the program 
terminates if there are no further statements.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   47 19-Jul-19   3:16:34 PM



48 Informatics Practices – Class XI

3.12 For Loop

Sometimes we need to repeat certain things for a 
particular number of times. For example, a program has 
to display attendance for every student of a class. Here 
the program has to execute the print statement for 
every student. In programming, this kind of repetition 
is called looping or iteration, and it is done using for 
statement. The for statement is used to iterate over 
a range of values or a sequence. The loop is executed 
for each item in the range. The values can be numeric, 
string, list, or tuple.

When all the items in the range are exhausted, the 
statements within loop are not executed and Python 
interpreter starts executing the statements immediately 
following the for loop. While using for loop, we should 
know in advance the number of times the loop will 
execute.

	 Syntax of the for Loop:
for <control-variable> in <sequence/items in 
range>:

	   <statements inside body of the 			 
 	   loop>

Program 3-4	 Program to 
print even 
numbers in a 
given sequence 
using for loop.

#Program 3-4
#Print even numbers in the given sequence
numbers = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
for num in numbers:
     if (num % 2) == 0:
          print(num,'is an even Number')

Output:
2  is an even Number
4  is an even Number
6  is an even Number
8  is an even Number
10 is an even Number

Note: Body of the loop is indented with respect to the for statement.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   48 19-Jul-19   3:16:34 PM



Brief Overview of Python 49

3.12.1	The range() Function
The range() is a built-in function in Python. Syntax of 
range() function is:
		  range([start], stop[, step])

It is used to create a list containing a sequence of 
integers from the given start value upto stop value 
(excluding stop value), with a difference of the given 
step value. If start value is not specified, by default 
the list starts from 0. If step is also not specified, by 
default the value is incremented by 1 in each iteration. 
All parameters of range() function must be integers. The 
step parameter can be a positive or a negative integer 
excluding zero.

Example 3.13	
>>> list(range(10))
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]

#start value is given as 2
>>>  list(range(2, 10))  
[2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]       

#step value is 5 and start value is 0
>>>  list(range(0, 30, 5)) 	
[0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25]  	    

#step value is -1. Hence, decreasing 	
#sequence is generated
>>>  list(range(0, -9, -1)) 	
[0, -1, -2, -3, -4, -5, -6, -7, -8]  

The function range() is often used in for loops for 
generating a sequence of numbers.
Program 3-5	 Program to print the multiples of 10 for 

numbers in a given range.
#Program 3-5
#Print multiples of 10 for numbers in a range
for num in range(5):
     if num > 0:
          print(num * 10)

Output:
10
20
30
40

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   49 19-Jul-19   3:16:34 PM



50 Informatics Practices – Class XI

3.13 Nested Loops

A loop may contain another loop inside it. A loop inside 
another loop is called a nested loop.
Program 3-6	 Program to 

demonst ra te 
working of 
nested for 
loops.

#Program 3-6
#Demonstrate working of nested for loops
for var1 in range(3):
    print( "Iteration " + str(var1 + 1) + " of outer loop")
    for var2 in range(2):    #nested loop
        print(var2 + 1)
    print("Out of inner loop")
print("Out of outer loop")

Output:
Iteration 1 of outer loop
1
2
Out of inner loop
Iteration 2 of outer loop
1
2
Out of inner loop
Iteration 3 of outer loop
1
2
Out of inner loop
Out of outer loop

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   50 19-Jul-19   3:16:34 PM



Brief Overview of Python 51

Summary Notes
•	 Python is an open-source, high level, interpreter-

based language that can be used for a multitude of 
scientific and non-scientific computing purposes.

•	 Comments are non-executable statements in a 
program.

•	 An identifier is a user defined name given to a 
variable or a constant in a program.

•	 Process of identifying and removing errors from a 
computer program is called debugging.

•	 Trying to use a variable that has not been assigned 
a value gives an error.

•	 There are several data types in Python — integer, 
boolean, float, complex, string, list, tuple, sets, 
None and dictionary. 

•	 Operators are constructs that manipulate the value 
of operands. Operators may be unary or binary. 

•	 An expression is a combination of values, variables, 
and operators.

•	 Python has input() function for taking user input.
•	 Python has print() function to output data to a 

standard output device.
•	 The if statement is used for decision making.
•	 Looping allows sections of code to be executed 

repeatedly under some condition. 
•	 for statement can be used to iterate over a range 

of values or a sequence. 
•	 The statements within the body of for loop are 

executed till the range of values is exhausted.

Exercise
1.	 Which of the following identifier names are invalid and 

why?    
a) Serial_no. e) Total_Marks
b) 1st_Room f) total-Marks
c) Hundred$ g) _Percentage
d) Total Marks h) True

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   51 19-Jul-19   3:16:34 PM



52 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 2.	 Write the corresponding Python assignment statements: 
a)	 Assign 10 to variable length and 20 to variable 

breadth. 
b)	 Assign the average of values of variables length and 

breadth to a variable sum.
c)	 Assign a list containing strings ‘Paper’, ‘Gel Pen’, and 

‘Eraser’ to a variable  stationery. 
d)	 Assign the strings ‘Mohandas’, ‘Karamchand’, and 

‘Gandhi’ to variables first, middle and last. 
e)	 Assign the concatenated value of string variables 

first, middle and last to variable fullname. Make sure 
to incorporate blank spaces appropriately between 
different parts of names.

3.	 Which data type will be used to represent the following 
data values and why?
a)	 Number of months in a year
b)	 Resident of Delhi or not
c)	 Mobile number
d)	 Pocket money
e)	 Volume of a sphere
f)	 Perimeter of a square
g)	 Name of the student
h)	 Address of the student

4.	 Give the output of the following when num1 = 4, num2 = 
3, num3 = 2
a)	 num1 += num2 + num3
b)	 print (num1)
c)	 num1 = num1 ** (num2 + num3)
d)	 print (num1)
e)	 num1 **= num2 + c
f)	 num1 = '5' + '5'
g)	 print(num1)
h)	 print(4.00/(2.0+2.0))
i)	 num1 = 2+9*((3*12)-8)/10
j)	 print(num1)
k)	 num1 = float(10)
l)	 print (num1)
m)	num1 = int('3.14')

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   52 19-Jul-19   3:16:34 PM



Brief Overview of Python 53

n)	 print (num1) Notes
o)	 print(10 != 9 and 20 >= 20)
p)	 print(5 % 10 + 10 < 50 and 29 <= 29)

5.	 Categorise the following as syntax error, logical error or 
runtime error:

a)	 25 / 0
b)	 num1 = 25; num2 = 0; num1/num2 

6.	 Write a Python program to calculate the amount payable 
if money has been lent on simple interest. Principal or 
money lent = P, Rate = R% per annum and Time = T 
years. Then Simple Interest (SI) = (P x R x T)/ 100. 
Amount payable = Principal + SI. 
P, R and T are given as input to the program.

7.	 Write a program to repeat the string ‘‘GOOD MORNING” 
n times. Here n is an integer entered by the user.

8.	 Write a program to find the average of 3 numbers.

9.	 Write a program that asks the user to enter one's name 
and age. Print out a message addressed to the user that 
tells the user the year in which he/she will turn 100 
years old.

10.	 What is the difference between else and elif construct 
of if statement?

11.	 Find the output of the following program segments:
a) for i in range(20,30,2):

     print(i)
b) country = 'INDIA'

for  i in country:
     print (i)

c) i = 0; sum = 0
while i < 9:

     if i % 4 == 0:
               sum = sum + i
          i = i + 2
print (sum)

Case Study Based Question
Schools use “Student Management Information System” 
(SMIS) to manage student related data. This system provides 
facilities for:

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   53 19-Jul-19   3:16:34 PM



54 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes

•	 Recording and maintaining personal details of students.
•	 Maintaining marks scored in assessments and computing 

results of students.
•	 Keeping track of student attendance, and 
•	 Managing many other student-related data in the school. 

Let us automate the same step by step.
Identify the personal details of students from your school 

identity card and write a program to accept these details for 
all students of your school and display them in this format.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   54 19-Jul-19   3:16:34 PM



Working with Chapter 
Lists and 

Dictionaries 4 

In this chapter
»» Introduction to List
»» List Operations

“Computer Science is a science of »» Traversing a List
abstraction – creating the right model for »» List Methods and Built-

a problem and devising the appropriate in Functions

mechanizable techniques to solve it.” »» List Manipulation
»» Introduction to 

Dictionaries
— A. Aho and J. Ullman »» Traversing a Dictionary

»» Dictionary Methods and 
Built-in Functions

»» Manipulating 
4.1	 Introduction to List Dictionaries
The data type list is an ordered sequence which is 
mutable and made up of one or more elements. Unlike a 
string which consists of only characters, a list can have 
elements of different data types such as integer, float, 
string, tuple or even another list. A list is very useful to 
group elements of mixed data types. Elements of a list 
are enclosed in square brackets and are separated by 
comma. 
Example 4.1	  

#list1 is the list of six even numbers
>>> list1 = [2,4,6,8,10,12]
>>> print(list1)
[2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12]

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   55 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



56 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes #list2 is the list of vowels
>>> list2 = ['a','e','i','o','u']
>>> print(list2)
['a', 'e', 'i', 'o', 'u']

#list3 is the list of mixed data types
>>> list3 = [100,23.5,'Hello']
>>> print(list3)
[100, 23.5, 'Hello']

#list4 is the list of lists called nested 
#list
>>> list4 =[['Physics',101],['Chemistry',202], 
            ['Mathematics',303]] 
>>> print(list4)
[['Physics', 101], ['Chemistry', 202],
 ['Mathematics', 303]]

4.1.1	Accessing Elements in a List
Each element in list is accessed using value called index. 
The fist index value is 0, the second index is 1 and so 
on. Elements in the list are assigned index values in 
increasing order sterling from 0. 

	 To access an element, use square brackets with 
the index [] value of that element. We may also use 
negative index value to access elements starting from 
the last element in the list, having index value -0.

#initialing a list named list1 
>>> list1 = [2,4,6,8,10,12]   	
>>> list1[0]	#returns first element of list1
2
>>> list1[3]	#returns fourth element of list1
8
#Out of range index value for the list returns error
>>> list1[15]	
IndexError: list index out of range
#an expression resulting in an integer index 
>>> list1[1+4]	
12
>>> list1[-1] #return first element from right
12
#length of the list1 is assigned to n
>>> n = len(list1)	
>>> print(n)
6
#Get the last element of the list1 
>>> list1[n-1]	  
12

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   56 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



##4##
Working with Lists and Dictionaries 57

#Get the first element of list1 
>>> list1[-n]	
2

4.1.2	Lists are Mutable
In Python, lists are mutable. It means that the contents 
of the list can be changed after it has been created. 

#List list1 of colors 
	 >>> list1 = ['Red','Green','Blue','Orange'] 
#change/override the fourth element of list1 
	 >>> list1[3] = 'Black'               
	 >>> list1  #print the modified list list1
['Red', 'Green', 'Blue', 'Black']

4.2	 List Operations

The data type list allows manipulation of its contents 
through various operations as shown below.
4.2.1	Concatenation
Python allows us to join two or more lists using Concatenation is the 
concatenation operator using symbol +. merging of two or 

more values. Example: 
#list1 is list of first five odd integers we can concatenate 
>>> list1 = [1,3,5,7,9]		 strings together.  
#list2 is list of first five even integers 
>>> list2 = [2,4,6,8,10]		
#Get elements of list1 followed by list2 
>>> list1 + list2           	
[1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10]
>>> list3 = ['Red','Green','Blue']
>>> list4 = ['Cyan', 'Magenta', 'Yellow' 
,'Black']
>>> list3 + list4
['Red','Green','Blue','Cyan','Magenta',   		
 'Yellow','Black']

Note that, there is no change in original lists i.e., 
list1, list2, list3, list4 remain the same after 
concatenation operation. If we want to use the result of 
two concatenated lists, we should use an assignment 
operator. 
For example, 

#Join list 2 at the end of list 
>>> new List = list 1 + list 2
[1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10]

>> new list The concatenation operator '+’ requires that 
the operands should be of list type only. If we try to 
concatenate a list with elements of some other data 
type, TypeError occurs.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   57 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



58 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes >>> list1 = [1,2,3]
>>> str1 = "abc"
>>> list1 + str1
TypeError: can only concatenate list (not 
"str") to list

4.2.2	Repetition
Python allows us to replicate the contents of a list using 
repetition operator depicted by symbol *.

>>> list1 = ['Hello']
#elements of list1 repeated 4 times
>>> list1 * 4			 
['Hello', 'Hello', 'Hello', 'Hello']

4.2.3	Membership
The membership operator in checks if the element 
is present in the list and returns True, else returns 
False. 

>>> list1 = ['Red','Green','Blue']
>>> 'Green' in list1
True
>>> 'Cyan' in list1
False

The Operator not in transpose returns True if the 
element is not present in the list, else it returns False.

>>> list1 = ['Red','Green','Blue']
>>> 'Cyan' not in list1
True
>>> 'Green' not in list1
False

4.2.4	Slicing
Slicing operations allow us to create new list by taking 
out elements from an existing list. 

>>> list1 =['Red','Green','Blue','Cyan', 
'Magenta','Yellow','Black']
#subject from indexes 2 to 5 of list 1
>>> list1[2:6]
['Blue', 'Cyan', 'Magenta', 'Yellow'] 

 #list1 is truncated to the end of the list
>>> list1[2:20] #second index is out of range  
['Blue', 'Cyan', 'Magenta', 'Yellow', 
'Black']
	
>>> list1[7:2] 	 #first index > second index
[] 			   #results in an empty list

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   58 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



Working with Lists and Dictionaries 59

#return sublist from index 0 to 4 
>>> list1[:5]	 #first index missing	
['Red','Green','Blue','Cyan','Magenta'] 

#slicing with a given step size 
>>> list1[0:6:2]          
['Red','Blue','Magenta']
#negative indexes
#elements at index -6,-5,-4,-3 are sliced 
>>> list1[-6:-2]    
['Green','Blue','Cyan','Magenta'] 

#both first and last index missing
>>> list1[::2]	 #step size 2 on entire list
['Red','Blue','Magenta','Black']

#Access list in the reverse order using 
negative step size
>>> list1[::-1]	
['Black','Yellow','Magenta','Cyan','Blue', 
'Green','Red']

4.3	T raversing a List

We can access each element of the list or traverse a list 
using a for loop or a while loop.
(A)	 List traversal using for loop: 

>>> list1 = ['Red','Green','Blue','Yellow',  
		     	 'Black']
>>> for item in list1:
         print(item)

 Output: len (list1) returns 
the length or total 

Red number of elements of 
Green list1.
Blue range(n) returns a 

sequence of numbers 
Yellow starting from 0, 
Black increases by 1 and ends 

Another way of accessing the elements of the list is at n-1 (one number 
using range() and len() functions: less than the specified 

number i.e. is)
>>> for i in range(len(list1)):
         print(list1[i])

Output:
Red
Green
Blue
Yellow
Black

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   59 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



60 Informatics Practices – Class XI

4.4	 List Methods and Built-in Functions

The data type list has several built-in methods that 
are useful in programming. Some of them are listed in 
Table 4.1.

Table 4.1 Built-in functions for list manipulation
Method Description Example
len() Returns the length of the list passed as >>> list1 = [10,20,30,40,50]

the argument >>> len(list1)
5

list() Creates an empty list if no argument is >>> list1 = list()
passed >>> list1

[ ]

>>> str1= 'aeiou'
Creates a list if a sequence is passed as >>> list1 = list(str1)
an argument >>> list1

['a', 'e', 'i', 'o', 'u']

append() Appends a single element passed as an >>> list1 = [10,20,30,40]
argument at the end of the list >>> list1.append(50)

>>> list1
A list can also be appended as an ele- [10, 20, 30, 40, 50]
ment to an existing list >>> list1 = [10,20,30,40]

>>> list1.append([50,60])
>>> list1
[10, 20, 30, 40, [50, 60]]

extend() Appends each element of the list passed >>> list1 = [10,20,30]
as argument at the end of the given list >>> list2 = [40,50]

>>> list1.extend(list2)
>>> list1
[10, 20, 30, 40, 50]

insert() Inserts an element at a particular index >>> list1 = [10,20,30,40,50]
in the list #inserts element 25 at index value 2

>>> list1.insert(2,25)
>>> list1
[10, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50]
>>> list1.insert(0,100)
>>> list1
[100, 10, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50]

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   60 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



Working with Lists and Dictionaries 61

count() Returns the number of times a given >>> list1 = [10,20,30,10,40,10]
element appears in the list >>> list1.count(10)

3
>>> list1.count(90)
0

find() Returns index of the first occurrence of >>> list1 = [10,20,30,20,40,10]
the element in the list. If the element is >>> list1.index(20)
not present, ValueError is generated 1

>>> list1.index(90)
ValueError: 90 is not in list

remove() Removes the given element from the >>> list1 = [10,20,30,40,50,30]
list. If the element is present multi- >>> list1.remove(30)
ple times, only the first occurrence is >>> list1
removed. If the element is not present, [10, 20, 40, 50, 30]
then ValueError is generated >>> list1.remove(90)

ValueError:list.remove(x):x not in 
list

pop() Returns the element whose index is >>> list1 = [10,20,30,40,50,60]
passed as argument to this function >>> list1.pop(3)
and also removes it from the list. If no 40
argument is given, then it returns and >>> list1
removes the last element of the list [10, 20, 30, 50, 60]

>>> list1 = [10,20,30,40,50,60]
>>> list1.pop()
60
>>> list1
[10, 20, 30, 40, 50]

reverse() Reverses the order of elements in the >>> list1 = [34,66,12,89,28,99]
given list >>> list1.reverse()

>>> list1
[ 99, 28, 89, 12, 66, 34]

>>> list1 = [ 'Tiger' ,'Zebra' , 
'Lion' , 'Cat' ,'Elephant' ,'Dog']
>>> list1.reverse()
>>> list1
['Dog', 'Elephant', 'Cat', 'Lion', 
'Zebra', 'Tiger']

sort() Sorts the elements of the given list in >>>list1 = ['Tiger','Zebra','Lion', 
place 'Cat', 'Elephant' ,'Dog']

>>> list1.sort()
>>> list1
['Cat', 'Dog', 'Elephant', 'Lion', 
'Tiger', 'Zebra']

>>> list1 = [34,66,12,89,28,99]
>>> list1.sort(reverse = True)
>>>list1
[99,89,66,34,28,12]

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   61 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



62 Informatics Practices – Class XI

sorted() It takes a list as parameter and creates >>>list1 = [23,45,11,67,85,56]
a new list consisting of the same ele- >>> list2 = sorted(list1)
ments but arranged in ascending order >>> list1

[23, 45, 11, 67, 85, 56]
>>> list2
[11, 23, 45, 56, 67, 85]

min() Returns minimum or smallest element >>> list1 = [34,12,63,39,92,44]
of the list >>> min(list1)

12
max() Returns maximum or largest element of >>> max(list1)

the list 92
sum() Returns sum of the elements of the list >>> sum(list1)

284

4.5	 List Manipulation    
In this chapter, we have learnt to create a list and the different ways to 
manipulate lists. In the following programs, we will apply the various list 
manipulation methods.

Program 4-1	 Write a program to allow user to perform any those list operation 
given in a menu. The menu is:

1. 	Append an element
2. 	Insert an element
3. 	Append a list to the given list
4. 	Modify an existing element
5. 	Delete an existing element from its position
6. 	Delete an existing element with a given value
7. 	Sort the list in the ascending order
8. 	Sort the list in descending order 
9. 	Display the list.

#Program 4-1
#Menu driven program to do various list operations
myList = [22,4,16,38,13] #myList having 5 elements
choice = 0
For attempt in range (3): print ("Attempt number:", attempt)
print("The list 'myList' has the following elements", myList)
print("\nL I S T   O P E R A T I O N S")
print(" 1. Append an element")
print(" 2. Insert an element at the desired position")
print(" 3. Append a list to the given list")
print(" 4. Modify an existing element")
print(" 5. Delete an existing element by its position")
print(" 6. Delete an existing element by its value")

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   62 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



Working with Lists and Dictionaries 63

print(" 7. Sort the list in ascending order")
print(" 8. Sort the list in descending order")
    print(" 9. Display the list")
    choice = int(input("ENTER YOUR CHOICE (1-9): "))

    #append element
    if choice == 1: 
        element = eval(input("Enter the element to be appended: "))
        myList.append(element)
        print("The element has been appended\n")

    #insert an element at desired position
    elif choice == 2: 
        element = eval(input("Enter the element to be inserted: "))
        pos = int(input("Enter the position:"))
        myList.insert(pos,element)
        print("The element has been inserted\n")

    #append a list to the given list
    elif choice == 3: 
        newList = eval(input("Enter the list to be appended: "))
        myList.extend(newList)
        print("The list has been appended\n")

    #modify an existing element
    elif choice == 4: 
        i = int(input("Enter the position of the element to be 
modified: "))
        if i < len(myList):
            newElement = eval(input("Enter the new element: "))
            oldElement = myList[i]
            myList[i] = newElement
            print("The element",oldElement,"has been modified\n")
        else:
            print("Position of the element is more then the length 
of list")

    #delete an existing element by position
    elif choice == 5: 
        i = int(input("Enter the position of the element to be 
deleted: "))
        if i < len(myList):
            element = myList.pop(i)
            print("The element",element,"has been deleted\n")
        else:
            print("\nPosition of the element is more then the length 
of list")

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   63 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



64 Informatics Practices – Class XI

    #delete an existing element by value
    elif choice == 6: 
        element = int(input("\nEnter the element to be deleted: "))
        if element in myList:
            myList.remove(element)
            print("\nThe element",element,"has been deleted\n")
        else:
            print("\nElement",element,"is not present in the list")

    #list in sorted order
    elif choice == 7: 
        myList.sort()
        print("\nThe list has been sorted")

    #list in reverse sorted order
    elif choice == 8: 
        myList.sort(reverse = True)
        print("\nThe list has been sorted in reverse order")

    #display the list
    elif choice == 9: 
        print("\nThe list is:", myList)
		   else:
        print("Choice is not valid")

Output:
The list 'myList' has the following elements [22, 4, 16, 38, 13]
Attempt number : 1
L I S T   O P E R A T I O N S
 	1. Append an element
 	2. Insert an element at the desired position
 	3. Append a list to the given list
 	4. Modify an existing element
 	5. Delete an existing element by its position
 	6. Delete an existing element by its value
 	7. Sort the list in ascending order
 	8. Sort the list in descending order
 	9. Display the list
ENTER YOUR CHOICE (1-10): 8

The list has been sorted in reverse order
The list 'myList' has the following elements [38, 22, 16, 13, 4]
Attempt number : 2
L I S T   O P E R A T I O N S
	 1. Append an element

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   64 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



Working with Lists and Dictionaries 65

 	2. Insert an element at the desired position
 	3. Append a list to the given list
 	4. Modify an existing element
 	5. Delete an existing element by its position
 	6. Delete an existing element by its value
 	7. Sort the list in ascending order
 	8. Sort the list in descending order
 	9. Display the list

ENTER YOUR CHOICE (1-9)5
Enter the position of the element to be deleted: 2
The element 16 has been deleted

The list 'myList' has the following elements [38, 22, 13, 4]
Attempt number : 3
L I S T   O P E R A T I O N S
 1. Append an element
 2. Insert an element at the desired position
 3. Append a list to the given list
 4. Modify an existing element
 5. Delete an existing element by its position
 6. Delete an existing element by its value
 7. Sort the list in ascending order
 8. Sort the list in descending order
 9. Display the list

ENTER YOUR CHOICE (1-9) 10
choice is not valid

Program 4-2	 A program to calculate average marks 
of n students where n is entered by 
the user.

#Program 4-2
#create an empty list 
list1 = []                         
print("How many students marks you want to enter: ")
n = int(input())
for i in range(0,n):
     print("Enter marks of student",(i+1),":")
     marks = int(input())
     #append marks in the list
 	   list1.append(marks)           
     #initialize total 
	    total = 0                     
     for marks in list1:

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   65 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



66 Informatics Practices – Class XI

          #add marks to total 
		     total = total + marks    
     average = total / n
print("Average marks of",n,"students is:",average)

Output:
How many students marks you want to enter:
5
Enter marks of student 1:
45
Enter marks of student 2:
89
Enter marks of student 3:
79
Enter marks of student 4:
76
Enter marks of student 5:
55
Average marks of 5 students is: 68.8

Program 4-3	 Write a program to check if a number is 
present in the list or not. If the number 
is present, print the position of the 
number. Print an appropriate message if 
the number is not present in the list.

#Program 4-3
list1 = []                          #Create an empty list
print("How many numbers do you want to enter in the list: ")
maximum = int(input())
print("Enter a list of numbers: ")
for i in range(0,maximum):
     n = int(input())
     list1.append(n)                #append numbers to the list
num = int(input("Enter the number to be searched: "))

position = -1
for i in range (0, lin (list1)
if list1[i] == num:			   #number is present
position = i+1				    #save the position of number
if position == -1 :
     print("Number",num,"is not present in the list")
else:
     print("Number",num,"is present at",position + 1, "position")  

Output:
How many numbers do you want to enter in the list
5

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   66 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



Working with Lists and Dictionaries 67

Enter a list of numbers:
23
567
12
89
324
Enter the number to be searched:12
Number 12 is present at 3 position

4.6	 Introduction to Dictionaries    

The data type dictionary falls under mapping. It is a 
mapping between a set of keys and a set of values. 
The key-value pair is called an item. A key is separated 
from its value by a colon(:) and consecutive items are 
separated by commas. Items in dictionaries are ordered, 
so we will get back the data in the same order in which 
we had entered  the data initially in the dictionary.
4.6.1	Creating a Dictionary
To create a dictionary, the items entered are separated 
by commas and enclosed in curly braces. Each item is 
a key value pair, separated through colon (:). The keys 
in the dictionary must be unique and should be of any 
immutable data type i.e. number, string or tuple. The 
values can be repeated and can be of any data type.  
Example 4.2	

#dict1 is an empty dictionary
>>> dict1 = {}           
>>> dict1
{}
#dict3 is the dictionary that maps names of  
#the students to marks in percentage
>>> dict3 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}
>>> dict3
{'Mohan': 95, 'Ram': 89, 'Suhel': 92, 
'Sangeeta': 85}

4.6.2	Accessing Items in a Dictionary
We have already seen that the items of a sequence 
(string, list and tuple) are accessed using a technique 
called indexing. The items of a dictionary are accessed 
via the keys rather than via their relative positions 
or indices. Each key serves as the index and maps to 
a value.  

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   67 29-01-2025   3.07.56 PM



68 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes The following example shows how a dictionary 
returns the value corresponding to the given key:

>>> dict3 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}
>>> dict3['Ram']          
89
>>> dict3['Sangeeta']
85
#using unspecified key
>>> dict3['Shyam']        
KeyError: 'Shyam'

In the above examples the key 'Ram' always maps to the 
value 89 and key 'Sangeeta' always maps to the value 
85. So the order of items does not matter. If the key is not 
present in the dictionary we get KeyError.

4.6.3	Membership Operation
The membership operator in checks if the key is present 
in the dictionary and returns True, else it returns False. 

>>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}
>>> 'Suhel' in dict1
True

The not in operator returns True if the key is not 
present in the dictionary, else it returns False.

>>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}
>>> 'Suhel' not in dict1
False

4.6.4	Dictionaries are Mutable
Dictionaries are mutable which implies that the 
contents of the dictionary can be changed after it has 
been created. 
(A)	 Adding a new item
We can add a new item to the dictionary as shown in 
the following example:

>>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}
>>> dict1['Meena'] = 78
>>> dict1
{'Mohan': 95, 'Ram': 89, 'Suhel': 92, 
'Sangeeta': 85, 'Meena': 78}

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   68 19-Jul-19   3:31:20 PM



Working with Lists and Dictionaries 69

(B)	 Modifying an existing item
The existing dictionary can be modified by just 
overwriting the key-value pair. Example to modify a 
given item in the dictionary:

>>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}
#Marks of Suhel changed to 93.5
>>> dict1['Suhel'] = 93.5    
>>> dict1
{'Mohan': 95, 'Ram': 89, 'Suhel': 93.5, 
'Sangeeta': 85}

4.7	T raversing a Dictionary

We can access each item of the dictionary or traverse a 
dictionary using for loop. 

>>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,'Suhel':92, 
'Sangeeta':85}

Method 1:
>>> for key in dict1:
         print(key,':',dict1[key])
Mohan: 95
Ram: 89
Suhel: 92
Sangeeta: 85

Method 2:
>>> for key,value in dict1.items():
         print(key,':',value)
Mohan: 95
Ram: 89
Suhel: 92
Sangeeta: 85

4.8	D ictionary Methods and Built-in Functions

Python provides many functions to work on dictionaries. 
Table 4.2 lists some of the commonly used dictionary 
methods.

Table 4.2 Built-in functions and methods for dictionary
Method Description Example

len() Returns the length or number of >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89,  
key: value pairs of the dictionary 'Suhel':92,  'Sangeeta':85}
passed as the argument >>> len(dict1)

4

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   69 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



70 Informatics Practices – Class XI

dict() Creates a dictionary from a pair1 = [('Mohan',95),('Ram',89), 
sequence of key-value pairs ('Suhel',92),('Sangeeta',85)]

>>> pair1
[('Mohan', 95), ('Ram', 89), ('Suhel', 
92), ('Sangeeta', 85)]
>>> dict1 = dict(pair1)
>>> dict1
{'Mohan': 95, 'Ram': 89, 'Suhel': 92, 
'Sangeeta': 85}

keys() Returns a list of keys in the >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95, 'Ram':89, 
dictionary 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}

>>> dict1.keys()
dict_keys(['Mohan', 'Ram', 'Suhel', 
'Sangeeta'])

values() Returns a list of values in the >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95, 'Ram':89, 
dictionary 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}

>>> dict1.values()
dict_values([95, 89, 92, 85])

items() Returns a list of tuples (key — >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95, 'Ram':89, 
value) pair 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}

>>> dict1.items()
dict_items([( 'Mohan',  95), ('Ram', 89), 
('Suhel', 92), ('Sangeeta', 85)])

get() Returns the value corresponding >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95, 'Ram':89, 
to the key passed as the argument 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}

>>> dict1.get('Sangeeta')
If the key is not present in the 85
dictionary it will return None

>>> dict1.get('Sohan')
>>>

update() appends the key-value pair of >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95, 'Ram':89, 
the dictionary passed as the 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}
argument to the key-value pair of >>> dict2 = {'Sohan':79,'Geeta':89}
the given dictionary >>> dict1.update(dict2)

>>> dict1
{'Mohan': 95, 'Ram': 89, 'Suhel': 92, 
'Sangeeta': 85, 'Sohan': 79, 'Geeta': 89}
>>> dict2
{'Sohan': 79, 'Geeta': 89}

clear() Deletes or clear all the items of >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89, 
the dictionary 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}

>>> dict1.clear()
>>> dict1
{ }

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   70 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



Working with Lists and Dictionaries 71

del() Deletes the item with the given >>> dict1 = {'Mohan':95,'Ram':89, 
key 'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta':85}
To delete the dictionary from the >>> del dict1['Ram']
memory we write: >>> dict1
del Dict_name

{'Mohan':95,'Suhel':92, 'Sangeeta': 85}

>>> dict1
NameError: name 'dict1' is not defined

4.9	 Manipulating Dictionaries

In this chapter, we have learnt how to create a 
dictionary and apply various methods to manipulate it. 
The following examples show the application of those 
manipulation methods on dictionaries.

(a)	Create a dictionary ‘ODD’ of odd numbers between 
1 and 10, where the key is the decimal number and 
the value is the corresponding number in words. 
>>> ODD = {1:'One',3:'Three',5:'Five',7:'Seven',9:'Nine'}
>>> ODD
{1: 'One', 3: 'Three', 5: 'Five', 7: 'Seven', 9: 'Nine'}

(b)	Display the keys in dictionary ‘ODD’.
>>> ODD.keys()
dict_keys([1, 3, 5, 7, 9])

(c)	Display the values in dictionary ‘ODD’.
>>> ODD.values()
dict_values(['One', 'Three', 'Five', 'Seven', 'Nine'])

(d)	Display the items from dictionary ‘ODD’
>>> ODD.items()
dict_items([(1, 'One'), (3, 'Three'), (5, 'Five'), (7, 'Seven'), (9, 
'Nine')])

(e)	Find the length of the dictionary ‘ODD’.
>>> len(ODD)
5

(f)	 Check if 7 is present or not in dictionary ‘ODD’
>>> 7 in ODD
True

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   71 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



72 Informatics Practices – Class XI

(g)	Check if 2 is present or not in dictionary ‘ODD’
>>> 2 in ODD
False

(h)	Retrieve the value corresponding to the key 9
>>> ODD.get(9)
'Nine'

(i)	 Delete the item from the dictionary, corresponding to the key 9. ‘ODD’
>>> del ODD[9]
>>> ODD
{1: 'One', 3: 'Three', 5: 'Five', 7: 'Seven'}

Program 4-4	 σ n number of write a program to enter 
names of employees and their salaries 
as input and store them in a dictionary. 
Here n is to input by the user.

#Program 4-4
#Program to create a dictionary which stores names of employees
#and their salary
num = int(input("Enter the number of employees whose data to be 
stored: "))
count = 1
employee = dict()                  #create an empty dictionary
for count in range (n):
     name = input("Enter the name of the Employee: ")
     salary = int(input("Enter the salary: "))
     employee[name] = salary
print("\n\nEMPLOYEE_NAME\tSALARY")
for k in employee:
     print(k,'\t\t',employee[k])

Output:
Enter the number of employees to be stored: 5
Enter the name of the Employee: 'Tarun'
Enter the salary: 12000
Enter the name of the Employee: 'Amina'
Enter the salary: 34000
Enter the name of the Employee: 'Joseph'
Enter the salary: 24000
Enter the name of the Employee: 'Rahul'
Enter the salary: 30000
Enter the name of the Employee: 'Zoya'
Enter the salary: 25000
EMPLOYEE_NAME    SALARY
'Tarun'          12000
'Amina'          34000

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   72 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



Working with Lists and Dictionaries 73

'Joseph'         24000
'Rahul'          30000
'Zoya'           25000

Program 4-5	 Write a program to count the number 
of times a character appears in a given 
string.

#Program 4-5
#Count the number of times a character appears in a given string
st = input("Enter a string: ")
dic = {}                  #creates an empty dictionary
for ch in st:
     if ch in dic:        #if next character is already in dic
          dic[ch] += 1
     else:
          dic[ch] = 1     #if ch appears for the first time

for key in dic:
     print(key,':',dic[key]) 

Output:
Enter a string: HelloWorld
H : 1
e : 1
l : 3
o : 2
W : 1
r : 1
d : 1

Program 4-6	 Write a program to convert a number 
entered by the user into its corresponding 
number in words. for example if the input 
is 876 then the output should be ‘Eight 
Seven Six’.

# Program 4-6
num = input("Enter any number: ")     #number is stored as string
    #numberNames is a dictionary of digits and corresponding number 	
	    #names
     numberNames = {0:'Zero',1:'One',2:'Two',3:'Three',4:'Four',\
                   5:'Five',6:'Six',7:'Seven',8:'Eight',9:'Nine'}
    
     result = ''
     for ch in num:
          key = int(ch)               #converts character to integer
          value = numberNames[key]

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   73 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



74 Informatics Practices – Class XI

          result = result + ' ' + value
print("The number is:",num)
print("The numberName is:",result)

Output:
Enter any number: 6512
The number is: 6512
The numberName is: Six Five One Two

Summary
•	 Lists are mutable sequences in Python, i.e. we can 

change the elements of the list.
•	 Elements of a list are put in square brackets 

separated by comma.
•	 List indexing is same as that of list and starts at 0. 

Two way indexing allows traversing the list in the 
forward as well as in the backward direction.

•	 Operator + concatenates one list to the end of other 
list.

•	 Operator * repeats the content of a list by  
specified number of times.

•	 Membership operator in tells if an element is 
present in the list or not and not in does the 
opposite.

•	 Slicing is used to extract a part of the list.
•	 There are many list manipulation methods. Few 

are: len(), list(), append(), extend(), insert(), count(), 
find(), remove(), pop(), reverse(), sort(), sorted(), 
min(), max(), sum().

•	 Dictionary is a mapping (non scalar) data type. It 
is an unordered collection of key-value pair; key-
value pair are put inside curly braces.

•	 Each key is separated from its value by a colon.
•	 Keys are unique and act as the index.
•	 Keys are of immutable type but values can be 

mutable.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   74 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



Working with Lists and Dictionaries 75

Notes

Exercise
1.	 What will be the output of the following statements?

a) list1 = [12,32,65,26,80,10]
list1.sort()
print(list1)

b) list1 = [12,32,65,26,80,10]
sorted(list1)
print(list1)

c) list1 = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
list1[::-2]
list1[:3] + list1[3:]

d) list1 = [1,2,3,4,5]
list1[len(list1)-1]

2.	 Consider the following list myList. What will be 
the elements of myList after each of the following 
operations?
  myList = [10,20,30,40]

a)	 myList.append([50,60])
b)	 myList.extend([80,90])

3.	 What will be the output of the following code segment? 
   myList = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
   for i in range(0,len(myList)):
        if i%2 == 0:
             print(myList[i])

4.	 What will be the output of the following code segment?
a)   myList = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]

   	 del myList[3:]
   	 print(myList)
  

b)   myList = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
		  del myList[:5]
		  print(myList)

  	  c)   myList = [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
		  del myList[::2]
		  print(myList)

5.	 Differentiate between append() and extend() methods 
of list.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   75 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



76 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 6.	 Consider a list:
   list1 = [6,7,8,9]
What is the difference between the following 
operations on list1:

a) lis t1 * 2
b) lis t1 *= 2
c) lis t1 = lis t1 * 2

7.	 The record of a student (Name, Roll No, Marks in 
five subjects and percentage of marks) is stored in 
the following list:
stRecord = ['Raman','A-36',[56,98,99,72,69], 		
			   78.8]
Write Python statements to retrieve the following 
information from the list stRecord.

a)	 Percentage of the student
b)	 Marks in the fifth subject
 c)	 Maximum marks of the student
d)	 Roll No. of the student
e)	 Change the name of the student from 			
	 ‘Raman’ to ‘Raghav’

8.	 Consider the following dictionary stateCapital:
stateCapital = {"Assam":"Guwahati", 
"Bihar":"Patna","Maharashtra":"Mumbai",  
"Rajasthan":"Jaipur"}
Find the output of the following statements:

a) print(stateCapital.get("Bihar"))

b) print(stateCapital.keys())

c) print(stateCapital.values())

d) print(stateCapital.items())

e) print(len(stateCapital))

 f) print("Maharashtra" in stateCapital)

g) print(stateCapital.get("Assam"))

h) del stateCapital["Assam"]
print(stateCapital)

Programming Problems

1.	 Write a program to find the number of times an element 
occurs in the list.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   76 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



Working with Lists and Dictionaries 77

2.	 Write a program to read a list of n integers (positive Notes
as well as negative). Create two new lists, one having 
all positive numbers and the other having all negative 
numbers from the given list. Print all three lists.

3.	 Write a program to find the largest and the second 
largest elements in a given list of elements.

4.	 Write a program to read a list of n integers and find their 
median. 
Note: The median value of a list of values is the middle one 
when they are arranged in order. If there are two middle values 
then take their average. 

	  Hint: Use an inbuilt function to sort the list.

5.	 Write a program to read a list of elements. Modify this 
list so that it does not contain any duplicate elements i.e. 
all elements occurring multiple times in the list should 
appear only once.

6.	 Write a program to create a list of elements. Input an 
element from the user that has to be inserted in the list. 
Also input the position at which it is to be inserted. 

7.	 Write a program to read elements of a list and do the 
following. 
a)	 The program should ask for the position of the 

element to be deleted from the list and delete the 
element at the desired position in the list.

b)	 The program should ask for the value of the element 
to be deleted from the list and delete this value from 
the list.

8.	 Write a Python program to find the highest 2 values in 
a dictionary. 

9.	 Write a Python program to create a dictionary from a 
string ‘w3resource’ such that each individual character 
mates a key and its index value for fist occurrence males 
the corresponding value in dictionary.
Expected output : {'3': 1, 's': 4, 'r': 2, 'u': 6, 'w': 0, 'c': 8, 		
		                'e': 3, 'o': 5}

10.	 Write a program to input your friend’s, names and their 
phone numbers and store them in the dictionary as the 
key-value pair. Perform the following operations on the 
dictionary:
a)	 Display the Name and Phone number for all your 

friends.
b)	 Add a new key-value pair in this dictionary and 

display the modified dictionary

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   77 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



78 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes c)	 Delete a particular friend from the dictionary
d)	 Modify the phone number of an existing friend
e)	 Check if a friend is present in the dictionary or not
f)	 Display the dictionary in sorted order of names

Case Study Based Question
For the SMIS System given in Chapter 3, let us do the 
following:
1.	 Write a program  to take in the roll number, name and 

percentage of marks for n students of Class X and do 
the following:

•	 Accept details of  the n students (n is the number 
of students). 

•	 Search details of a particular student on the basis 
of roll number and display result. 

•	 Display the result of all the students. 
•	 Find the topper amongst them.
•	 Find the subject toppers amongst them.

(Hint: Use Dictionary, where the key can be roll number 
and the value an immutable data type containing name 
and percentage.)

Case Study

1.	 A bank is a financial institution which is involved in 
borrowing and lending of money. With advancement 
in technology, online banking, also known as internet 
banking allows customers of a bank to conduct a range 
of financial transactions through the bank’s website 
anytime, anywhere. As part of initial investigation you 
are suggested to:

•	 Collect a Bank’s application form. After careful 
analysis of the form,  identify the information 
required for opening a savings account. Also 
enquire about the rate of interest offered for a 
savings account. 

•	 The basic two operations performed on an account 
are Deposit and Withdrawal. Write a menu driven 
program that accepts either of the two choices 
of Deposit and Withdrawal, then accepts an 
amount, performs the transaction and  accordingly 
displays the balance. Remember every bank has 
a requirement of minimum balance which needs 
to be taken care of during withdrawal operations. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   78 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



Working with Lists and Dictionaries 79

Enquire about the minimum balance required in Notes
your bank.

•	 Collect the interest rates for opening a fixed 
deposit in various slabs in a savings bank 
account. Remembers rate may be different for 
senior citizens. 

		 Finally, write a menu driven program having the 
following options (use functions and appropriate data 
types):
•	 Open a savings bank account
•	 Deposit money
•	 Withdraw money
•	 Take details such as amount and period for a 

Fixed Deposit and display its maturity amount for 
a particular customer.

2.	 Participating in a quiz can be fun as it provides a 
competitive element. Some educational institutes use 
it as a tool to measure knowledge level, abilities and/ 
or skills of their pupils either on a general level or in 
a specific field of study. Identify and analyse popular 
quiz shows and write a Python program to create a quiz 
that should also contain the following functionalities 
besides the one identified by you as a result of 
 your analysis.

•	 Create an administrative user ID  and password to 
categorically add or modify delete a question.

•	 Register the student before allowing her/him to 
play a quiz.

•	 Allow selection of category based on subject area.
•	 Display questions as per the chosen category.
•	 Keep the score as the participant plays.
•	 Display final score.

3.	 Our heritage monuments are our assets. They are 
a reflection of our rich and glorious past and an 
inspiration for our future. UNESCO has identified some 
of Indian heritage sites as World Heritage sites. Collect 
the following information about these sites:

•	 What is the name of the site?
•	 Where is it located?

▪	 District
▪	 State

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   79 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



80 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes •	 When was it built?
•	 Who built it?
•	 Why was it built?
•	 Website link (if any)

Write a Python program to:
•	 Create an administrative user ID  and password to 

add, modify or delete an entered heritage site in the 
list of sites.

•	 Display the list of world heritage sites in India.
•	 Search and display information of a world heritage 

site entered by the user.
•	 Display the name(s) of world heritage site(s) on the 

basis of the state input by the user.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   80 19-Jul-19   3:31:21 PM



Understanding Chapter 
Data 5 

In this chapter
»» Introduction to Data 
»» Data Collection

“Data is not information, Information »» Data Storage

is not knowledge, Knowledge is not »» Data Processing 

understanding, Understanding is not »» Statistical Techniques 
for Data Processing

wisdom.” 
— Gary Schubert 

5.1	 Introduction to Data

Many a time, people take decisions based on 
certain data or information. For example, while 
choosing a college for getting admission, one 
looks at placement data of previous years of that 
college, educational qualification and experience 
of the faculty members, laboratory and hostel 
facilities, fees, etc. So we can say that identification 
of a college is based on various data and their 
analysis. Governments systematically collect 
and record data about the population through 
a process called census. Census data contains 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   81 09-Aug-19   11:49:18 AM



82 Informatics Practices – Class XI

valuable information which are helpful is planning and 
formulating policies. Likewise, the coaching staff of a 
sports team analyses previous performances of opponent 
teams for making strategies. Banks maintain data about 
the customers, their account details and transactions. 
All these examples highlight the need of data in various 
fields. Data are indeed crucial for decision making. 

In the previous examples, one cannot make decisions 
by looking at the data itself. In our example of choosing 
a college, suppose the placement cell of the college has 
maintained data of about 2000 students placed with 
different companies at different salary packages in the 
last 3 years. Looking at such data, one cannot make 
any remark about the placement of students of that 
college. The college processes and analyses this data 
and the results are given in the placement brochure of 
the college through summarisation as well as visuals for 
easy understanding. Hence, data need to be gathered, 
processed and analysed for making decisions. 

A knowledge base is 
a store of information In general, data is a collection of characters, numbers, 

consisting of facts, and other symbols that represents values of some 
assumptions and situations or variables. Data is plural and singular of the 
rules which an AI word data is “datum”. Using computers, data are stored 
system can use for in electronic forms because data processing becomes 
decision making. faster and easier as compared to manual data processing 

done by people. The Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) revolution led by computer, mobile and 
Internet has resulted in generation of large volume of 
data and at a very fast pace. The following list contains 
some examples of data that we often come across.
•	 Name, age, gender, contact details, etc., of a person
•	 Transactions data generated through banking, 

ticketing, shopping, etc. whether online or offline
•	 Images, graphics, animations, audio, video
•	 Documents and web pages
•	 Online posts, comments and messages 
•	 Signals generated by sensors
•	 Satellite data including meteorological data, 

communication data, earth observation data, etc.

5.1.1	Importance of Data
Human beings rely on data for making decisions. 
Besides, large amount of data when processed with the 
help of a computer, show us the possibilities or hidden 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   82 09-Aug-19   11:49:19 AM



##5##
Understanding Data 83

traits which are otherwise not visible to humans. When Notes
one withdraws money from ATM, the bank needs to debit 
the withdrawn amount from the linked account. So the 
bank needs to maintain data and update it as and when 
required. The meteorological offices continuously keep 
on monitoring satellite data for any upcoming cyclone 
or heavy rain. 

In a competitive business environment, it is important 
for business organisations to continuously monitor and 
analyse market behavior with respect to their products 
and take actions accordingly. Besides, companies 
identify customer demands as well as feedbacks, and 
make changes in their products or services accordingly. 

The dynamic pricing concept used by airlines and 
railway is another example where they decide the price 
based on relationships between demand and supply. 
The cab booking Apps increase or decrease the price 
based on demand for cabs at a particular time. Certain 
restaurants offer discounted price (called happy hours), 
they decide when and how much discount to offer by 
analysing sales data at different time periods. 

Besides business, following are some other scenarios 
where data are also stored and analysed for making 
decisions: 
•	 The electronic voting machines are used for recording 

the votes cast. Subsequently, the voting data from 
all the machines are accumulated to declare election 
results in a short time as compared to manual 
counting of ballot papers. 

•	 Scientists record data while doing experiments to 
calculate and compare results. 

•	 Pharmaceutical companies record data while trying 
out a new medicine to see its effectiveness. 

•	 Libraries maintain data about books in the library 
and the membership of the library.

•	 The search engines give us results after analysing 
large volume of data available on the websites across 
World Wide Web (www).

•	 Weather alerts are generated by analysing data 
received from various satellites.

5.1.2	Types of Data
As data come from different sources, they can be in 
different formats. For example, an image is a collection 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   83 09-Aug-19   11:49:19 AM



84 Informatics Practices – Class XI

of pixels; a video is made up of frames; a fee slip is 
made up of few numeric and non-numeric entries; and 
messages/chats are made up of texts, icons (emoticons) 
and images/videos. Two broad categories in which data 

Activity 5.1 can be classified on the basis of their format are:
Observe Voter Identity (A)	 Structured Data
cards of your family Data which is organised and can be recorded in a well 
members and identify defined format is called structured data. Structured 
the data fields under data is usually stored in computer in a tabular (in rows 
which data are 
organised. Are they and columns) format where each column represents 
same for all? different data for a particular parameter called attribute/

characteristic/variable and each row represents data of 
an observation for different attributes. Table 5.1 shows 
structured data related to an inventory of kitchen items 
maintained by a shop. 

Table 5.1 Structured data about kitchen items in a shop
ModelNo ProductName Unit Price Discount(%) Items_in_Inventory

ABC1 Water bottle 126 8 13
ABC2 Melamine Plates 320 5 45
ABC3 Dinner Set 4200 10 8
GH67 Jug 80 0 10
GH78 Table Spoon 120 5 14
GH81 Bucket 190 12 6
NK2 Kitchen Towel 25 0 32

Given this data, using a spreadsheet or other such 
software, the shop owner can find out how many total 
items are there by summing the column Items_in_
Inventory of Table 5.1 The owner of the shop can also 
calculate the total value of all items in the inventory 
by multiplying each entry of column 3 (Unit Price) with 
corresponding entry of column 5 (Items_in_Inventory) 
and finding their sum. 

Table 5.2 shows more examples of structured data 
recorded for different attributes. 

Table 5.2 Attributes maintained for different activities
Entity/Activities Data Fields/Parameters/Attributes

Books at a shop BookTitle, Author, Price, YearofPublication 
Depositing fees in a school StudentName, Class, RollNo, FeesAmount, DepositDate
Amount withdrawal from ATM AccHolderName, AccountNo, TypeofAcc, DateofWithdrawal, 

AmountWithdrawn, ATMid, TimeOfWithdrawal

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   84 09-Aug-19   11:49:19 AM



Understanding Data 85

(B)	 Unstructured Data
A newspaper contains various types of news items 
which are also called data. But there is no fixed pattern 
that a newspaper follows in placing news articles. One 
day there might be three images of different sizes on 
a page along with five news items and one or more 
advertisements. While on another day there, might be 
one big image with three textual news items. So there is 
no particular format nor any fixed structure for printing 
news. Another example is the content of an email. Think and Reflect
There is no fixed structure about how many lines or When we click a 
paragraphs one has to write in an email or how many photograph using 
files are to be attached with an email. In summary, our digital or mobile 
data which are not in the traditional row and column camera, does it have 
structure is called unstructured data. some metadata 

associated with it?
Examples of unstructured data include web pages 

consisting of text as well as multimedia contents 
(image, graphics, audio/video). Other examples include 
text documents, business reports, books, audio/video 
files, social media messages. Although there are ways 
to process unstructured data, we are going to focus on 
handling structured data only in this book.

Unstructured data are sometimes described with 
the help of some other data called metadata. Metadata 
is basically data about data. For example, we describe 
different parts of an email as subject, recipient, main 
body, attachment, etc. These are the metadata for the 
email data. Likewise, we can have some metadata for an 
image file as image size (in KB or MB), image type (for 
example, JPEG, PNG), image resolution, etc.

5.2	D ata Collection
For processing data, we need to collect or gather data 
first. We can then store the data in a file or database 
for later use. Data collection here means identifying 
already available data or collecting from the appropriate 
sources. Suppose there are three different scenarios 
where sales data in a grocery store are available:
•	 Sales data are available with the shopkeeper in a 

diary or register. In this case we should enter the 
data in a digital format for example, in a spreadsheet.

•	 Data are already available in a digital format, say in 
a CSV (comma separated values) file.

•	 The shopkeeper has so far not recorded any data in 
either form but wants to get a software developed for 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   85 09-Aug-19   11:49:19 AM



86 Informatics Practices – Class XI

maintaining sales data and accounts. The software 
Think and Reflect may be developed using a programming language such 

Identify attributes as Python which can be used to store and retrieve data 
needed for creating an from a CSV file or a database management system 
Aadhaar Card. 

like MySQL, which will be discussed further.
Data are continuously being generated at different 

sources. Our interactions with digital medium are 
continuously generating huge volumes of data. Hospitals 
are collecting data about patients for improving their 
services. Shopping malls are collecting data about the 
items being purchased by people. On analysing such 
data, suppose it appears that bedsheets and groceries 
are frequently bought together. Hence, the shop owner 
may decide to display bedsheets near the grocery section 
in the mall to increase the sales. Likewise, a political 
analyst may look at the data contained in the posts and 
messages at a social media platform and analyse to see 
public opinion before an election. Organisations like 
World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) are 
collecting data related to various economic parameters 
from different countries for making economic forecasts.

5.3	D ata Storage

Once we gather data and process them to get results, we 
may not then simply discard the data. Rather, we would 
like to store them for future use as well. Data storage 
is the process of storing data on storage devices so that 
data can be retrieved later. Now a days large volume of 
data are being generated at a very high rate. As a result, 
data storage has become a challenging task. However, 
the decrease in the cost of digital storage devices has 
helped in simplifying this task. There are numerous 
digital storage devices available in the market like, Hard 
Disk Drive (HDD), Solid State Drive (SSD), CD/DVD, 
Tape Drive, Pen Drive, Memory Card, etc.

Think and Reflect We store data like images, documents, audios/
Is it necessary to store videos, etc. as files in our computers. Likewise, school/
data in files before hospital data are stored in data files. We use computers 
processing? to add, modify or delete data in these files or process 

these data files to get results. However, file processing 
has certain limitations, which can be overcome through 
Database Management System (DBMS). 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   86 09-Aug-19   11:49:19 AM



Understanding Data 87

5.4	D ata Processing
We are interested in 
understanding data as RAW DATA INFORMATION

Data Processing
they hold valuable facts (Numbers/ (In the form

Text/Image) of table/
and information that chart/text)
can be useful in our 
decision making process. 
However, by looking at Data Process Cycle

the vast or large amount Input Processing Output
of data, one cannot arrive 
at a conclusion. Rather, Data Collection Store Reports

data need to be processed Data Prepration Retrieve Results
Data Entry Classify Processing System

to get results and after Update
analysing those results, 
we make conclusions or Figure 5.1:	Steps in Data Processing
decisions.

We find automated data processing in situations like 
online bill payment, registration of complaints, booking 
tickets, etc. Figure 5.1 illustrates basic steps used to 
process the data to get the output. 

Figure 5.2 shows some tasks along with data, 
processing and generated output/information.

A website handling online filling of student details for a competitive examination and generating admit card

Student details like name, address, Processing of filled in details for 
qualification, marks, mobile correctness of data received, 

number, photo and sign, center eligibility as per advertisement or Examination Admit card specifying 
choice, online fee payment details not, fees paid or not, photo and roll number, center address, date 
like credit/debit card, net banking signature uploaded or not. Then, and time of test.

or other mode of payment, etc. generate a roll number and add this 
applicant in the list of eligible 

applicants.

A Bank handling withdrawals of cash through ATMs of its own branch

ATM PIN number, account type, Checking for valid PIN number, 
account number, card number, existing bank balance, if satisfied, Currency notes, printed slip with 
ATM location from where money then deduction of amount from that transaction details

was withdrawn, date and time, and account and counting of rupees and 
amount to be withdrawn. initiate printing of receipt

Issue of train ticket

Journey start and end stations, Verify login details and check 
date of journey, number of tickets availability of berth in that class. If 

required, class of travel payment done, issue tickets and Generate ticket with berth and 
(Sleeper/AC/other), berth deduct that number from the total coach number, or issue ticket with 

preference (if any), passenger available tickets on that coach. a waiting list number
name(s) and age(s), mobile and Allocate PNR number and berths or 

email id, payment related details, generate a waiting number for that 
etc. ticket.

Problem Statement Inputs against which Processing
data are collected Output

Figure 5.2:	Data Based Problem Statements

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   87 09-Aug-19   11:49:19 AM



88 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 5.5	S tatistical Techniques for Data Processing

Given a set of data values, we need to process them to get 
information. There are various techniques which help 
us to have preliminary understanding about the data. 
Summarisation methods are applied on tabular data 
for its easy comprehension. Commonly used statistical 
techniques for data summarisation are given below:
5.5.1	Measures of Central Tendency
A measure of central tendency is a single value that 
gives us some idea about the data. Three most common 
measures of central tendency are the mean, median, 
and mode. Instead of looking at each individual data 
values, we can calculate the mean, median and mode 
of the data to get an idea about average, middle value 
and frequency of occurrence of a particular value, 
respectively. Selection of a measure of central tendency 
depends on certain characteristics of data.
(A)	 Mean
Mean is simply the average of numeric values of an 
attribute. Mean is also called average. Suppose there 
are data on weight of 40 students in a class. Instead 
of looking at each of the data values, we can calculate 
the average to get an idea about the average weight of 
students in that class.
Definition: Given n values x1, x2, x3,...xn, mean is 

n

computed as ∑ xi .
i

n

Example 5.1	  
Assume that height (in cm) of students in a class are as 
follows [90,102,110,115,85,90,100,110,110]. Mean or 
average height of the class is 
90 +102 +110 +115 + 85 + 90 +100 +110 +110 912

= =101.33cm
9 9

Mean is not a suitable choice if there are outliers 
in the data. To calculate mean, the outliers or extreme 
values should be removed from the given data and then 
calculate mean of the remaining data.
Note: An outlier is an exceptionally large or small value, in 
comparison to other values of the data. Usually, outliers are 
considered as error since they can influence/affect the average or 
other statistical calculation based on the data.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   88 09-Aug-19   11:49:20 AM



Understanding Data 89

(B)	 Median 
Median is also computed for a single attribute/variable 
at a time. When all the values are sorted in ascending or 
descending order, the middle value is called the Median. 
When there are odd number of values, then median is 
the value at the middle position. If the list has even 
number of values, then median is the average of the two 
middle values. Median represents the central value at 
which the given data is equally divided into two parts.
Example 5.2	  
Consider the previous data of height of students used 
in calculation of mean value. In order to compute the 
median, the first step is to sort data in ascending or 
descending order. We have sorted the height data in 
ascending order as [85,90,90,100,102,110,110,110, 
115]. As there are total 9 values (odd number), the Think and Reflect
median is the value at position 5, that is 102 cm, Out of Mean and Median, 
whether counted from left to right or from right to left. which one is more 

sensitive to outliers in 
Median represents the actual central value at which the data?
given data is equally divided into two parts.
(C)	 Mode 
Value that appears most number of times in the given 
data of an attribute/variable is called Mode. It is 
computed on the basis of frequency of occurrence of 
distinct values in the given data. A data set has no mode 
if each value occurs only once. There may be multiple 
modes in the data if more than one values have same 
highest frequency. Mode can be found for numeric as 
well as non-numeric data.
Example 5.3	  
In the list of height of students, mode is 110 as its 
frequency of occurrence in the list is 3, which is larger 
than the frequency of rest of the values. 
5.5.2	Measures of Variability
The measures of variability refer to the spread or variation 
of the values around the mean. They are also called 
measures of dispersion that indicate the degree of diversity 
in a data set. They also indicate difference within the group. 
Two different data sets can have the same mean, median 
or mode but completely different levels of dispersion, or 
vice versa. Common measures of dispersion or variability 
are Range and Standard Deviation.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   89 09-Aug-19   11:49:20 AM



90 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes (A)	 Range 
It is the difference between maximum and minimum 
values of the data (the largest value minus the 
smallest value). Range can be calculated only for 
numerical data. It is a measure of dispersion and 
tells about coverage/spread of data values. For 
example difference in salaries of employees, marks of 
a student, price of toys, etc. As range is calculated 
based on the two extreme values, any outlier in the 
data badly influences the result.

Let M be the largest or maximum value and S is the 
smallest or minimum value in the data, then Range is 
the difference between two extreme values i.e. M – S or 
Maximum – Minimum. 
Example 5.4	  
In the above example, minimum hight value is 85 cm 
and maximum hight value is 115 cm. Hane range is 
115-85 = 30 cm.
(B)	 Standard deviation 
Standard deviation refers to differences within the group 
or set of data of a variable. Like Range, it also measures 
the spread of data. However, unlike Range which only 
uses two extreme values in the data, calculation of 
standard deviation considers all the given data. It is 
calculated as the positive square root of the average of 
squared difference of each value from the mean value 
of data. Smaller value of standard deviation means 
data are less spread while a larger value of standard 
deviation means data are more spread.

Given n values x1, x2, x3,...xn, and their mean x, the 
standard deviation, represented as σ (greek letter sigma) 
is computed as

n
∑ (Xi − X)2

∑ = i=1

n

Example 5.5	   
Let us compute the standard deviation of the hight 
of nine students that we used while calculating 
Mean. The Mean (x) was calculated to be 101.33 cm. 
Subtract each value from the mean and take square 
of that value. Dividing the sum of square values by 
total number of values and taking its square not 
gives the standard deviation in data. See Table 5.3 
for details.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   90 09-Aug-19   11:49:21 AM



Understanding Data 91

Table 5.3 Standard deviation of attendance of 9 students
_

Height (x) in cm x _
_

 x (x _ x)2
90 -11.33 128.37 n

102 0.67 0.36 ∑ (Xi − X)2
= i=1

110 8.67 75.17 n

115 13.67 186.87 
85 -16.33 266.67 938

= =104.22
9

90 -11.33 128.37 
n

100 -1.33 1.77 ∑ (X 2
i − X)

110 8.67 75.17 ∑ = i=1

n
 110 8.67 75.17 

           n = 9 _ _ = 104.22 =10.2cm
_ ∑x-x) = 0.03 ∑x-x)2 = 938.00

 x =101.33

Let us look at the following problems and select 
the suitable statistical technique to be applied (Mean/
Median/Mode/Range/Standard Deviation):

Problem Statement Choose suitable 
statistical method

The management of a company wants to know about disparity in salaries of 
all employees.

Teacher wants to know about the average performance of the whole class in 
a test.

Compare height of residents of two cities

Find the dominant value from a set of values 

Compare income of residents of two cities

Find the popular color for car after surveying the car owners of a small city.

It is important to understand statistical techniques 
so that one can decide which statistical technique to 
use to arrive at a decision. Different programming tools 
are available for efficient analysis of large volumes of 
data. These tools make use of statistical techniques for 
data analysis. One such programming tool is Python 
and it has libraries specially built for data processing 
and analysis. We will be covering some of them in the 
following chapters.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   91 09-Aug-19   11:49:21 AM



92 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes Summary
•	 Data refer to unorganised facts that can be processed 

to generate meaningful result or information.
•	 Data can be structured or unstructured.
•	 Hard Disk, SSD, CD/DVD, Pen Drive, Memory 

Card, etc. are some of the commonly used storage 
devices.

•	 Data Processing cycle involves input and storage 
of data, its processing and generating output.

•	 Summarizing data using statistical techniques aids 
in revealing data characteristics.

•	 Mean, Median, Mode, Range, and Standard 
Deviation are some of the statistical techniques 
used for data summarisation.

•	 Mean is the average of given values.
•	 Median is the mid value when data are sorted in 

ascending/descending order.
•	 Mode is the data value that appears most  number 

of times. 
•	 Range is the difference between the maximum and 

minimum values.
•	 Standard deviation is the positive square root of 

the average of squared difference of each value 
from  the mean.

Excercise
1.	 Identify data required to be maintained to perform the 

following services:
a)	 Declare exam results and print e-certificates
b)	 Register participants in an exhibition and issue 

biometric ID cards
c)	 To search for an image by a search engine
d)	 To book an OPD appointment with a hospital in a 

specific department
2.	 A school having 500 students wants to identify 

beneficiaries of the merit-cum means scholarship, 
achieving more than 75% for two consecutive years 
and having family income less than 5 lakh per annum. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   92 09-Aug-19   11:49:22 AM



Understanding Data 93

Briefly describe data processing steps to be taken by the Notes
to beneficial prepare the list of school.

3.	 A bank ‘xyz’ wants to know about its popularity among 
the residents of a city ‘ABC’ on the basis of number of 
bank accounts each family has and the average monthly 
account balance of each person. Briefly describe the 
steps to be taken for collecting data and what results 
can be checked through processing of the collected data. 

4.	 Identify type of data being collected/generated in the 
following scenarios:
a)	 Recording a video
b)	 Marking attendance by teacher
c)	 Writing tweets
d)	 Filling an application form online

5.	 Consider the temperature (in Celsius) of 7 days of a week 
as 34, 34, 27, 28, 27, 34, 34. Identify the appropriate 
statistical technique to be used to calculate the following:
a)	 Find the average temperature.
b)	 Find the temperature Range of that week.
c)	 Find the standard deviation temperature.

6.	 A school teacher wants to analyse results. Identify the 
appropriate statistical technique to be used along with 
its justification for the following cases:
a)	 Teacher wants to compare performance in terms of 

division secured by students in Class XII A and Class 
XII B where each class strength is same.

b)	 Teacher has conducted five unit tests for that class in 
months July to November and wants to compare the 
class performance in these five months.

7.	 Suppose annual day of your school is to be celebrated. 
The school has decided to felicitate those parents of the 
students studying in classes XI and XII, who are the 
alumni of the same school. In this context, answer the 
following questions:
a)	 Which statistical technique should be used to find 

out the number of students whose both parents are 
alumni of this school?

b)	 How varied are the age of parents of the students of 
that school?

8.	 For the annual day celebrations, the teacher is looking 
for an anchor in a class of 42 students. The teacher would 
make selection of an anchor on the basis of singing skill, 
writing skill, as well as monitoring skill. 
a)	 Which mode of data collection should be used?
b)	 How would you represent the skill of students 

as data?

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   93 09-Aug-19   11:49:22 AM



94 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 9.	 Differentiate between structured and unstructured data 
giving one example.

10.	 The principal of a school wants to do following analysis 
on the basis of food items procured and sold in the 
canteen:
a)	 Compare the purchase and sale price of fruit juice 

and biscuits.
b)	 Compare sales of fruit juice, biscuits and samosa.
c)	 Variation in sale price of fruit juices of different 

companies for same quantity (in ml).
Create an appropriate dataset for these items (fruit juice, 
biscuits, samosa) by listing their purchase price and 
sale price. Apply basic statistical techniques to make 
the comparisons.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   94 09-Aug-19   11:49:22 AM



Introduction Chapter 

to NumPy 6 

In this chapter
»» Introduction 
»» Array
»» NumPy Array

“The goal is to turn data into information, »» Indexing and Slicing
and information into insight.” »» Operations on Arrays

»» Concatenating Arrays
—  Carly Fiorina »» Reshaping Arrays

»» Splitting Arrays
»» Statistical Operations 

on Arrays
»» Loading Arrays from 

Files
»» Saving NumPy Arrays 

6.1	 Introduction in Files on Disk
NumPy stands for ‘Numerical Python’. It is a 
package for data analysis and scientific computing 
with Python. NumPy uses a multidimensional 
array object, and has functions and tools 
for working with these arrays. The powerful 
n-dimensional array in NumPy speeds-up data 
processing. NumPy can be easily interfaced with 
other Python packages and provides tools for 
integrating with other programming languages 
like C, C++ etc.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   95 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



96 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Installing NumPy 
NumPy can be installed by typing following command:
	 pip install NumPy 

6.2	 Array

We have learnt about various data types like list, tuple, 
Contiguous memory and dictionary. In this chapter we will discuss another 
allocation:
The memory space datatype ‘Array’. An array is a data type used to store 
must be divided multiple values using a single identifier (variable name). 
into the fined sized An array contains an ordered collection of data elements 
position and each where each element is of the same type and can be 
position is allocated referenced by its index (position). 
to a single data only. The important characteristics of an array are:
Now Contiguous 
Memory Allocation: •	 Each element of the array is of same data 
Divide the data into type, though the values stored in them may be 
several blocks and different.
place in different 
parts of the memory •	 The entire array is stored contiguously in 
according to the memory. This makes operations on array fast.
availability of memory •	 Each element of the array is identified or 
space. referred using the name of the Array along with 

the index of that element, which is unique for 
each element. The index of an element is an 
integral value associated with the element, 
based on the element’s position in the array. 
For example consider an array with 5 numbers: 
           [ 10, 9, 99, 71, 90 ] 

Here, the 1st value in the array is 10 and has the 
index value [0] associated with it; the 2nd value in the 
array is 9 and has the index value [1] associated with 
it, and so on. The last value (in this case the 5th value) 
in this array has an index [4]. This is called zero based 
indexing. This is very similar to the indexing of lists in 
Python. The idea of arrays is so important that almost 
all programming languages support it in one form or 
another.

6.3	N umPy Array

NumPy arrays are used to store lists of numerical data, 
vectors and matrices. The NumPy library has a large set of 
routines (built-in functions) for creating, manipulating, 
and transforming NumPy arrays. Python language also 
has an array data structure, but it is not as versatile, 
efficient and useful as the NumPy array. The NumPy 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   96 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



##6##
Introduction to NumPy 97

array is officially called ndarray but commonly known 
as array. In rest of the chapter, we will be referring to 
NumPy array whenever we use “array”. following are few 
differences between list and Array.
6.3.1	Difference Between List and Array

List Array
List can have elements of different data All elements of an array are of same data type for 
types for example, [1,3.4, ‘hello’, ‘a@’] example, an array of floats may be: [1.2, 5.4, 2.7]
Elements of a list are not stored  Array elements are stored in contiguous memory 
contiguously in memory. locations. This makes operations on arrays faster than 

lists. 
Lists do not support element wise operations, Arrays support element wise operations. For example, 
for example, addition, multiplication, etc. if A1 is an array, it is possible to say A1/3 to divide 
because elements may not be of same type. each element of the array by 3.
Lists can contain objects of different NumPy array takes up less space in memory as 
datatype that Python must store the type compared to a list because arrays do not require to 
information for every element along with its store datatype of each element separately. 
element value. Thus lists take more space 
in memory and are less efficient.
List is a part of core Python. Array (ndarray) is a part of NumPy library.

6.3.2	Creation of NumPy Arrays from List
There are several ways to create arrays. To create an 
array and to use its methods, first we need to import the 
NumPy library.

#NumPy is loaded as np (we can assign any 
#name), numpy must be written in lowercase
>>> import numpy as np 	

The NumPy’s array() function converts a given list 
into an array. For example,

#Create an array called array1 from the 
#given list.
>>> array1 = np.array([10,20,30]) 

#Display the contents of the array
>>> array1      
array([10, 20, 30])   

•	 Creating a 1-D Array
An array with only single row of elements is called 
1-D array. Let us try to create a 1-D array from 
a list which contains numbers as well as strings. 
>>> array2 = np.array([5,-7.4,'a',7.2])
>>> array2

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   97 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



98 Informatics Practices – Class XI

array(['5', '-7.4', 'a', '7.2'],     
dtype='<U32')

A common mistake 
occurs while passing Observe that since there is a string value in the 
argument to array() if list, all integer and float values have been promoted to 
we forget to put square string, while converting the list to array.
brackets. Make sure 
only a single argument Note: U32 means Unicode-32 data type.
containing list of •	 Creating a 2-D Array
values is passed.
#incorrect way We can create a two dimensional (2-D) arrays by 
>>> a = passing nested lists to the array() function. 
np.array(1,2,3,4)  
#correct way
>>> a = Example 6.1	
np.array([1,2,3,4]) >>> array3 = np.array([[2.4,3],   

             [4.91,7],[0,-1]])
>>> array3
array([[ 2.4 ,  3.  ],
       [ 4.91,  7.  ],
       [ 0.  , -1.  ]])

Observe that the integers 3, 7, 0 and -1 have been 
promoted to floats.
6.3.3	Attributes of NumPy Array
Some important attributes of a NumPy ndarray object are:

i)	 ndarray.ndim: gives the number of dimensions 
of the array as an integer value. Arrays can be 
1-D, 2-D or n-D. In this chapter, we shall focus 
on 1-D and 2-D arrays only. NumPy calls the 
dimensions as axes (plural of axis). Thus, a 2-D 
array has two axes. The row-axis is called axis-0 

A list is called nested 
list when each and the column-axis is called axis-1. The number 

element is a list itself. of axes is also called the array’s rank. 
Example 6.2	

>>> array1.ndim
1
>>> array3.ndim
2

ii)	 ndarray.shape: It gives the sequence of integers 
indicating the size of the array for each dimension. 

Example 6.3	
# array1 is 1D-array, there is nothing  
# after , in sequence 
>>> array1.shape
(3,)
>>> array2.shape
(4,)
>>> array3.shape
(3, 2)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   98 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



Introduction to NumPy 99

The output (3, 2) means array3 has 3 rows and 2 Notes
columns.
iii)	 ndarray.size: It gives the total number of 

elements of the array. This is equal to the product 
of the elements of shape.

Example 6.4	
>>> array1.size
3
>>> array3.size
6

iv)	 ndarray.dtype: is the data type of the elements 
of the array. All the elements of an array are of 
same data type. Common data types are int32, 
int64, float32, float64, U32, etc.

Example 6.5	
>>> array1.dtype
dtype('int32')
>>> array2.dtype
dtype('<U32>')
>>> array3.dtype
dtype('float64')

v)	 ndarray.itemsize: It specifies the size in bytes 
of each element of the array. Data type int32 and 
float32 means each element of the array occupies 
32 bits in memory. 8 bits form a byte. Thus, an 
array of elements of type int32 has itemsize 32/8=4 
bytes. Likewise, int64/float64 means each item 
has itemsize 64/8=8 bytes.

Example 6.6	
>>> array1.itemsize
4 		    # memory allocated to integer 
>>> array2.itemsize
128 		   # memory allocated to string
>>> array3.itemsize
8 		    #memory allocated to float type

6.3.4	Other Ways of Creating NumPy Arrays 
1.	 	We can specify data type (integer, float, etc.) while 

creating array using dtype as an argument to 
array(). This will convert the data automatically 
to the mentioned type. In the following example, 
nested list of integers are passed to the array 
function. Since data type has been declared 
as float, the integers are converted to floating 
point numbers.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   99 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



100 Informatics Practices – Class XI

>>> array4 = np.array( [ [1,2], [3,4] ],  
             dtype=float)
>>> array4
array([[1., 2.],
       [3., 4.]])

2.	 We can create an array with all elements initialised 
to 0 using the function zeros(). By default, the 
data type of the array created by zeros() is float. 
The following code will create an array with 3 rows 
and 4 columns with each element set to 0.
>>> array5 = np.zeros((3,4))
>>> array5
array([[0., 0., 0., 0.],
       [0., 0., 0., 0.],
       [0., 0., 0., 0.]])

3.	 We can create an array with all elements initialised 
to 1 using the function ones(). By default, the 
data type of the array created by ones() is float. 
The following code will create an array with 3 rows 
and 2 columns.
>>> array6 = np.ones((3,2))
>>> array6
array([[1., 1.],
       [1., 1.],
       [1., 1.]])

4.	 We can create an array with numbers in a given 
range and sequence using the arange() function. 
This function is analogous to the range() function 
of Python. 
>>> array7 = np.arange(6) 
# an array of 6 elements is created with 
start value 5 and step size 1
>>> array7
array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]) 
# Creating an array with start value -2, end 
# value 24 and step size 4
>>> array8 = np.arange( -2, 24, 4 )
>>> array8
array([-2,  2,  6, 10, 14, 18, 22])

6.4	 Indexing and Slicing

Think and Reflect NumPy arrays can be indexed, sliced and iterated over. 
When we may require 6.4.1	Indexing
to create an array 
initialised to zeros or We have learnt about indexing single-dimensional 
ones? array in section 6.2. For 2-D arrays indexing for both 

dimensions starts from 0, and each element is referenced 
through two indexes i and j, where i represents the row 
number and j represents the column number. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   100 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



Introduction to NumPy 101

Table 6.1 Marks of students in different subjects Notes

Name   Maths English Science
Ramesh 78 67 56

Vedika 76 75 47

Harun 84 59 60

Prasad 67 72 54

Consider Table 6.1 showing marks obtained by 
students in three different subjects. Let us create an 
array called marks to store marks given in three subjects 
for four students given in this table. As there are 4 
students (i.e. 4 rows) and 3 subjects (i.e. 3 columns), 
the array will be called marks[4][3]. This array can 
store 4*3 = 12 elements. 

Here, marks[i,j] refers to the element at (i+1)th row 
and (j+1)th column because the index values start at 0. 
Thus marks[3,1] is the element in 4th row and second 
column which is 72 (marks of Prasad in English).

# accesses the element in the 1st row in  
# the 3rd column
>>> marks[0,2] 
56
>>> marks [0,4]
index Out of Bound "Index Error". Index 4 
is out of bounds for axis with size 3

6.4.2	Slicing
Sometimes we need to extract part of an array. This is 
done through slicing. We can define which part of the 
array to be sliced by specifying the start and end index 
values using [start : end] along with the array name. 
Example 6.7	

>>> array8
array([-2,  2,  6, 10, 14, 18, 22])

# excludes the value at the end index
>>> array8[3:5] 
array([10, 14])

# reverse the array
>>> array8[ : : -1]
array([22, 18, 14, 10,  6,  2, -2])

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   101 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



102 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes Now let us see how slicing is done for 2-D arrays. 
For this, let us create a 2-D array called array9 having 
3 rows and 4 columns.

>>> array9 = np.array([[ -7, 0, 10, 20],
       			     [ -5, 1, 40, 200],
       		      	   [ -1, 1,  4, 30]])

# access all the elements in the 3rd column
>>> array9[0:3,2]
array([10, 40,  4])

Note that we are specifying rows in the range 0:3 
because the end value of the range is excluded.

# access elements of 2nd and 3rd row from 1st 
# and 2nd column
>>> array9[1:3,0:2]
array([[-5, 1],
       [-1, 1]])

If row indices are not specified, it means all the rows 
are to be considered. Likewise, if column indices are 
not specified, all the columns are to be considered. 
Thus, the statement to access all the elements in the 3rd 
column can also be written as:

>>>array9[:,2]
array([10, 40, 4])

6.5	O perations on Arrays

Once arrays are declared, we con access it's element 
or perform certain operations the last section, we 
learnt about accessing elements. This section describes 
multiple operations that can be applied on arrays.
6.5.1	Arithmetic Operations
Arithmetic operations on NumPy arrays are fast and 
simple. When we perform a basic arithmetic operation 
like addition, subtraction, multiplication, division etc. on 
two arrays, the operation is done on each corresponding 
pair of elements. For instance, adding two arrays will 
result in the first element in the first array to be added 
to the first element in the second array, and so on. 
Consider the following element-wise operations on two 
arrays:

>>> array1 = np.array([[3,6],[4,2]])
>>> array2 = np.array([[10,20],[15,12]])

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   102 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



Introduction to NumPy 103

#Element-wise addition of two matrices. Notes
>>> array1 + array2
array([[13, 26],
       [19, 14]])

#Subtraction
>>> array1 - array2
array([[ -7, -14],
       [-11, -10]])

#Multiplication
>>> array1 * array2
array([[ 30, 120],
       [ 60,  24]])

#Matrix Multiplication
>>> array1 @ array2
array([[120, 132],
       [ 70, 104]])

#Exponentiation
>>> array1 ** 3
array([[ 27, 216],
       [ 64,   8]], dtype=int32)

#Division
>>> array2 / array1
array([[3.33333333, 3.33333333],
       [3.75      , 6.        ]])

#Element wise Remainder of Division  
#(Modulo)
>>> array2 % array1
array([[1, 2],
       [3, 0]], dtype=int32)

It is important to note that for element-wise 
operations, size of both arrays must be same. That is, 
array1.shape must be equal to array2.shape. 
6.5.2	Transpose
Transposing an array turns its rows into columns and 
columns into rows just like matrices in mathematics. 

#Transpose
>>> array3 = np.array([[10,-7,0, 20], 
             [-5,1,200,40],[30,1,-1,4]])
>>> array3
array([[ 10,  -7,   0,  20],
       [ -5,   1, 200,  40],
       [ 30,   1,  -1,   4]])

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   103 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



104 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes # the original array does not change
>>> array3.transpose()  
array([[ 10,  -5,  30],
       [ -7,   1,   1],
       [  0, 200,  -1],
       [ 20,  40,   4]])

6.5.3	Sorting
Sorting is to arrange the elements of an array in 
hierarchical order either ascending or descending. By 
default, numpy does sorting in ascending order.

>>> array4 = np.array([1,0,2,-3,6,8,4,7])
>>> array4.sort()   
>>> array4
array([-3,  0,  1,  2,  4,  6,  7,  8])

In 2-D array, sorting can be done along either of the 
axes i.e., row-wise or column-wise. By default, sorting 
is done row-wise (i.e., on axis = 1). It means to arrange 
elements in each row in ascending order. When axis=0, 
sorting is done column-wise, which means each column 
is sorted in ascending order.

>>> array4 = np.array([[10,-7,0, 20], 
		    [-5,1,200,40],[30,1,-1,4]])
>>> array4
array([[ 10,  -7,   0,  20],
       [ -5,   1, 200,  40],
       [ 30,   1,  -1,   4]])

#default is row-wise sorting 
>>> array4.sort() 
>>> array4
array([[ -7,   0,  10,  20],
       [ -5,   1,  40, 200],
       [ -1,   1,   4,  30]])
>>> array5 = np.array([[10,-7,0, 20], 
		    [-5,1,200,40],[30,1,-1,4]])

#axis =0 means column-wise sorting 
>>> array5.sort(axis=0)
>>> array5
array([[ -5,  -7,  -1,   4],
       [ 10,   1,   0,  20],
       [ 30,   1, 200,  40]])

6.6	C oncatenating Arrays

Concatenation means joining two or more arrays. 
Concatenating 1-D arrays means appending the 
sequences one after another. NumPy.concatenate() 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   104 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



Introduction to NumPy 105

function can be used to concatenate two or more Notes
2-D arrays either row-wise or column-wise. All the 
dimensions of the arrays to be concatenated must match 
exactly except for the dimension or axis along which 
they need to be joined. Any mismatch in the dimensions 
results in an error. By default, the concatenation of the 
arrays happens along axis=0. 
Example 6.8	  

>>> array1 = np.array([[10, 20], [-30,40]])
>>> array2 = np.zeros((2, 3), dtype=array1. 
             dtype)

>>> array1
array([[ 10,  20],
       [-30,  40]])

>>> array2
array([[0, 0, 0],
       [0, 0, 0]])

>>> array1.shape
(2, 2)
>>> array2.shape
(2, 3)

>>> np.concatenate((array1,array2), axis=1)
array([[ 10,  20,   0,   0,   0],
       [-30,  40,   0,   0,   0]])

>>> np.concatenate((array1,array2), axis=0)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<pyshell#3>", line 1, in <module>
    np.concatenate((array1,array2))
ValueError: all the input array dimensions 
except for the concatenation axis must 
match exactly

6.7	R eshaping Arrays

We can modify the shape of an array using the reshape() 
function. Reshaping an array cannot be used to change 
the total number of elements in the array. Attempting 
to change the number of elements in the array using 
reshape() results in an error.
Example 6.9	

>>> array3 = np.arange(10,22)
>>> array3
array([10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 
19, 20, 21])

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   105 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



106 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes >>> array3.reshape(3,4)
array([[10, 11, 12, 13],
       [14, 15, 16, 17],
       [18, 19, 20, 21]])

>>> array3.reshape(2,6)
array([[10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15],
       [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21]])

6.8	S plitting Arrays

We can split an array into two or more subarrays. 
numpy.split() splits an array along the specified axis. 
We can either specify sequence of index values where an 
array is to be split; or we can specify an integer N, that 
indicates the number of equal parts in which the array 
is to be split, as parameter(s) to the NumPy.split() 
function. By default, NumPy.split() splits along axis = 
0. Consider the array given below:

>>> array4
array([[ 10,  -7,   0,  20],
       [ -5,   1, 200,  40],
       [ 30,   1,  -1,   4],
       [  1,   2,   0,   4],
       [  0,   1,   0,   2]])

# [1,3] indicate the row indices on which  
# to split the array 
>>> first, second, third = numpy split(array4, 	
    [1, 3])

# array4 is split on the first row and  
# stored on the sub-array first  
>>> first
array([[10, -7,  0, 20]])

# array4 is split after the first row and  
# upto the third row and stored on the  
# sub-array second
>>> second
array([[ -5,   1, 200,  40],
       [ 30,   1,  -1,   4]])

# the remaining rows of array4 are stored  
# on the sub-array third
>>> third
array([[1, 2, 0, 4],
       [0, 1, 0, 2]])

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   106 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



Introduction to NumPy 107

#[1, 2], axis=1 give the columns indices  Notes
#along which to split
>>> firstc, secondc, thirdc =numpy split(array4, 
[1, 2], axis=1)
>>> firstc
array([[10],
       [-5],
       [30],
       [ 1],
       [ 0]])

>>> secondc
array([[-7],
       [ 1],
       [ 1],
       [ 2],
       [ 1]])

>>> thirdc
array([[  0,  20],
       [200,  40],
       [ -1,   4],
       [  0,   4],
       [  0,   2]])

# 2nd parameter 2 implies array is to be  
# split in 2 equal parts axis=1 along the  
# column axis 
>>> firsthalf, secondhalf =np.split(array4,2, 
axis=1) 
>>> firsthalf
array([[10, -7],
       [-5,  1],
       [30,  1],
       [ 1,  2],
       [ 0,  1]])

>>> secondhalf
array([[  0,  20],
       [200,  40],
       [ -1,   4],
       [  0,   4],
       [  0,   2]])

6.9	S tatistical Operations on Arrays

NumPy provides functions to perform many useful 
statistical operations on arrays. In this section, we will 
apply the basic statistical techniques called descriptive 
statistics that we have learnt in chapter 5.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   107 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



108 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes Let us consider two arrays:
>>> arrayA = np.array([1,0,2,-3,6,8,4,7])
>>> arrayB = np.array([[3,6],[4,2]])

1.	 The max() function finds the maximum element 
from an array.
# max element form the whole 1-D array
>>> arrayA.max()  
8
# max element form the whole 2-D array
>>> arrayB.max()	
6
# if axis=1, it gives column wise maximum
>>> arrayB.max(axis=1) 
array([6, 4])
# if axis=0, it gives row wise maximum 
>>> arrayB.max(axis=0)  
array([4, 6])

2.	 The min() function finds the minimum element 
from an array.
>>> arrayA.min()
-3
>>> arrayB.min()
2
>>> arrayB.min(axis=0)
array([3, 2])

3.	 The sum() function finds the sum of all elements 
of an array.
>>> arrayA.sum()
25
>>> arrayB.sum()
15
#axis is used to specify the dimension  
#on which sum is to be made. Here axis = 1  
#means the sum of elements on the first row 
>>> arrayB.sum(axis=1)
array([9, 6])

4.	 The mean() function finds the average of elements 
of the array.
>>> arrayA.mean()
3.125
>>> arrayB.mean()
3.75
>>> arrayB.mean(axis=0)
array([3.5, 4. ])

>>> arrayB.mean(axis=1)
array([4.5, 3. ])

5.	 The std() function is used to find standard 
deviation of an array of elements.
>>> arrayA.std()
3.550968177835448

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   108 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



Introduction to NumPy 109

>>> arrayB.std() Notes
1.479019945774904

>>> arrayB.std(axis=0)
array([0.5, 2. ])

>>> arrayB.std(axis=1)
array([1.5, 1. ])

6.10  Loading Arrays from Files

Sometimes, we may have data in files and we may need 
to load that data in an array for processing. numpy.
loadtxt() and numpy.genfromtxt()are the two 
functions that can be used to load data from text files. 
The most commonly used file type to handle large amount 
of data is called CSV (Comma Separated Values). 

Each row in the text file must have the same number 
of values in order to load data from a text file into a 
numpy array. Let us say we have the following data in a 
text file named data.txt stored in the folder C:/NCERT.

RollNo Marks1 Marks2  Marks3 
1, 36, 18, 57
2, 22, 23, 45
3, 43, 51, 37
4, 41, 40, 60
5, 13, 18, 37

We can load the data from the data.txt file into an 
array say, studentdata in the following manner:
6.10.1	 Using NumPy.loadtxt()

>>> studentdata = np.loadtxt('C:/NCERT/ 
    data.txt', skiprows=1, delimiter=',',  
    dtype = int)

>>> studentdata 
array([[ 1, 36, 18, 57],
       [ 2, 22, 23, 45],
       [ 3, 43, 51, 37],
       [ 4, 41, 40, 60],
       [ 5, 13, 18, 27]])

In the above statement, first we specify the name 
and path of the text file containing the data. Let us 
understand some of the parameters that we pass in the 
np.loadtext() function:

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   109 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



110 Informatics Practices – Class XI

•	 The parameter skiprows=1 indicates that the 
first row is the header row and therefore we 
need to skip it as we do not want to load it in 
the array.

•	 The delimiter specifies whether the values are 
separated by comma, semicolon, tab or space 
(the four are together called whitespace), or any 
other character. The default value for delimiter 
is space.

•	 We can also specify the data type of the array 
to be created by specifying through the dtype 
argument. By default, dtype is float. 

We can load each row or column of the data file into 
different numpy arrays using the unpack parameter. 
By default, unpack=False means we can extract each 
row of data as separate arrays. When unpack=True, the 
returned array is transposed  means we can extract the 
columns as separate arrays.

# To import data into multiple NumPy arrays 
# row wise. Values related to student1 in  
# array stud1, student2 in array stud2 etc.
>>> stud1, stud2, stud3, stud4, stud5 = 
np.loadtxt('C:/NCERT/data.txt',skiprows=1, 

.CSV files or comma delimiter=',', dtype = int)
separated values 
files are a type of text >>> stud1
files that have values array([ 1, 36, 18, 57])
separated by commas. >>> stud2
A CSV file stores array([ 2, 22, 23, 45])  # and so on
tabular data in a text 
file. CSV files can # Import data into multiple arrays column  
be loaded in NumPy # wise. Data in column RollNo will be put  
arrays and their data # in array rollno, data in column Marks1  
can be analyzed using # will be put in array mks1 and so on.
these functions. >>> rollno, mks1, mks2, mks3 = 

np.loadtxt('C:/NCERT/data.txt', 
skiprows=1, delimiter=',', unpack=True, 
dtype = int)
>>> rollno
array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])

>>> mks1
array([36, 22, 43, 41, 13])

>>> mks2
array([18, 23, 51, 40, 18])

>>> mks3
array([57, 45, 37, 60, 27])

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   110 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



Introduction to NumPy 111

6.10.2	 Using NumPy.genfromtxt()
genfromtxt() is another function in NumPy to load data 
from files. As compared to loadtxt(), genfromtxt() Activity 6.1
can also handle missing values in the data file. Let us Can you write the 
look at the following file dataMissing.txt with some command to load the 
missing values and some non-numeric data: data.txt including the 

header row as well?
RollNo Marks1 Marks2  Marks3 

1, 36, 18, 57
2, ab, 23, 45
3, 43, 51,
4, 41, 40, 60
5, 13, 18, 27

>>> dataarray = np.genfromtxt('C:/NCERT/  
    dataMissing.txt',skip_header=1,  
    delimiter = ',')

>>> dataarray
array([[ 1., 36., 18., 57.],
       [ 2., nan, 23., 45.],
       [ 3., 43., 51., nan],
       [ 4., 41., 40., 60.],
       [ 5., 13., 18., 27.]])

The genfromtxt() function converts missing values 
and character strings in numeric columns to nan. But if 
we specify dtype as int, it converts the missing or other 
non numeric values to -1. We can also convert these 
missing values and character strings in the data files 
to some specific value using the parameter filling_
values. 
Example 6.10	  Let us set the value of the missing or non 
numeric data to -999: 

Activity 6.2
>>> dataarray = np.genfromtxt('C:/NCERT/    
    dataMissing.txt',skip_header=1,  Can you create a 

datafile and import 
    delimiter=',', filling_values=-999,  data into multiple 
    dtype = int) NumPy arrays column 

wise? (Hint: use unpack 
>>> dataarray parameter)
array([[   1,   36,   18,   57],
       [   2, -999,   23,   45],
       [   3,   43,   51, -999],
       [   4,   41,   40,   60],
       [   5,   13,   18,   27]])

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   111 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



112 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 6.11  Saving NumPy Arrays in Files on Disk

The savetxt() function is used to save a NumPy array 
to a text file.
Example 6.11	

>>> np.savetxt('C:/NCERT/testout.txt', 
studentdata, delimiter=',', fmt='%i')

Note: We have used parameter fmt to specify the format in 
which data are to be saved. The default is float.

Summary
•	 Array is a data type that holds objects of same 

datatype (numeric, textual, etc.). The elements of 
an array are stored contiguously in memory. Each 
element of an array has an index or position value.

•	 NumPy is a Python library for scientific computing 
which stores data in a powerful n-dimensional 
ndarray object for faster calculations. 

•	 Each element of an array is referenced by the array 
name along with the index of that element. 

•	 numpy.array() is a function that returns an object 
of type numpy.ndarray. 

•	 All arithmetic operations can be performed on 
arrays when shape of the two arrays is same. 

•	 NumPy arrays are not expandable or extendable. 
Once a numpy array is defined, the space it occupies 
in memory is fixed and cannot be changed. 

•	 numpy.split() slices apart an array into multiple 
sub-arrays along an axis. 

•	 numpy.concatenate() function can be used to 
concatenate arrays. 

•	 numpy.loadtxt() and numpy.genfromtxt() are 
functions used to load data from files. The savetxt() 
function is used to save a NumPy array to a 
text file.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   112 19-Jul-19   3:43:32 PM



Introduction to NumPy 113

Notes

Exercise
1.	 	What is NumPy ? How to install it? 
2.	 	What is an array and how is it different from a list? What 

is the name of the built-in array class in NumPy ?
3.	 What do you understand by rank of an ndarray?
4.	 	Create the following NumPy arrays:

	 a)	 A 1-D array called zeros having 10 elements and 
all the elements are set to zero.

	 b)	 A 1-D array called vowels having the elements ‘a’, 
‘e’, ‘i’, ‘o’ and ‘u’.

	 c)	 A 2-D array called ones having 2 rows and 5 
columns and all the elements are set to 1 and 
dtype as int.

	 d)	 Use nested Python lists to create a 2-D array called 
myarray1 having 3 rows and 3 columns and store 
the following data:

		  2.7, 	 -2, 	 -19
		  0, 	 3.4, 	 99.9
		  10.6,	  0, 	 13
	 e)	 A 2-D array called myarray2 using arange() 

having 3 rows and 5 columns with start value = 4, 
step size 4 and dtype as float.

5.	 Using the arrays created in Question 4 above, write 
NumPy commands for the following:

	 a)	 Find the dimensions, shape, size, data type of the 
items and itemsize of arrays zeros, vowels, 
ones, myarray1 and myarray2.

	 b)	 Reshape the array ones to have all the 10 elements 
in a single row.

	 c)	 Display the 2nd and 3rd element of the array vowels.
	 d)	 Display all elements in the 2nd and 3rd row of the 

array myarray1.
	 e)	 Display the elements in the 1st and 2nd column of 

the array myarray1.
	 f)	 Display the elements in the 1st column of the 2nd 

and 3rd row of the array myarray1.
	 g)	 Reverse the array of vowels.
6.	 Using the arrays created in Question 4 above, write 

NumPy commands for the following:

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   113 19-Jul-19   3:43:33 PM



114 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 	 a)	 Divide all elements of array ones by 3. 
	 b)	 Add the arrays myarray1 and myarray2.
	 c)	 Subtract myarray1 from myarray2 and store the 

result in a new array.
	 d)	 Multiply myarray1 and myarray2 elementwise.
	 e)	 Do the matrix multiplication of myarray1 and 

myarray2 and store the result in a new array 
myarray3.

	 f)	 Divide myarray1 by myarray2.
	 g)	 Find the cube of all elements of myarray1 and 

divide the resulting array by 2. 
	 h)	 Find the square root of all elements of myarray2 

and divide the resulting array by 2. The result 
should be rounded to two places of decimals.

7.	 	Using the arrays created in Question 4 above, write 
NumPy commands for the following:

	 a)	 Find the transpose of ones and myarray2.
	 b)	 Sort the array vowels in reverse.
	 c)	 Sort the array myarray1 such that it brings the 

lowest value of the column in the first row and so 
on.

8.	 	Using the arrays created in Question 4 above, write 
NumPy commands for the following:

	 a)	 Use NumPy. split() to split the array myarray2 
into 5 arrays columnwise. Store your resulting 
arrays in myarray2A, myarray2B, myarray2C, 
myarray2D and myarray2E. Print the arrays 
myarray2A, myarray2B, myarray2C, myarray2D 
and myarray2E.

	 b)	 Split the array zeros at array index 2, 5, 7, 8 and 
store the resulting arrays in zerosA, zerosB, 
zerosC and zerosD and print them. 

	 c)	 Concatenate the arrays myarray2A, myarray2B 
and myarray2C into an array having 3 rows and 3 
columns.

9.	 	Create a 2-D array called myarray4 using arange() 
having 14 rows and 3 columns with start value = -1, 
step size 0.25 having. Split this array row wise into 3 
equal parts and print the result.

10.	 	Using the myarray4 created in the above questions, 
write commands for the following:

	 a)	 Find the sum of all elements.
	 b)	 Find the sum of all elements row wise.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   114 19-Jul-19   3:43:33 PM



Introduction to NumPy 115

	 c)	 Find the sum of all elements column wise. Notes
	 d)	 Find the max of all elements.
	 e)	 Find the min of all elements in each row.
	 f)	 Find the mean of all elements in each row.
	 g)	 Find the standard deviation column wise.

Case Study (Solved)
We have already learnt that a data set (or dataset) is a 
collection of data. Usually a data set corresponds to the 
contents of a database table, or a statistical data matrix, 
where every column of the table represents a particular 
variable, and each row corresponds to a member or an item 
etc. A data set lists values for each of the variables, such as 
height and weight of a student, for each row (item) of the data 
set. Open data refers to information released in a publicly 
accessible repository. 

The Iris flower data set is an example of an open data. 
It is also called Fisher's Iris data set as this data set was 
introduced by the British statistician and biologist Ronald 
Fisher in 1936. The Iris data set consists of 50 samples from 
each of the three species of the flower Iris (Iris setosa, Iris 
virginica and Iris versicolor). Four features were measured 
for each sample: the length and the width of the sepals and 
petals, in centimeters. Based on the combination of these 
four features, Fisher developed a model to distinguish one 
species from each other. The full data set is freely available 
on UCI Machine Learning Repository at https://archive.ics.
uci.edu/ml/datasets/iris. 

We shall use the following smaller section of this data set 
having 30 rows (10 rows for each of the three species). We 
shall include a column for species number that has a value 
1 for Iris setosa, 2 for Iris virginica and 3 for Iris versicolor. 

Sepal Sepal Petal Petal 
Length Width Length Width Iris Species 

No
5.1 3.5 1.4 0.2 Iris-setosa 1
4.9 3 1.4 0.2 Iris-setosa 1
4.7 3.2 1.3 0.2 Iris-setosa 1
4.6 3.1 1.5 0.2 Iris-setosa 1
5 3.6 1.4 0.2 Iris-setosa 1

5.4 3.9 1.7 0.4 Iris-setosa 1
4.6 3.4 1.4 0.3 Iris-setosa 1

5 3.4 1.5 0.2 Iris-setosa 1
4.4 2.9 1.4 0.2 Iris-setosa 1

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   115 19-Jul-19   3:43:33 PM



116 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 4.9 3.1 1.5 0.1 Iris-setosa 1
5.5 2.6 4.4 1.2 Iris-versicolor 2
6.1 3 4.6 1.4 Iris-versicolor 2
5.8 2.6 4 1.2 Iris-versicolor 2
5 2.3 3.3 1 Iris-versicolor 2

5.6 2.7 4.2 1.3 Iris-versicolor 2
5.7 3 4.2 1.2 Iris-versicolor 2
5.7 2.9 4.2 1.3 Iris-versicolor 2
6.2 2.9 4.3 1.3 Iris-versicolor 2
5.1 2.5 3 1.1 Iris-versicolor 2
5.7 2.8 4.1 1.3 Iris-versicolor 2
6.9 3.1 5.4 2.1 Iris-virginica 3
6.7 3.1 5.6 2.4 Iris-virginica 3
6.9 3.1 5.1 2.3 Iris-virginica 3
5.8 2.7 5.1 1.9 Iris-virginica 3
6.8 3.2 5.9 2.3 Iris-virginica 3
6.7 3.3 5.7 2.5 Iris-virginica 3
6.7 3 5.2 2.3 Iris-virginica 3
6.3 2.5 5 1.9 Iris-virginica 3
6.5 3 5.2 2 Iris-virginica 3
6.2 3.4 5.4 2.3 Iris-virginica 3

You may type this using any text editor (Notepad, gEdit 
or any other) in the way as shown below and store the 
file with a name called Iris.txt. (In case you wish to work 
with the entire dataset you could download a .csv file for the 
same from the Internet and save it as Iris.txt). The 
headers are:
sepal length, sepal width, petal length, petal width, iris, 
Species No
5.1, 3.5, 1.4, 0.2, Iris-setosa, 1
4.9, 3, 1.4, 0.2, Iris-setosa, 1
4.7, 3.2, 1.3, 0.2, Iris-setosa, 1
4.6, 3.1, 1.5, 0.2, Iris-setosa, 1
5, 3.6, 1.4, 0.2, Iris-setosa, 1
5.4, 3.9, 1.7, 0.4, Iris-setosa, 1
4.6, 3.4, 1.4, 0.3, Iris-setosa, 1
5, 3.4, 1.5, 0.2, Iris-setosa, 1
4.4, 2.9, 1.4, 0.2, Iris-setosa, 1
4.9, 3.1, 1.5, 0.1, Iris-setosa, 1

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   116 19-Jul-19   3:43:33 PM



Introduction to NumPy 117

5.5, 2.6, 4.4, 1.2, Iris-versicolor, 2 Notes
6.1, 3, 4.6, 1.4, Iris-versicolor, 2
5.8, 2.6, 4, 1.2, Iris-versicolor, 2
5, 2.3, 3.3, 1, Iris-versicolor, 2
5.6, 2.7, 4.2, 1.3, Iris-versicolor, 2
5.7, 3, 4.2, 1.2, Iris-versicolor, 2
5.7, 2.9, 4.2, 1.3, Iris-versicolor, 2
6.2, 2.9, 4.3, 1.3, Iris-versicolor, 2
5.1, 2.5, 3, 1.1, Iris-versicolor, 2
5.7, 2.8, 4.1, 1.3, Iris-versicolor, 2
6.9, 3.1, 5.4, 2.1, Iris-virginica, 3
6.7, 3.1, 5.6, 2.4, Iris-virginica, 3
6.9, 3.1, 5.1, 2.3, Iris-virginica, 3
5.8, 2.7, 5.1, 1.9, Iris-virginica, 3
6.8, 3.2, 5.9, 2.3, Iris-virginica, 3
6.7, 3.3, 5.7, 2.5, Iris-virginica, 3
6.7, 3, 5.2, 2.3, Iris-virginica, 3
6.3, 2.5, 5, 1.9, Iris-virginica, 3
6.5, 3, 5.2, 2, Iris-virginica, 3
6.2, 3.4, 5.4, 2.3, Iris-virginica, 3

1.	 Load the data in the file Iris.txt in a 2-D array called 
iris.

2.	 	Drop column whose index = 4 from the array iris.
3.	 	Display the shape, dimensions and size of iris.
4.	 	Split iris into three 2-D arrays, each array for a different 

species. Call them iris1, iris2, iris3.
5.	 	Print the three arrays iris1, iris2, iris3
6.	 	Create a 1-D array header having elements "sepal 

length", "sepal width", "petal length", "petal width", 
"Species No" in that order.

7.	 	Display the array header. 
8.	 	Find the max, min, mean and standard deviation for the 

columns of the iris and store the results in the arrays 
iris_max, iris_min, iris_avg, iris_std, iris_
var respectively. The results must be rounded to not 
more than two decimal places.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   117 19-Jul-19   3:43:33 PM



118 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 9.	 	Similarly find the max, min, mean and standard deviation 
for the columns of the iris1, iris2 and iris3 and 
store the results in the arrays with appropriate names. 

10.	 	Check the minimum value for sepal length, sepal width, 
petal length and petal width of the three species in 
comparison to the minimum value of sepal length, sepal 
width, petal length and petal width for the data set as a 
whole and fill the table below with True if the species value 
is greater than the dataset value and False otherwise.

Iris setosa Iris virginica Iris versicolor

sepal length

sepal width

petal length

petal width

11.	 	Compare Iris setosa’s average sepal width to that of Iris 
virginica. 

12.	 	Compare Iris setosa’s average petal length to that of Iris 
virginica. 

13.	 	Compare Iris setosa’s average petal width to that of Iris 
virginica. 

14.	 	Save the array iris_avg in a comma separated file 
named IrisMeanValues.txt on the hard disk.

15.	 	Save the arrays iris_max, iris_avg, iris_min in 
a comma separated file named IrisStat.txt on the 
hard disk.

Solutions to Case Study based Exercises
>>> import numpy as np

# Solution to Q1
>>> iris = np.genfromtxt('C:/NCERT/Iris.txt',skip_ 
    header=1, delimiter=',', dtype = float)

# Solution to Q2
>>> iris = iris[0:30,[0,1,2,3,5]] # drop column 4

# Solution to Q3
>>> iris.shape
(30, 5)
>>> iris.ndim

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   118 19-Jul-19   3:43:33 PM



Introduction to NumPy 119

2 Notes
>>> iris.size
150

# Solution to Q4
# Split into three arrays, each array for a different 
# species
>>> iris1, iris2, iris3 = np.split(iris, [10,20], 
    axis=0)

# Solution to Q5
# Print the three arrays
>>> iris1
array([[5.1, 3.5, 1.4, 0.2, 1. ],
       [4.9, 3. , 1.4, 0.2, 1. ],
       [4.7, 3.2, 1.3, 0.2, 1. ],
       [4.6, 3.1, 1.5, 0.2, 1. ],
       [5. , 3.6, 1.4, 0.2, 1. ],
       [5.4, 3.9, 1.7, 0.4, 1. ],
       [4.6, 3.4, 1.4, 0.3, 1. ],
       [5. , 3.4, 1.5, 0.2, 1. ],
       [4.4, 2.9, 1.4, 0.2, 1. ],
       [4.9, 3.1, 1.5, 0.1, 1. ]])

>>> iris2
array([[5.5, 2.6, 4.4, 1.2, 2. ],
       [6.1, 3. , 4.6, 1.4, 2. ],
       [5.8, 2.6, 4. , 1.2, 2. ],
       [5. , 2.3, 3.3, 1. , 2. ],
       [5.6, 2.7, 4.2, 1.3, 2. ],
       [5.7, 3. , 4.2, 1.2, 2. ],
       [5.7, 2.9, 4.2, 1.3, 2. ],
       [6.2, 2.9, 4.3, 1.3, 2. ],
       [5.1, 2.5, 3. , 1.1, 2. ],
       [5.7, 2.8, 4.1, 1.3, 2. ]])

>>> iris3
array([[6.9, 3.1, 5.4, 2.1, 3. ],
       [6.7, 3.1, 5.6, 2.4, 3. ],
       [6.9, 3.1, 5.1, 2.3, 3. ],
       [5.8, 2.7, 5.1, 1.9, 3. ],
       [6.8, 3.2, 5.9, 2.3, 3. ],
       [6.7, 3.3, 5.7, 2.5, 3. ],
       [6.7, 3. , 5.2, 2.3, 3. ],
       [6.3, 2.5, 5. , 1.9, 3. ],
       [6.5, 3. , 5.2, 2. , 3. ],
       [6.2, 3.4, 5.4, 2.3, 3. ]])

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   119 19-Jul-19   3:43:33 PM



120 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes # Solution to Q6
>>> header =np.array(["sepal length", "sepal 
     width", "petal length", "petal width",
     "Species No"])

# Solution to Q7
>>> print(header)
['sepal length' 'sepal width' 'petal length' 'petal 
width' 'Species No']

# Solution to Q8
# Stats for array iris
# Finds the max of the data for sepal length, sepal 
width, petal length, petal width, Species No
>>> iris_max = iris.max(axis=0)
>>> iris_max
array([6.9, 3.9, 5.9, 2.5, 3. ])

# Finds the min of the data for sepal length, sepal 
# width, petal length, petal width, Species No
>>> iris_min = iris.min(axis=0)
>>> iris_min
array([4.4, 2.3, 1.3, 0.1, 1. ])

# Finds the mean of the data for sepal length, sepal 
# width, petal length, petal width, Species No
>>> iris_avg = iris.mean(axis=0).round(2)
>>> iris_avg
array([5.68, 3.03, 3.61, 1.22, 2.  ])

# Finds the standard deviation of the data for sepal 
# length, sepal width, petal length, petal width, 
# Species No
>>> iris_std = iris.std(axis=0).round(2)
>>> iris_std
array([0.76, 0.35, 1.65, 0.82, 0.82])

# Solution to Q9
>>> iris1_max = iris1.max(axis=0)
>>> iris1_max
array([5.4, 3.9, 1.7, 0.4, 1. ])

>>> iris2_max = iris2.max(axis=0)
>>> iris2_max
array([6.2, 3. , 4.6, 1.4, 2. ])

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   120 19-Jul-19   3:43:33 PM



Introduction to NumPy 121

>>> iris3_max = iris3.max(axis=0) Notes
>>> iris3_max
array([6.9, 3.4, 5.9, 2.5, 3. ])

>>> iris1_min = iris1.min(axis=0)
>>> iris1_min
array([4.4, 2.9, 1.3, 0.1, 1. ])
>>> iris2_min = iris2.min(axis=0)
>>> iris2_min
array([5. , 2.3, 3. , 1. , 2. ])

>>> iris3_min = iris3.min(axis=0)
>>> iris3_min
array([5.8, 2.5, 5. , 1.9, 3. ])

>>> iris1_avg = iris1.mean(axis=0)
>>> iris1_avg
array([4.86, 3.31, 1.45, 0.22, 1.  ])

>>> iris2_avg = iris2.mean(axis=0)
>>> iris2_avg
array([5.64, 2.73, 4.03, 1.23, 2.  ])

>>> iris3_avg = iris3.mean(axis=0)
>>> iris3_avg
array([6.55, 3.04, 5.36, 2.2 , 3.  ])

>>> iris1_std = iris1.std(axis=0).round(2)
>>> iris1_std
array([0.28, 0.29, 0.1 , 0.07, 0.  ])

>>> iris2_std = iris2.std(axis=0).round(2)
>>> iris2_std
array([0.36, 0.22, 0.47, 0.11, 0.  ])

>>> iris3_std = iris3.std(axis=0).round(2)
>>> iris3_std
array([0.34, 0.25, 0.28, 0.2 , 0.  ])

# Solution to Q10 (solve other parts on the same lines)
# min sepal length of each species Vs the min sepal 
# length in the data set
>>> iris1_min[0] > iris_min[0]  #sepal length
False

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   121 19-Jul-19   3:43:33 PM



122 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes >>> iris2_min[0] > iris_min[0]
True
>>> iris3_min[0] > iris_min[0]
True

# Solution to Q11
#Compare Iris setosa and Iris virginica
>>> iris1_avg[1] > iris2_avg[1] #sepal width
True

# Solution to Q12
>>> iris1_avg[2] > iris2_avg[2] #petal length
False

# Solution to Q13
>>> iris1_avg[3] > iris2_avg[3] #petal width
False

# Solution to Q14
>>> np.savetxt('C:/NCERT/IrisMeanValues.txt',  
    iris_avg, delimiter = ',')

# Solution to Q15
>>> np.savetxt('C:/NCERT/IrisStat.txt', (iris_ 
    max, iris_avg, iris_min), delimiter=',')

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   122 19-Jul-19   3:43:33 PM



Database Chapter 
Concepts 7 

In this chapter
»» Introduction 
»» File System 

“Inconsistency of your mind… Can damage »» Database Management 
System

your memory… Remove the inconsistent 
»» Relational Data Model

data… And keep the original one !!!” 
»» Keys in a Relational 

Database 
— Nisarga Jain

7.1	 Introduction
After learning about importance of data in the 
previous chapter, we need to explore the methods 
to store and manage data electronically. Let us 
take an example of a school that maintains data 
about its students, along with their attendance 
record and guardian details.

The class teacher marks daily attendance of the 
students in the attendance register. The teacher 
records ‘P’ for present or ‘A’ for absent against 
each student’s roll number on each working day. 
If class strength is 50 and total working days in 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   123 19-Jul-19   3:45:07 PM



124 Informatics Practices – Class XI

a month are 26, the teacher needs to record 50 × 26 
records manually in the register every month. As the 
volume of data increases, manual data entry becomes 
tedious. Following are some of the limitations of manual 
record keeping in this example:
1)	 Entry of student details (Roll number and name) 

Activity 7.1 in the new attendance register when the student is 
Visit a few shops promoted to the next class.
where records are 2)	 Writing student details on each month’s attendance 
maintained manually page where inconsistency may happen due to 
and identify a few incorrectly written names, skipped student 
limitations of manual records, etc.
record keeping faced 3)	 Loss of data in case attendance register is lost or 
by them. damaged.

4)	 Erroneous calculation while consolidating 
attendance record manually.

The office staff also manually maintain Student 
details viz. Roll Number, Name and Date of Birth 
with respective guardian details viz. Guardian name, 
Contact Number and Address. This is required for 
correspondence with guardian regarding student 
attendance and result.

Finding information from a huge volume of papers 
or deleting/modifying an entry is a difficult task in pen 
and paper based approach. To overcome the hassles 
faced in manual record keeping, it is desirable to store 
attendance record and student details on separate data 
files on a computerized system, so that office staff and 
teachers can:
1)	 Simply copy the student details to the new 

attendance file from the old attendance file when 
students are promoted to next class.

2)	 Find any data about student or guardian.
3)	 Add more details to existing data whenever a new 

student joins the school.
4)	 Modify stored data like details of student or guardian 

whenever required.
5)	 Remove/delete data whenever a student leaves the 

school.

7.2	 File System
A file can be understood as a container to store data in 
a computer. Files can be stored on the storage device 
of a computer system. Contents of a file can be texts, 
computer program code, comma separated values 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   124 19-Jul-19   3:45:07 PM



##7##
Database Concepts 125

(CSV), etc. Likewise, pictures, audios/videos, web pages 
are also files.

Files stored on a computer can be accessed directly 
and searched for desired data. But to access data of a 
file through software, for example, to display monthly 
attendance report on school website, one has to write 
computer programs to access data from files.

Continuing the example of attendance at school, 
we need to store data about students and attendance 
in two separate files. Table 7.1 shows the contents of 
STUDENT file which has six columns, as detailed below: 
RollNumber 	 –	 Roll number of the student
SName 	 –	 Name of the student
SDateofBirth – 	 Date of birth of the student
GName 	 – 	Name of the guardian
GPhone 	 –	 Phone number of the student guardian
GAddress 	 – 	Address of the guardian of the student

Table 7.1 STUDENT file maintained by office staff
Roll

Number SName SDateof 
Birth GName GPhone GAddress

1 Atharv Ahuja 2003-05-15 Amit Ahuja 5711492685 G-35, Ashok Vihar, 
Delhi

2 Daizy Bhutia 2002-02-28 Baichung 3612967082 Flat no. 5, Darjeeling 
Bhutia Appt., Shimla

3 Taleem Shah 2002-02-28 Himanshu Shah 4726309212 26/77, West Patel 
Nagar, Ahmedabad

4 John Dsouza 2003-08-18 Danny Dsouza S -13, Ashok Village, 
Daman

5 Ali Shah 2003-07-05 Himanshu Shah 4726309212 26/77, West Patel 
Nagar, Ahmedabad

6 Manika P. 2002-03-10 Sujata P. 3801923168 HNO-13, B- block, Preet 
Vihar, Madurai

Table 7.2 shows another file called ATTENDANCE 
which has four columns, as detailed below: 
AttendanceDate 	 – Date for which attendance was 
  				        marked
RollNumber 	 –  Roll number of the student
SName		  –  Name of the student
AttendanceStatus – Marked as P (present) or A (absent)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   125 3/31/2023   3:44:54 PM



126 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Table 7.2 ATTENDANCE file maintained by class teacher
AttendanceDate RollNumber SName AttendanceStatus

2018-09-01 1 Atharv Ahuja P
2018-09-01 2 Daizy Bhutia P
2018-09-01 3 Taleem Shah A
2018-09-01 4 John Dsouza P
2018-09-01 5 Ali Shah A
2018-09-01 6 Manika P. P
2018-09-02 1 Atharv Ahuja P
2018-09-02 2 Daizy Bhutia P
2018-09-02 3 Taleem Shah A
2018-09-02 4 John Dsouza A
2018-09-02 5 Ali Shah P
2018-09-02 6 Manika P. P

7.2.1 Limitations of a File System
File system becomes difficult to handle when number of 
files increases and volume of data also grows. Following 
are some of the limitations of file system:
(A)	 Difficulty in Access
Files themselves do not provide any mechanism to 
retrieve data. Data maintained in a file system are 
accessed through application programs. While writing 
such programs, the developer may not anticipate all 
the possible ways in which data may be accessed. So, 
sometimes it is difficult to access data in the required 
format and one has to write application program to 
access data. 
(B)	 Data Redundancy
Redundancy means same data are duplicated in 
different places (files). In our example, student names 
are maintained in both the files. Besides, in Table 7.1, 
students with roll numbers 3 and 5 have same guardian 
name and therefore same guardian name is maintained 
twice. Both these are examples of redundancy which is 
difficult to avoid in a file system. Redundancy leads to 
excess storage use and may cause data inconsistency 
also.
(C)	 Data Inconsistency
Data inconsistency occurs when same data maintained 
in different places do not match. If a student wants to 
get changed the spelling of her name, it needs to be 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   126 19-Jul-19   3:45:07 PM



Database Concepts 127

changed in SName column in both the files. Likewise, if Notes
a student leaves school, the details need to be deleted 
from both the files. As the files are being maintained by 
different people, the changes may not happen in one of 
the files. In that case, the student name will be different 
(inconsistent) in both the files. 
(D)	 Data Isolation 
Both the files presented at Table 7.1 (STUDENT) and at 
Table 7.2 (ATTENDANCE) are related to students. But 
there is no link or mapping between them. The school 
will have to write separate programs to access these two 
files. This is because data mapping is not supported in 
file system. In a more complex system where data files 
are generated by different person at different times, files 
being created in isolation may be of different formats. 
In such case, it is difficult to write new application 
programs to retrieve data from different files maintained 
at multiple places, as one has to understand the 
underlying structure of each file as well.
(E)	 Data Dependence
Data are stored in a specific format or structure in a 
file. If the structure or format itself is changed, all the 
existing application programs accessing that file also 
need to be change. Otherwise, the programs may not 
work correctly. This is data dependency. Hence, updating 
the structure of a data file requires modification in all 
the application programs accessing that file.
(F)	 Controlled Data Sharing
There can be different category of users like teacher, 
office staff and parents. Ideally, not every user should 
be able to access all the data. As an example, guardians 
and office staff can only see the student attendance data 
but should not be able to modify/delete it. It means 
these users should be given limited access (read only) 
to the ATTENDANCE file. Only the teacher should be 
able to update the attendance data. It is very difficult to 
enforce this kind of access control in a file system while 
accessing files through application programs.

7.3	D atabase Management System
Limitations faced in file system can be overcome by 
storing the data in a database where data are logically 
related. We can organise related data in a database so 
that it can be managed in an efficient and easy way.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   127 19-Jul-19   3:45:07 PM



128 Informatics Practices – Class XI

A database management system (DBMS) or database 
system in short, is a software that can be used to 
create and manage databases. DBMS lets users to 
create a database, store, manage, update/modify and 
retrieve data from that database by users or application 
programs. Some examples of open source and 
commercial DBMS include MySQL, Oracle, PostgreSQL, 
SQL Server, Microsoft Access, MongoDB.

A database system hides certain details about 
how data are actually stored and maintained. Thus, 
it provides users with an abstract view of the data. A 
database system has a set of programs through which 
users or other programs can access, modify and retrieve 
the stored data.

The DBMS serves as an interface between the 
database and end users or application programs. 

Some database 
management systems Retrieving data from a database through special type of 
include a graphical commands is called querying the database. In addition, 

user interface for users users can modify the structure of the database itself 
to create and manage through a DBMS. 

databases. Other Databases are widely used in various fields. Some 
database systems use a 
command line interface applications are given in Table 7.3.

that requires users Table 7.3 Use of Database in Real-life Applications
to use programming Application Database to maintain data about
commands to create 

and manage databases. Banking customer information, account details, loan details, 
transaction details, etc.

Crop Loan kisan credit card data, farmer’s personal data, land 
area and cultivation data, loan history, repayment 
data, etc.

Inventory product details, customer information, order details, 
Management delivery data, etc. 
Organisation employee records, salary details, department 
Resource information, branch locations, etc.
Management
Online items description, user login details, users 
Shopping preferences details, etc.

7.3.1	File System to DBMS
Let us revisit our school example where two data files 
were maintained (Table 7.1 by office and Table 7.2 by 
teacher). Let us now design a database to store data of 
those two files. We know that tables in a database are 
linked or related through one or more common columns 
or fields. In our example, the STUDENT (Table 7.1) file 
and ATTENDANCE (Table 7.2) file have RollNumber 
and SName as common field names. In order to convert 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   128 19-Jul-19   3:45:07 PM



Database Concepts 129

these two files into a database, we need to incorporate 
the following changes:
a)	 SName need not be maintained in ATTENDANCE 

file as it is already there in STUDENT. Details for a 
student can be retrieved through the common field 
RollNumber in both the files.

b)	 If two siblings are in the same class, then same 
guardian details (GName, GPhone and GAddress) 
are maintained for both the siblings. We know this High Cost is incurred 
is a redundancy and by using a database we can while shifting from file 
avoid this. So let us split the STUDENT file into two system to DBMS: 

file (STUDENT file and GUARDIAN) file so that each •	Purchasing 
guardian data are maintained only once. sophisticated 

hardware and 
c)	 One and more guardians can have the same name. software. 

So it will not be possible to identify which guardian •	Training users for 
is related to which student. In such case, we need querying.
to create an additional column, say GUID (Guardian •	Recurrent cost to 
ID) that will take unique value for each record in take regular backup 
the GUARDIAN file. The column GUID will also be and perform recovery 
kept with STUDENT file for relating these two files. operations.

Note: We could distinguish guardians by their phone numbers 
also. But, phone number can change, and therefore may not 
truly distinguish guardian.

Figure 7.1 shows the related data files for the 
STUDENT, GUARDIAN and ATTENDANCE details. Note 
that this is not the complete database schema since it 
does not show any relationship among tables.

STUDENT GUARDIAN ATTENDANCE
RollNumber GUID AttendanceDate
SName GName RollNumber
SDateofBirth GPhone AttendanceStatus
GUID GAddress

Figure 7.1:	Record structure of three files in 
STUDENTATTENDANCE Database

The tables shown at Figure 7.1 are empty, which are 
to be populated with actual data as shown in Table 7.4, 
7.5 and 7.6. 

Table 7.4 Snapshot of STUDENT table
RollNumber SName SDateofBirth GUID

1 Atharv Ahuja 2003-05-15 444444444444
2 Daizy Bhutia 2002-02-28 111111111111

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   129 19-Jul-19   3:45:07 PM



130 Informatics Practices – Class XI

3 Taleem Shah 2002-02-28
4 John Dsouza 2003-08-18 333333333333
5 Ali Shah 2003-07-05 101010101010
6 Manika P. 2002-03-10 466444444666

Table 7.5 Snapshot of GUARDIAN table
GUID GName GPhone GAddress

444444444444 Amit Ahuja 5711492685 G-35, Ashok Vihar, Delhi
111111111111 Baichung Bhutia 3612967082 Flat no. 5, Darjeeling Appt., Shimla
101010101010 Himanshu Shah 4726309212 26/77, West Patel Nagar, Ahmedabad
333333333333 Danny Dsouza S -13, Ashok Village, Daman
466444444666 Sujata P. 3801923168 HNO-13, B- block, Preet Vihar, Madurai

Table 7.6 Snapshot of ATTENDANCE table
Date RollNumber Status

2018-09-01 1 P
2018-09-01 2 P
2018-09-01 3 A
2018-09-01 4 P
2018-09-01 5 A
2018-09-01 6 P
2018-09-02 1 P
2018-09-02 2 P
2018-09-02 3 A
2018-09-02 4 A
2018-09-02 5 P
2018-09-02 6 P

 Figure 7.2 shows a simplified database called 
STUDENTATTENDANCE, which is used to maintain 
data about the student, guardian and attendance. As 
shown here, the DBMS maintains a single repository 
of data at a centralized location and can be used by 
multiple users (office staff, teacher) at the same time.
7.3.2	Key Concepts in DBMS
In order to efficiently manage data using a DBMS, let us 
understand certain key terms: 
(A)	 Database Schema 
Database Schema is the design of a database. It is the 
skeleton of the database that represents the structure 
(table names and their fields/columns), the type of data 
each column can hold, constraints on the data to be 
stored (if any), and the relationships among the tables. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   130 3/31/2023   3:56:48 PM



Database Concepts 131

Teacher Office Staff

DBMS Software processes Query
DBMS Software access database and its definition

Student 
Database 

Guardian Catalog

Attendance

Figure 7.3:	StudentAttendance Database Environment

Database schema is also called the visual or logical 
architecture as it tells us how the data are organised in 
a database. 
(B)	 Data Constraint
Sometimes we put certain restrictions or limitations on 
the type of data that can be inserted in one or more 
columns of a table. This is done by specifying one or 
more constraints on that column(s) while creating the 
tables. For example, one can define the constraint that 
the column mobile number can only have non-negative 
integer values of exactly 10 digits. Since each student 
shall have one unique roll number, we can put the NOT 
NULL and UNIQUE constraints on the RollNumber 
column. Constraints are used to ensure accuracy and 
reliability of data in the database
(C)	 Meta-data or Data Dictionary
The database schema along with various constraints on the 
data is stored by DBMS in a database catalog or dictionary, 
called meta-data. A meta-data is data about the data.
(D)	 Database Instance
When we define database structure or schema, state 
of database is empty i.e. no data entry is there. After 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   131 19-Jul-19   3:45:08 PM

Query Result

Query

Query Result

Que
ry



132 Informatics Practices – Class XI

loading data, the state or snapshot of the database 
at any given time is the database instance. We may 
then retrieve data through queries or manipulate data 
through updation, modification or deletion. Thus, the 
state of database can change, and thus a database 
schema can have many instances at different times. 
(E)	 Query
A query is a request to a database for obtaining 
information in a desired way. Query can be made to get 
data from one table or from a combination of tables. For 
example, “find names of all those students present on 
Attendance Date 2000-01-02” is a query to the database. 
To retrieve or manipulate data, the user needs to write 
query using a query language called, which is discussed 
in chapter 8.
(F)	 Data Manipulation

Limitations of DBMS Modification of database consists of three operations 
Increased Complexity: viz. Insertion, Deletion or Update. Suppose Rivaan joins 

Use of DBMS increases as a new student in the class then the student details 
the complexity need to be added in STUDENT as well as in GUARDIAN 
of maintaining 

functionalities like files of the Student Attendance database. This is called 
security, consistency, Insertion operation on the database. In case a student 
sharing and integrity leaves the school, then his/her data as well as her 

guardian details need to be removed from STUDENT, 
Increased data GUARDIAN and ATTENDANCE files, respectively. This 
vulnerability: 

As data are stored is called Deletion operation on the database. Suppose 
centrally, it increases Atharv’s Guardian has changed his mobile number, his 
the chances of loss GPhone should be updated in GUARDIAN file. This is 
of data due to any called Update operation on the database.

failure of hardware or 
software. It can bring (G)	 Database Engine
all operations to a halt Database engine is the underlying component or set of 

for all the users. programs used by a DBMS to create database and handle 
various queries for data retrieval and manipulation. 

7.4	R elational Data Model
Different types of DBMS are available and their 
classification is done based on the underlying data model. 
A data model describes the structure of the database, 
including how data are defined and represented, 
relationships among data, and the constraints. The most 
commonly used data model is Relational Data Model. 
Other types of data models include object-oriented data 
model, entity-relationship data model, document model 
and hierarchical data model. This book discusses the 
DBMS based on relational data model.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   132 19-Jul-19   3:45:08 PM



Database Concepts 133

In relational model, tables are called relations that 
store data for different columns. Each table can have 
multiple columns where each column name should be 
unique. For example, each row in the table represents a 
related set of values. Each row of Table 7.5 represents a 
particular guardian and has related values viz. guardian’s 
ID with guardian name, address and phone number. 
Thus, a table consists of a collection of relationships.

It is important to note here that relations in a database 
are not independent tables, but are associated with each 
other. For example, relation ATTENDANCE has attribute 
RollNumber which links it with corresponding student 
record in relation STUDENT. Similarly, attribute GUID 
is placed with STUDENT table for extracting guardian 
details of a particular student. If linking attributes are 
not there in appropriate relations, it will not be possible 
to keep the database in correct state and retrieve valid 
information from the database.

Figure 7.3 shows the relational database Student 
Attendance along with the three relations (tables) 
STUDENT, ATTENDANCE and GUARDIAN.

Figure 7.4:	Representing StudentAttendance Database using Relational Data Model

Table 7.7 Relation schemas along with its description of Student Attendance 
database

Relation Scheme Description of attributes
STUDENT(RollNumber, RollNumber: unique id of the student
SName, SDateofBirth, SName: name of the student
GUID) SDateofBirth: date of  birth of the student

GUID: unique id of the guardian of the student
ATTENDANCE AttendanceDate: date on which attendance is taken
(AttendanceDate, RollNumber: roll number of the student
RollNumber, AttendanceStatus: whether present (P) or absent(A)
AttendanceStatus) Note that combination of AttendanceDate and RollNumber will be unique 

in each record of the table
GUARDIAN(GUID, GUID: unique id of the guardian
GName, GPhone, GName: name of the guardian
GAddress) GPhone: contact number of the guardian

GAddress: contact address of the guardian

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   133 19-Jul-19   3:45:08 PM



134 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Each tuple (row) in a relation (table) corresponds 
to data of a real world entity (for example, Student, 
Guardian, and Attendance). In the GUARDIAN relation 
(Table 7.5), each row represents the facts about the 
guardian and each column name in the GUARDIAN table 
is used to interpret the meaning of data stored under that 
column. A database that is modeled on relational data 
model concept is called Relational Database. Figure 7.4 
shows relation GUARDIAN with some populated data. 

Let us now understand the commonly used 
terminologies in relational data model using Figure 7.4.

Relation Guardian 
with 4 attribute/
columns

GUID GName GPhone GAddress
444444444444 Amit Ahuja 5711492685 G-35, Ashok Vihar, Delhi
111111111111 Baichung Bhutia 3612967082 Flat no. 5, Darjeeling Appt., Shimla
101010101010 Himanshu Shah 4726309212 26/77, West Patel Nagar, Ahmedabad
333333333333 Danny Dsouza S -13, Ashok Village, Daman
466444444666 Sujata P. 3801923168 HNO-13, B- block, Preet Vihar, Madurai

Facts about RELATION GUARDIAN:
1.	 Degree (Number of attributes) = 4 Record/tuple/row
2.	 Cardinality (Number of rows/tuples/records) = 5
3.	 Relation is a flat file i.e, each column has a single value and each record 

has same number of columns
Figure 7.5:	Relation GUARDIAN with its Attributes and Tuples

i)	 ATTRIBUTE: Characteristic or parameters for 
which data are to be stored in a relation. Simply 
stated, the columns of a relation are the attributes 
which are also referred as fields. For example, GUID, 
GName, GPhone and GAddress are attributes of 
relation GUARDIAN.

ii)	 TUPLE: Each row of data in a relation (table) is 
called a tuple. In a table with n columns, a tuple is 
a relationship between the n related values. 

iii)	 DOMAIN:  It is a set of values from which an 
attribute can take a value in each row. Usually, a 
data type is used to specify domain for an attribute. 
For example, in STUDENT relation, the attribute 
RollNumber takes integer values and hence its 
domain is a set of integer values. Similarly, the set 
of character strings constitutes the domain of the 
attribute SName.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   134 3/31/2023   4:13:04 PM

Relation 
State



Database Concepts 135

iv)	 DEGREE: The number of attributes in a relation Notes
is called the Degree of the relation. For example, 
relation GUARDIAN with four attributes is a relation 
of degree 4. 

v)	 CARDINALITY: The number of tuples in a relation 
is called the Cardinality of the relation. For example, 
the cardinality of relation GUARDIAN is 5 as there 
are 5 tuples in the table.

7.4.1	Three Important Properties of a Relation
In relational data model, following three properties 
are observed with respect to a relation which makes a 
relation different from a data file or a simple table.   
Property 1: imposes following rules on an attribute of 
the relation.

•	 Each attribute in a relation has a unique name. 
•	 Sequence of attributes in a relation is immaterial.

Property 2: governs following rules on a tuple of a 
relation.

•	 Each tuple in a relation is distinct. For example, data 
values in no two tuples of relation ATTENDANCE 
can be identical for all the attributes. Thus, each 
tuple of a relation must be uniquely identified by 
its contents.

•	 Sequence of tuples in a relation is immaterial. 
The tuples are not considered to be ordered, even 
though they appear to be in tabular form.

Property 3: imposes following rules on the state of a 
relation.

•	 All data values in an attribute must be from the 
same domain (same data type). 

•	 Each data value associated with an attribute 
must be atomic (cannot be further divisible into 
meaningful subparts). For example, GPhone of 
relation GUARDIAN has ten digit numbers which 
is indivisible.

•	 No attribute can have many data values in one 
tuple. For example, Guardian cannot specify 
multiple contact numbers under GPhone attribute. 

•	 A special value “NULL” is used to represent 
values that are unknown or non-applicable to 
certain attributes. For example, if a guardian does 
not share his or her contact number with the 
school authorities, then GPhone is set to NULL 
(data unknown). 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   135 19-Jul-19   3:45:08 PM



136 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 7.5	 Keys in a Relational Database  
The tuples within a relation must be distinct. It means no two 
tuples in a table should have same value for all attributes. 
That is, there should be at least one attribute in which 
data are distinct (unique) and not NULL. That way, we can 
uniquely distinguish each tuple of a relation. So, relational 
data model imposes some restrictions or constraints on the 
values of the attributes and how the contents of one relation 
be referred through another relation. These restrictions 
are specified at the time of defining the database through 
different types of keys as given below:
7.5.1	Candidate Key
A relation can have one or more attributes that takes 
distinct values. Any of these attributes can be used to 
uniquely identify the tuples in the relation. Such attributes 
are called candidate keys as each of them are candidates 
for the primary key.

As shown in Figure 7.4, the relation GUARDIAN has 
four attributes out of which GUID and GPhone always take 
unique values. No two guardians will have same phone 
number or same GUID. Hence, these two attributes are the 
candidate keys as they both are candidates for primary key.
7.5.2	Primary Key
Out of one or more candidate keys, the attribute chosen 
by the database designer to uniquely identify the tuples 
in a relation is called the primary key of that relation. The 
remaining attributes in the list of candidate keys are called 
the alternate keys.

In the relation GUARDIAN, suppose GUID is chosen as 
primary key, then GPhone will be called the alternate key.
7.5.3	Composite Primary Key
If no single attribute in a relation is able to uniquely 
distinguish the tuples, then more than one attribute are 
taken together as primary key. Such primary key consisting 
of more than one attribute is called Composite Primary key. 

In relation ATTENDANCE, Roll Number cannot be used 
as primary key as roll number of same student will appear 
in another row for a different date. Similarly, in relation 
Attendance, AttendanceDate cannot be used as primary 
key because same date is repeated for each roll number. 
However combination of these two attributes RollNumber and 
AttendanceDate together would always have unique value in 
ATTENDANCE table as on any working day, of  a student 
would be marked attendance only once. Hence {RollNumber, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   136 19-Jul-19   3:45:08 PM



Database Concepts 137

AttendanceDate} will make the of ATTENDANCE relation 
composite primary key. 
7.5.4	Foreign Key
A foreign key is used to represent the relationship between 
two relations. A foreign key is an attribute whose value 
is derived from the primary key of another relation. This 
means that any attribute of a relation (referencing), 
which is used to refer contents from another (referenced) 
relation, becomes foreign key if it refers to the primary key 
of referenced relation. The referencing relation is called 
Foreign Relation. In some cases, foreign key can take NULL 
value if it is not the part of primary key of the foreign table. 
The relation in which the referenced primary key is defined 
is called primary relation or master relation. 

In Figure 7.5, two foreign keys in Student Attendance 
database are shown using schema diagram where the foreign 
key is displayed as a directed arc (arrow) originating from it 
and ending at the corresponding attribute of the primary 
key of the referenced table.  The underlined attributes make 
the primary key of that table.

STUDENT RollNumber SName SDateofBirth GUID

GUARDIAN GUID GName GPhone GAddress

ATTENDANCE AttendanceDate RollNumber AttendanceStatus

Figure 7.2:	StudentAttendance Database with the Primary and Foreign keys

Summary
•	 A file in a file system is a container to store data in a 

computer.
•	 File system suffers from Data Redundancy, Data 

Inconsistency, Data Isolation, Data Dependence and 
Controlled Data sharing.

•	 Database Management System (DBMS) is a software 
to create and manage databases. A database is a 
collection of tables.

•	 Database schema is the design of a database
•	 A database constraint is a restriction on the type of 

data that that can be inserted into the table.
•	 Database schema and database constraints are stored 

in database Catalog.
Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   137 19-Jul-19   3:45:08 PM



138 Informatics Practices – Class XI

•	 Whereas the snapshot of the database at any given 
time is the database instance.

•	 A query is a request to a database for information 
retrieval and data manipulation (insertion, deletion or 
update). It is written in Structured Query Language 
(SQL).

•	 Relational DBMS (RDBMS) is used to store data in 
related tables. Rows and columns of a table are called 
tuples and attributed respectively. A table is referred 
to as a relation.

•	 Destructions on data stored in a RDBMS is applied 
by use of keys such as Candidate Key, Primary Key, 
Composite Primary Key, Foreign Key.

•	 Primary key in a relation is used for unique identification 
of tuples.

•	 Foreign key is used to relate two tables or relations.
•	 Each column in a table represents a feature (attribute) 

of a record. Table stores the information for an entity 
whereas a row represents a record. 

•	 Each row in a table represents a record. A tuple is 
a collection of attribute values that makes a record 
unique. 

•	 A tuple is a unique entity whereas attribute values can 
be duplicate in the table.

•	 SQL is the standard language for RDBMS systems like 
MySQL. 

Exercise
1.	 Give the terms for each of the following:

a)	 Collection of logically related records.
b)	 DBMS creates a file that contains description about the 

data stored in the database.
c)	 Attribute that can uniquely identify the tuples in a 

relation.
d)	 Special value that is stored when actual data value is 

unknown for an attribute.
e)	 An attribute which can uniquely identify tuples of the 

table but is not defined as primary key of the table.
f)	 Software that is used to create, manipulate and maintain 

a relational database.
2.	 Why foreign keys are allowed to have NULL values? Explain 

with an example.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   138 19-Jul-19   3:45:08 PM



Database Concepts 139

3.	 Differentiate between: Notes
a)	 Database state and database schema
b)	 Primary key and foreign key
c)	 Degree and cardinality of a relation

4.	 Compared to a file system, how does a database management 
system avoid redundancy in data through a database?

5.	 What are the limitations of file system that can be overcome 
by a relational DBMS?

6.	 A school has a rule that each student must participate in a 
sports activity. So each one should give only one preference 
for sports activity. Suppose there are five students in a class, 
each having a unique roll number. The class representative 
has prepared a list of sports preferences as shown below. 
Answer the following:

Table: Sports Preferences
Roll_no Preference

9 Cricket
13 Football
17 Badminton
17 Football
21 Hockey
24 NULL

NULL Kabaddi
a)	 Roll no 24 may not be interested in sports. Can a NULL 

value be assigned to that student’s preference field?
b)	 Roll no 17 has given two preferences sports. Which 

property of relational DBMC is violated here? Can we use 
any constraint or key in the relational DBMS to check 
against such violation, if any?

c)	 Kabaddi was not chosen by any student. Is it possible to 
have this tuple in the Sports Preferences relation?

7.	 In another class having 2 sections, the two respective class 
representatives have prepared 2 separate Sports Preferences 
tables, as shown below: 
Sports preference of section 1 (arranged on roll number column)

Table: Sports Preferences
Roll_no Sports

9 Cricket
13 Football
17 Badminton
21 Hockey
24 Cricket

Sports preference of section 2 (arranged on Sports name 
column, and column order is also different)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   139 19-Jul-19   3:45:08 PM



140 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes Table: Sports Preferences
Sports Roll_no

Badminton 17
Cricket 9
Cricket 24
Football 13
Hockey 21

Are the states of both the relations equivalent? 
Justify.

8.	 The school canteen wants to maintain records of items 
available in the school canteen and generate bills when 
students purchase any item from the canteen. The school 
wants to create a canteen database to keep track of items 
in the canteen and the items purchased by students. 
Design a database by answering the following questions:
a)	 To store each item name along with its price, what 

relation should be used? Decide appropriate attribute 
names along with their data type. Each item and its 
price should be stored only once. What restriction 
should be used while defining the relation?

b)	 In order to generate bill, we should know the quantity 
of an item purchased. Should this information be in 
a new relation or a part of the previous relation? If 
a new relation is required, decide appropriate name 
and data type for attributes. Also, identify appropriate 
primary key and foreign key so that the following  two 
restrictions are satisfied:
i)	 The same bill cannot be generated for different 

orders. 
ii)	 Bill can be generated only for available items in 

the canteen. 
c)	 The school wants to find out how many calories 

students intake when they order an item. In which 
relation should the attribute ‘calories’ be stored? 

9.	 An organisation wants to create a database EMP-
DEPENDENT to maintain following details about its 
employees and their dependent.

EMPLOYEE(AadharNumber, Name, Address, 
Department,EmployeeID)

DEPENDENT(EmployeeID, DependentName, 
Relationship)

a)	 Name the attributes of EMPLOYEE, which can be 
used as candidate keys.

b)	 The company wants to retrieve details of dependent 
of a particular employee. Name the tables and the 
key which are required to retrieve this detail.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   140 19-Jul-19   3:45:08 PM



Database Concepts 141

c)	 What is the degree of EMPLOYEE and DEPENDENT 
relation?

10.	School uniform is available at M/s Sheetal Private 
Limited. They have maintained SCHOOL_UNIFORM 
Database with two relations viz. UNIFORM and COST. 
The following figure shows database schema and its state.

School Uniform Database

Attributes and Constraints Table: 
UCode Size COST Price

Table: UNIFORM 1 M 500
Attribute UCode UName UColor 1 L 580

Constraints Primary Key Not Null - 1 XL 620
2 M 810

Table: COST 2 L 890
Attribute UCode Size Price 2 XL 940

Constraints Composite Primary Key >0 3 M 770
3 L 830

Table: UNIFORM 3 XL 910
UCode UName UColor 4 S 150

1 Shirt White 4 L 170
2 Pant Grey 5 S 180
3  Skirt Grey 5 L 210
4 Tie Blue 6 M 110
5 Socks Blue 6 L 140
6 Belt Blue 6 XL 160

a)	 Can they insert the following tuples to the UNIFORM 
Relation? Give reasons in support of your answer.  
i)	 7, Handkerchief, NULL
ii)	 4, Ribbon, Red
iii)	 8, NULL, White

b)	 Can they insert the following tuples to the COST 
Relation? Give reasons in support of your answer.
i)	 7, S, 0
ii)	 9, XL,  100

11.	In a multiplex, movies are screened in different 
auditoriums. One movie can be shown in more than one 
auditorium. In order to maintain the record of movies, 
the multiplex maintains a relational database consisting 
of two relations viz. MOVIE and AUDI respectively as 
shown below:
Movie(Movie_ID, MovieName, ReleaseDate)

Audi(AudiNo, Movie_ID, Seats, ScreenType, 
TicketPrice)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   141 19-Jul-19   3:45:08 PM



142 Informatics Practices – Class XI

a)	 Is it correct to assign Movie_ID as the primary 
key in the MOVIE relation? If no, then suggest an 
appropriate primary key. 

b)	 Is it correct to assign AudiNo as the primary key in 
the AUDI relation? If no, then suggest appropriate 
primary key. 

c)	 Is there any foreign key in any of these relations?

Student Project Database

Table: STUDENT
Roll No Name Class Section Registration_ID

11 Mohan XI 1 IP-101-15
12 Sohan XI 2 IP-104-15
21 John XII 1 CS-103-14

Table: PROJECT ASSIGNED
22 Meena XII 2 CS-101-14

Registration_ID ProjectNo
23 Juhi XII 2 CS-101-10

IP-101-15 101
Table: PROJECT IP-104-15 103
ProjectNo PName SubmissionDate CS-103-14 102

101 Airline Database 12/01/2018 CS-101-14 105
102 Library Database 12/01/2018 CS-101-10 104
103 Employee Database 15/01/2018
104 Student Database 12/01/2018
105 Inventory Database 15/01/2018
106 Railway Database 15/01/2018

12.	For the above given database STUDENT-PROJECT, 
answer the following: 
a)	 Name primary key of each table.
b)	 Find foreign key(s) in table PROJECT-ASSIGNED.
c)	 Is there any alternate key in table STUDENT? Give 

justification for your answer.
d)	 Can a user assign duplicate value to the field RollNo 

of STUDENT table? Jusify.
13.	For the above given database STUDENT-PROJECT,  can 

we perform the following operations? 
a)	 Insert a student record with missing roll number 

value.
b)	 Insert a student record with missing registration 

number value.
c)	 Insert a project detail without submission-date.
d)	 Insert a record with registration ID IP-101-19 and 

ProjectNo  206 in table PROJECT-ASSIGNED.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 7.indd   142 19-Jul-19   3:45:08 PM



Introduction to Chapter 
Structured Query 8 

Language (SQL) 

In this chapter
»» Introduction 
»» Structured Query 

“The most important motivation for the Language (SQL)  
research work that resulted in the relational »» Data Types and 
model was the objective of providing a sharp Constraints in MySQL
and clear boundary between the logical and »» SQL for Data Definition
physical aspects of database management.” »» SQL for Data 

Manipulation
– E. F. Codd »» SQL for Data Query

»» Data Updation and 
Deletion

8.1	 Introduction

We have learnt about Relational Database 
Management System (RDBMS) and purpose in the 
previous chapter. There are many RDBMS such 
as MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server, PostgreSQL, 
Oracle, etc. that allow us to create a database 
consisting of relations and to link one or more 
relations for efficient querying to store, retrieve 
and manipulate data on that database. In this 
chapter, we will learn how to create, populate and 
query database using MySQL.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   143 19-Jul-19   3:45:57 PM



144 Informatics Practices – Class XI

8.2	 Structured Query Language (SQL) 
One has to write application programs to access data in 
case of a file system. However, for database management 
systems there are special kind of programming 
languages called query language that can be used to 
access data from the database. The Structured Query 
Language (SQL) is the most popular query language 
used by major relational database management systems 
such as MySQL, ORACLE, SQL Server, etc.

SQL is easy to learn as the statements comprise of 
descriptive English words and are not case sensitive. 
We can create and interact with a database using SQL 
in an efficient and easy way. The benefit with SQL is 
that we don’t have to specify how to get the data from 
the database. Rather, we simply specify what is to be 
retrieved, and SQL does the rest. Although called a query 
language, SQL can do much more besides querying. 
SQL provides statements for defining the structure of 
the data, manipulating data in the database, declare 
constraints and retrieve data from the database in 
various ways, depending on our requirements.

In this chapter, we will learn how to create a database 
using MySQL as the RDBMS software. We will create a 
database called StudentAttendance (Figure 7.5) that we 
had identified in the previous chapter. We will also learn 
how to populate database with data, manipulate data in 
that and retrieve data from the database through SQL 
queries.
8.2.1	Installing MySQL
MySQL is an open source RDBMS software which can 
be easily downloaded from the official website https://
dev.mysql.com/downloads. After installing MySQL, 
start MySQL service. The appearance of mysql> prompt 
(Figure 8.1) means that MySQL is ready for us to enter 
SQL statements.

Few rules to follow while writing SQL statements in 
MySQL:

Activity 8.1 •	 SQL is case insensitive. That means name and NAME 
are same for SQL.

Explore LibreOffice 
Base and compare it •	 Always end SQL statements with a semicolon (;). 
with MySQL •	 To enter multiline SQL statements, we don’t write 

‘;’ after the first line. We put enter to continue on 
next line. The prompt mysql> then changes to ‘->’, 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   144 19-Jul-19   3:45:57 PM



##8##
Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 145

indicating that statement is continued to the next 
line. After the last line, put ‘;’ and press enter.  

8.3	D ata Types and Constraints in MySQL

Figure 8.1:	MySQL Shell

We know that a database consists of one or more 
relations and each relation (table) is made up of attributes Activity 8.2
(column). Each attribute has a data type. We can also What are the other 
specify constraints for each attribute of a relation. data types supported in 

MySQL? Are there other 
8.3.1	Data type of Attribute variants of integer and 

float data type?
Data type indicates the type of data value that an 
attribute can have. The data type of an attribute decides 
the operations that can be performed on the data of 
that attribute. For example, arithmetic operations can Think and Reflect
be performed on numeric data but not on character Can you think of an 

attribute for which 
data. Commonly used data types in MySQL are numeric fixed length string is 
types, date and time types, and string (character and suitable?
byte) types as shown in Table 8.1.

Table 8.1 Commonly used data types in MySQL
Data type Description

CHAR(n) Specifies character type data of length n where n could be any value from 0 to 
255. CHAR is of fixed length, means, declaring CHAR (10) implies to reserve 
spaces for 10 characters. If data does not have 10 characters (for example, 
‘city’ has four characters), MySQL fills the remaining 6 characters with spaces 
padded on the right.

VARCHAR(n) Specifies character type data of length ‘n’ where n could be any value from 0 
to 65535. But unlike CHAR, VARCHAR is a variable-length data type. That is, 
declaring VARCHAR (30) means a maximum of 30 characters can be stored 
but the actual allocated bytes will depend on the length of entered string. So 
‘city’ in VARCHAR (30) will occupy the space needed to store 4 characters only.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   145 19-Jul-19   3:45:57 PM



146 Informatics Practices – Class XI

INT INT specifies an integer value. Each INT value occupies 4 bytes of storage. The 
range of values allowed in integer type are -2147483648 to 2147483647. For 
values larger than that, we have to use BIGINT, which occupies 8 bytes.

FLOAT Holds numbers with decimal points. Each FLOAT value occupies 4 bytes.

DATE The DATE type is used for dates in 'YYYY-MM-DD' format. YYYY is the 4 digit 
year, MM is the 2 digit month and DD is the 2 digit date. The supported range 
is '1000-01-01' to '9999-12-31'.

8.3.2	Constraints
Think and Reflect

Which two constraints Constraints are certain types of restrictions on the data 
when applied together values that an attribute can have. They are used to 
will produce a Primary ensure the accuracy and reliability of data. However, it 
Key constraint? is not mandatory to define constraint for each attribute 

of a table. Table 8.2 lists various SQL constraints.
Table 8.2 Commonly used SQL Constraints

Constraint Description
NOT NULL Ensures that a column cannot have NULL values where NULL means missing/

unknown/not applicable value.
UNIQUE Ensures that all the values in a column are distinct/unique.
DEFAULT A default value specified for the column if no value is provided.

PRIMARY KEY The column which can uniquely identify each row or record in a table.
FOREIGN KEY The column which refers to value of an attribute defined as primary key in another 

table.

8.4	 SQL for Data Definition

SQL provides commands for defining the relation 
schemas, modifying relation schemas and deleting 
relations. These are called Data Definition Language 
(DDL) through which the set of relations are specified, 
including their schema, data type for each attribute, the 
constraints as well as the security and access related 
authorisations.

Data definition starts with the create statement. This 
statement is used to create a database and its tables 
(relations). Before creating a database, we should be 
clear about the number of tables in the database, the 
columns (attributes) in each table along with the data 
type of each column. This is how we decide the relation 
schema.
8.4.1	CREATE Database
To create a database, we use the CREATE DATABASE 
statement as shown in the following syntax:

CREATE DATABASE databasename;

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   146 19-Jul-19   3:45:57 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 147

To create a database called StudentAttendance, we 
will type following command at mysql prompt.

mysql> CREATE DATABASE StudentAttendance;
Query OK, 1 row affected (0.02 sec)

Note: In LINUX environment, names for database and tables 
are case-sensitive whereas in WINDOWS, there is no such Show
differentiation. However, as a good practice, it is suggested to write 
database or table name in the same letter cases that were used at 
the time of their creation.

A DBMS can manage multiple databases on one 
computer. Therefore, we need to select the database 
that we want to use. Once the database is selected, we 
can proceed with creating tables or querying data. Write 
the following SQL statement for using the database: 

mysql> USE StudentAttendance;
Database changed Activity 8.3

Initially, the created database is empty. It can be Type the statement 
checked by using the Show tables command that lists show database;.  Does 
names of all the tables within a database. it show the name of 

StudentAttendance 
mysql> SHOW TABLES; database?
Empty set (0.06 sec)

8.4.2	CREATE Table
After creating database StudentAttendance, we need 
to define relations (create tables) in this database and 
specify attributes for each relation along with data types 
for each attribute. This is done using the CREATE TABLE 
statement.
	 Syntax:

CREATE TABLE tablename(
attributename1 datatype constraint,
attributename2 datatype constraint,
:
attributenameN datatype constraint);

It is important to observe the following points with 
respect to the Create Table statement:
•	 N is the degree of the relation, means there are N 

columns in the table.
•	 Attribute name specifies the name of the column in 

the table.
•	 Datatype specifies the type of data that an attribute 

can hold.
•	 Constraint indicates the restrictions imposed on the 

values of an attribute. By default, each attribute can 
take NULL values except for the primary key.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   147 19-Jul-19   3:45:57 PM



148 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Let us identify data types of the attributes of table 
STUDENT along with their constraint, if any. Assuming 
maximum students in a class to be 100 and values of 
roll number in a sequence from 1 to 100, we know that 
3 digits are sufficient to store values for the attribute 
RollNumber. Hence, data type INT is appropriate for this 
attribute. Total number of characters in student names 
(SName) can differ. Assuming maximum characters in 
a name as 20, we use VARCHAR(20) for SName column. 
Data type for the attribute SDateofBirth is DATE and 
supposing the school uses guardian’s 12 digit Aadhaar 
number as GUID, we can declare GUID as CHAR (12) 
since Aadhaar number is of fixed length and we are not 
going to perform any mathematical operation on GUID. 

Table 8.3, 8.4 and 8.5 show the chosen data type and 
constraint for each attribute of the relations STUDENT, 
GUARDIAN and ATTENDANCE, respectively.

Table 8.3 Data types and constraints for the attributes of relation STUDENT
Attribute Name Data expected to be stored Data type Constraint

RollNumber Numeric value consisting of maximum 3 digits INT PRIMARY KEY

SName Variant length string of maximum 20 characters VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL

SDateofBirth Date value DATE NOT NULL

GUID Numeric value consisting of 12 digits CHAR (12) FOREIGN KEY

Table 8.4 Data types and constraints for the attributes of relation GUARDIAN
Attribute Name Data expected to be stored Data type Constraint

GUID Numeric value consisting of 12 digit Aadhaar CHAR (12) PRIMARY KEY
number

GName Variant length string of maximum 20 VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL
characters

GPhone Numeric value consisting of 10 digits CHAR(10) NULL UNIQUE

GAddress Variant length string of size 30 characters VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL

Table 8.5 Data types and constraints for the attributes of relation ATTENDANCE.
Attribute Name Data expected to be stored Data type Constraint
AttendanceDate Date value DATE PRIMARY KEY*

RollNumber Numeric value consisting of maximum 3 INT PRIMARY KEY*
digits FOREIGN KEY

AttendanceStatus ‘P’ for present and ‘A’ for absent CHAR(1) NOT NULL

*means part of composite primary key

Once data types and constraints are identified, let us 
create tables without specifying constraint along with 
the attribute name for simplification. We will learn to 
incorporate constraints on attributes in Section 8.4.4.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   148 19-Jul-19   3:45:57 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 149

Example 8.1	 Create table STUDENT.
mysql> CREATE TABLE STUDENT( Think and Reflect
    -> RollNumber  INT, Can we have a CHAR 
    -> SName VARCHAR(20), or VARCHAR data type 
    -> SDateofBirth DATE, for contact number 
    -> GUID CHAR(12), (mobile, landline)?
    -> PRIMARY KEY (RollNumber));
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.91 sec)

Note: ‘,’ is used to separate two attributes and each statement 
terminates with a semi-colon (;). The symbol ‘->’ indicates line 
continuation as SQL statement may not complete in a single line.

8.4.3	DESCRIBE Table Activity 8.4

We can view the structure of an already created table Create the other two 
using the describe statement. relations GUARDIAN 

and ATTENDANCE 
	 Syntax: as per data types 

DESCRIBE tablename; given in Table 8.4 and 
MySQL also supports the short form DESC of DESCRIBE 8.5, and view their 

structures. Don't add 
to get description of table. To retrieve details about the any constraint in the 
structure of relation STUDENT, we can write DESC or two tables.
DESCRIBE followed by table name:

mysql> DESC STUDENT;
+--------------+-------------+------+-----+---------+-------+
| Field        | Type        | Null | Key | Default | Extra |
+--------------+-------------+------+-----+---------+-------+
| RollNumber   | int         | NO   | PRI | NULL    |       |
| SName        | varchar(20) | YES  |     | NULL    |       |
| SDateofBirth | date        | YES  |     | NULL    |       |
| GUID         | char(12)    | YES  |     | NULL    |       |
+--------------+-------------+------+-----+---------+-------+
4 rows in set (0.06 sec)

The show table command will now return the table 
STUDENT:

mysql> SHOW TABLES;
+------------------------------+
| Tables_in_studentattendance  |
+------------------------------+
| student                      |
+------------------------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)

8.4.4	ALTER Table 
After creating a table we may realize that we need to 
add/remove an attribute or to modify the datatype of an 
existing attribute or to add constraint in attribute. In all 
such cases, we need to change or alter the structure of 
the table by using the alter statement.
	 Syntax:

ALTER TABLE tablename ADD/Modify/DROP attribute1, 
attribute2,..

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   149 19-Jul-19   3:45:57 PM



150 Informatics Practices – Class XI

(A)	 Add primary key to a relation
Let us now alter the tables created in Activity 8.4. The 
below MySQL statement adds a primary key to the 
GUARDIAN relation:

mysql> ALTER TABLE GUARDIAN ADD PRIMARY KEY (GUID);
Query OK, 0 rows affected (1.14 sec)
Records: 0 Duplicates: 0 Warnings: 0

Now let us add primary key to the ATTENDANCE 
relation. The primary key of this relation is a composite 
key made up of two attributes   — AttendanceDate and 
RollNumber.  

mysql> ALTER TABLE ATTENDANCE  
    -> ADD PRIMARY KEY(AttendanceDate,  
    -> RollNumber);
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.52 sec)
Records: 0 Duplicates: 0 Warnings: 0

(B)	 Add foreign key to a relation
Once primary keys are added the next step is to add 
foreign keys to the relation (if any). A relation may have 
multiple foreign keys and each foreign key is defined on 
a single attribute. Following points need to be observed 
while adding foreign key to a relation:
•	 The referenced relation must be already created.
•	 The referenced attribute must be a part of primary 

key of the referenced relation.
•	 Data types and size of referenced and referencing 

attributes must be same.
Syntax:

ALTER TABLE table_name ADD FOREIGN KEY(attribute 
name) REFERENCES referenced_table_name                        
(attribute name);

Let us now add foreign key to the table STUDENT. 
Table 8.3 shows that attribute GUID (the referencing 

Think and Reflect attribute) is a foreign key and it refers to attribute GUID 
Name foreign keys in (the referenced attribute) of table GUARDIAN (Table  8.4). 
table ATTENDANCE Hence, STUDENT is the referencing table and GUARDIAN 
and STUDENT. Is there 
any foreign key in table is the referenced table. 
GUARDIAN. mysql> ALTER TABLE STUDENT 

    -> ADD FOREIGN KEY(GUID) REFERENCES  
    -> GUARDIAN(GUID);
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.75 sec)
Records: 0 Duplicates: 0 Warnings: 0

(C)	 Add constraint UNIQUE to an existing attribute
In GUARDIAN table, attribute GPhone has a constraint 
UNIQUE which means no two values in that column 
should be same. 
	 Syntax:

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   150 19-Jul-19   3:45:57 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 151

ALTER TABLE table_name ADD UNIQUE (attribute 
name);

Let us now add the constraint UNIQUE with attribute 
GPhone of the table GUARDIAN as shown at table 8.4. Activity 8.5

mysql> ALTER TABLE GUARDIAN  Add foreign key in 
    -> ADD UNIQUE(GPhone); the ATTENDANCE 
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.44 sec) table (use fig. 8.1 to 
Records: 0 Duplicates: 0 Warnings: 0

identify referencing and 
(D)	 Add an attribute to an existing table referenced tables).
Sometimes, we may need to add an additional attribute 
in a table. It can be done using the syntax given below:
	 ALTER TABLE table_name ADD attribute_name DATATYPE;

Suppose the principal of the school has decided to 
award scholarship to some needy students for which 
income of the guardian must be known. But school has 
not maintained income attribute with table GUARDIAN 
so far. Therefore, the database designer now needs to 
add a new attribute income of data type INT in the table 
GUARDIAN.

mysql> ALTER TABLE GUARDIAN  
    -> ADD income INT;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.47 sec)
Records: 0 Duplicates: 0 Warnings: 0 Think and Reflect

(E)	 Modify datatype of an attribute What are the minimum 
and maximum income 

We can modify data types of the existing attributes of a values that can be 
table using the following ALTER statement. entered in the income 
	 Syntax: attribute given the data 

type is INT?
ALTER TABLE table_name MODIFY attribute DATATYPE;

Suppose we need to change the size of attribute 
GAddress from VARCHAR(30) to VARCHAR(40) of the 
GUARDIAN table. The MySQL statement will be: 

mysql> ALTER TABLE GUARDIAN  
    -> MODIFY GAddress VARCHAR(40); 
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.11 sec)
Records: 0 Duplicates: 0 Warnings: 0

(F)	 Modify constraint of an attribute
When we create a table, by default each attribute takes 
NULL value except for the attribute defined as primary 
key. We can change an attribute’s constraint from NULL 
to NOT NULL using alter statement.
Syntax: 

ALTER TABLE table_name MODIFY attribute DATATYPE 
NOT NULL;

Note: We have to specify the data type of the attribute along with 
constraint NOT NULL while using MODIFY.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   151 19-Jul-19   3:45:57 PM



152 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes To associate NOT NULL constraint with attribute 
SName of table STUDENT (table 8.3), we write the 
following MySQL statement:

 mysql> ALTER TABLE STUDENT  
     -> MODIFY SName VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.47 sec)
Records: 0 Duplicates: 0 Warnings: 0

(G)	 Add default value to an attribute
If we want to specify default value for an attribute, then 
use the following syntax:

ALTER TABLE table_name MODIFY attribute DATATYPE 
DEFAULT default_value;

To set default value of SDateofBirth of STUDENT to 
15th May 2000, we write the following statement:

mysql> ALTER TABLE STUDENT  
    -> MODIFY SDateofBirth DATE DEFAULT  
    -> 2000-05-15;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.08 sec)
Records: 0 Duplicates: 0 Warnings: 0

Note: We have to specify the data type of the attribute along with 
DEFAULT while using MODIFY.
(H)	 Remove an attribute
Using ALTER, we can remove attributes from a table, as 
shown in the below syntax:

ALTER TABLE table_name DROP attribute;

To remove the attribute income from the table 
GUARDIAN (8.4), we can write the following MySQL 
statement:

mysql> ALTER TABLE GUARDIAN DROP income;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.42 sec)
Records: 0 Duplicates: 0 Warnings: 0

(I)	 Remove primary key from the table
While creating a table, we may have specified incorrect 
primary key. In such case, we need to drop the existing 
primary key of the table and add a new primary key. 
	 Syntax:

ALTER TABLE table_name DROP PRIMARY KEY;

To remove primary key of  table GUARDIAN (Table 8.4), 
we write the following MySQL statement:

mysql> ALTER TABLE GUARDIAN DROP PRIMARY KEY;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.72 sec)
Records: 0 Duplicates: 0 Warnings: 0

Note: We have dropped primary key from GUARDIAN table, but 
each table should have a primary key to maintain uniqueness. 
Hence, we have to use ADD command to specify primary key for 
the GUARDIAN table as shown in earlier examples.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   152 19-Jul-19   3:45:57 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 153

8.4.5	DROP Statement Notes
Sometimes a table in a database or the database itself 
needs to be removed. We can use DROP statement to 
remove a database or a table permanently from the 
system. However, one should be very cautious while 
using this statement as it cannot be undone.
	 Syntax to drop a table:

DROP TABLE table_name;

	 Syntax to drop a database:
DROP DATABASE database_name;

Cautions:  
1)	 Using the Drop statement to remove a database will 

ultimately remove all the tables within it.
2)	 DROP statement will remove the tables or database 

created by you. Hence you may apply DROP statement at 
the end of the chapter.

8.5	 SQL for Data Manipulation

In the previous section, we created the database 
StudentAttendance having three relations STUDENT, 
GUARDIAN and ATTENDANCE. When we create a table, 
only its structure is created but the table has no data. 
To populate records in the table, INSERT statement is 
used. Similarly, table records can be deleted or updated 
using SQL data manipulation statements. 

Data Manipulation using a database means either 
retrieval (access) of existing data, insertion of new data, 
removal of existing data or modification of existing data 
in the database. 
8.5.1	INSERTION of Records
INSERT INTO statement is used to insert new records in 
a table. Its syntax is:

INSERT INTO tablename
VALUES(value 1, value 2,....); 

Here, value 1 corresponds to attribute 1, value 2 
corresponds to attribute 2 and so on. Note that we need 
not to specify attribute names in insert statement if 
there are exactly same number of values in the INSERT 
statement as the total number of attributes in the table.
Caution: While populating records in a table with foreign 
key, ensure that records in referenced tables are already 
populated.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   153 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



154 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Let us insert some records in the StudentAttendance 
database. We shall insert records in the GUARDIAN 
table first as it does not have any foreign key. We are 
going to insert the records given in Table 8.6.

Table 8.6 Records to be inserted into the GUARDIAN table
GUID GName GPhone GAddress

444444444444 Amit Ahuja 5711492685 G-35, Ashok Vihar, Delhi
111111111111 Baichung Bhutia 3612967082 Flat no. 5, Darjeeling Appt., Shimla
101010101010 Himanshu Shah 4726309212 26/77, West Patel Nagar, Ahmedabad
333333333333 Danny Dsouza S -13, Ashok Village, Daman
466444444666 Sujata P. 3801923168 HNO-13, B- block, Preet Vihar, Madurai

The below statement inserts the first record in the 
table.

mysql> INSERT INTO GUARDIAN  
    -> VALUES (444444444444, 'Amit Ahuja',  
    -> 5711492685, 'G-35,Ashok vihar, Delhi' ); 
Query OK, 1 row affected (0.01 sec)

We can use the SQL statement SELECT * from table_
name to view the inserted records. The SELECT statement 
will be explained in next section.

mysql> SELECT * from  GUARDIAN;
+--------------+-----------------+------------+-------------------------------+
| GUID         | GName           | Gphone     | GAddress                      |
+--------------+-----------------+------------+-------------------------------+
| 444444444444 | Amit Ahuja      | 5711492685 | G-35, Ashok vihar, Delhi      |
+--------------+-----------------+------------+-------------------------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)

If we want to provide values only for some of the 
attributes in a table (supposing other attributes having 
NULL or any other default value), then we shall specify 
the attribute name alongside each data value as shown 
in the following syntax of INSERT INTO statement.
	 Syntax:

INSERT INTO tablename (column1, column2, ...)  
VALUES (value1, value2,  ...); 

To insert the fourth record of Table 8.6 where GPhone 
is not given, we need to insert values in the other three 
fields (GPhone was set to NULL by default at the time 
of table creation). In this case, we have to specify the 

Activity 8.6 names of attributes in which we want to insert values. 
Write SQL statements The values must be given in the same order in which 
to insert the remaining attributes are written in INSERT command.
3 rows of table 8.6 in mysql> INSERT INTO GUARDIAN(GUID, GName, GAddress) 
table GUARDIAN.     -> VALUES (333333333333, 'Danny Dsouza',  

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   154 3/31/2023   3:57:16 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 155

    -> 'S -13, Ashok Village, Daman' ); 
Query OK, 1 row affected (0.03 sec)

Note: Text and date values must be enclosed in ‘ ’ (single quotes).
mysql> SELECT * from GUARDIAN;
+--------------+--------------+------------+----------------------------------+
| GUID         | GName        | Gphone     | GAddress                         |
+--------------+--------------+------------+----------------------------------+
| 333333333333 | Danny Dsouza | NULL       | S -13, Ashok Village, Daman      |
| 444444444444 | Amit Ahuja   | 5711492685 | G-35, Ashok vihar, Delhi         |
+--------------+--------------+------------+----------------------------------+
2 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Let us now insert the records given in Table 8.7 into 
the STUDENT table.

Table 8.7 Records to be inserted into the STUDENT table
RollNumber SName SDateofBirth GUID

1 Atharv Ahuja 2003-05-15 444444444444
2 Daizy Bhutia 2002-02-28 111111111111
3 Taleem Shah 2002-02-28
4 John Dsouza 2003-08-18 333333333333
5 Ali Shah 2003-07-05 101010101010
6 Manika P. 2002-03-10 466444444666

To insert the first record of Table 8.7, we write the 
following MySQL statement 

mysql> INSERT INTO STUDENT  
    -> VALUES(1,'Atharv Ahuja','2003-05-15',  
    -> 444444444444);
Query OK, 1 row affected (0.11 sec)

OR
mysql> INSERT INTO STUDENT (RollNumber, SName,  
    -> SDateofBirth, GUID)
    -> VALUES (1,'Atharv Ahuja','2003-05-15',  
    -> 444444444444);
Query OK, 1 row affected (0.02 sec)

mysql> SELECT * from STUDENT;
+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| RollNumber | SName        | SDateofBirth | GUID         |
+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
|          1 | Atharv Ahuja | 2003-05-15   | 444444444444 |
+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)

Let us now insert the third record of Table 8.7 where 
GUID is NULL. Recall that GUID is foreign key of this Recall that Date is 
table and thus can take NULL value. Hence, we can put stored in “YYYY-MM-

DD” format.
NULL value for GUID and insert the record by using the 
following statement:

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   155 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



156 Informatics Practices – Class XI

mysql> INSERT INTO STUDENT  
    -> VALUES(3, 'Taleem Shah','2002-02-28',  
    -> NULL); 
Query OK, 1 row affected (0.05 sec)

mysql> SELECT * from STUDENT;
+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| RollNumber | SName        | SDateofBirth | GUID         |
+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
|          1 | Atharv Ahuja | 2003-05-15   | 444444444444 |
|          3 | Taleem Shah  | 2002-02-28   |         NULL |
+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
2 rows in set (0.00 sec)

We had to write NULL in the above MySQL statement 
because when not giving the column names, we need 
to give values for all the columns. Otherwise, we have 
to give names of attributes along with the values if we 
need to insert data only for certain attributes, as shown 
in the next query:

Activity 8.7
mysql> INSERT INTO STUDENT (RollNumber, SName,  

Write SQL statements     -> SDateofBirth) VALUES (3, 'Taleem Shah','  
to insert the remaining     -> 2002-02-28');
4 rows of table 8.7 in Query OK, 1 row affected (0.05 sec)

table STUDENT.  In the above statement we are informing DBMS 
to insert the corresponding values for the mentioned 
columns and GUID would be assigned NULL value.

mysql> SELECT * from STUDENT;
+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| RollNumber | SName        | SDateofBirth | GUID         |
+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
|          1 | Atharv Ahuja | 2003-05-15   | 444444444444 |
|          3 | Taleem Shah  | 2002-02-28   |         NULL |

+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
2 rows in set (0.00 sec)

8.6 SQL for Data Query
Think and Reflect

•	Which of the above So far we have learnt how to create database as well 
syntax should be as to store and manipulate data. We are interested to 
used when we are store data in a database as it is easier to retrieve data 
not sure of the order in future from databases in whatever way we want. 
(with respect to the The Structured Query Language (SQL) has efficient 
column)  in which 
the values are to be mechanisms to retrieve data stored in multiple tables 
inserted in the table? in a MySQL database (or any other RDBMS). The 

•	Can we insert two user enters the SQL commands called queries where 
records with the the specific requirements for data to be retrieved are 
same roll number? provided. The SQL statement SELECT is used to retrieve 

data from the tables in a database and is also called 
query statement.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   156 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 157

8.6.1	SELECT Statement
The SQL statement SELECT is used to retrieve data from 
the tables in a database and the output is also displayed 
in tabular form.
	 Syntax:

SELECT attribute1, attribute2, ...
FROM table_name
WHERE condition

Here, attribute1, attribute2, ... are the column names 
of the table table_name  from which we want to retrieve 
data. The FROM clause is always written with SELECT 
clause as it specifies the name of the table from which 
data is to be retrieved. The WHERE clause is optional and 
is used to retrieve data that meet specified condition(s). 
Example 8.2	 To display the name and date of birth of student 
with roll number 2, we write the following query:

mysql> SELECT SName, SDateofBirth
    -> FROM STUDENT
    -> WHERE RollNumber = 1;
+--------------+--------------+
| SName        | SDateofBirth |
+--------------+--------------+ Think and Reflect
| Atharv Ahuja | 2003-05-15   | Can you think of 
+--------------+--------------+ examples from daily 
1 row in set (0.03 sec)

life where storing 
8.6.2	QUERYING using Database OFFICE and querying data 

in a database can be 
Different organisations maintain databases to helpful?
store data in the form of tables. Let us consider the 
database OFFICE of an organisation that has many 
related tables like EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT and 
so on. Every EMPLOYEE in the database is assigned 
to a DEPARTMENT and his/her Department number 
(DeptId) is stored as a foreign key in the table EMPLOYEE. 
Let us consider some data for the table ‘EMPLOYEE’ as 
shown in Table 8.8 and apply the SELECT statement to 
retrieve data:

Table 8.8 EMPLOYEE
EmpNo Ename Salary Bonus Deptld

101 Aaliya 10000 234 D02
102 Kritika 60000 123 D01
103 Shabbir 45000 566 D01
104 Gurpreet 19000 565 D04
105 Joseph 34000 875 D03

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   157 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



158 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 106 Sanya 48000 695 D02
107 Vergese 15000 D01
108 Nachaobi 29000 D05
109 Daribha 42000 D04
110 Tanya 50000 467 D05

(A)	 Retrieve selected columns
The following query displays employee numbers of all 
the employees:

mysql> SELECT  EmpNo
    -> FROM  EMPLOYEE;
+-------+
| EmpNo |
+-------+
|   101 |
|   102 |
|   103 |
|   104 |
|   105 |
|   106 |
|   107 |
|   108 |
|   109 |
|   110 |
+-------+
10 rows in set (0.41 sec)

To display the employee number and employee name 
of all the employees, we write the following query:

mysql> SELECT EmpNo, Ename
    -> FROM  EMPLOYEE;
+-------+----------+
| EmpNo | Ename    |
+-------+----------+
|   101 | Aaliya   |
|   102 | Kritika  |
|   103 | Shabbir  |
|   104 | Gurpreet |
|   105 | Joseph   |
|   106 | Sanya    |
|   107 | Vergese  |
|   108 | Nachaobi |
|   109 | Daribha  |
|   110 | Tanya    |
+-------+----------+
10 rows in set (0.00 sec)

(B)	 Renaming of columns
In case we want to rename any column while displaying 
the output, we can do so by using alias 'AS' in the 
query as:

Display Employee name as Name in the output for 
all the employees.

mysql> SELECT  EName  AS Name

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   158 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 159

    -> FROM  EMPLOYEE; Notes
+----------+
| Name     |
+----------+
| Aaliya   |
| Kritika  |
| Shabbir  |
| Gurpreet |
| Joseph   |
| Sanya    |
| Vergese  |
| Nachaobi |
| Daribha  |
| Tanya    |
+----------+
10 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Example 8.3	 Display names of all employees along with their 
annual salary (Salary*12). While displaying query result, 
rename EName as Name.

mysql> SELECT EName AS Name, Salary*12
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE;
+----------+-----------+
| Name     | Salary*12 |
+----------+-----------+
| Aaliya   |    120000 |
| Kritika  |    720000 |
| Shabbir  |    540000 |
| Gurpreet |    228000 |
| Joseph   |    408000 |
| Sanya    |    576000 |
| Vergese  |    180000 |
| Nachaobi |    348000 |
| Daribha  |    504000 |
| Tanya    |    600000 |
+----------+-----------+
10 rows in set (0.02 sec)

Observe that in the output, Salary*12 is displayed as 
the column name for the annual salary column. In the 
output table, we can use alias to rename that column as 
Annual Salary as shown below:

mysql> SELECT Ename AS Name, Salary*12 AS  
    -> 'Annual Salary'
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE;
+----------+---------------+
| Name     | Annual Salary |
+----------+---------------+
| Aaliya   |        120000 |
| Kritika  |        720000 |
| Shabbir  |        540000 |
| Gurpreet |        228000 |
| Joseph   |        408000 |
| Sanya    |        576000 |
| Vergese  |        180000 |
| Nachaobi |        348000 |
| Daribha  |        504000 |
| Tanya    |        600000 |
+----------+---------------+
10 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   159 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



160 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes Note:
i)	 Annual Salary will not be added as a new column in the 

database table. It is just for displaying the output of the 
query.

ii)	If an aliased column name has space as in the case of Annual 
Salary, it should be enclosed in quotes as 'Annual Salary'.

(C)	 DISTINCT Clause
By default, SQL shows all the data retrieved through 
query as output. However, there can be duplicate values. 
The SELECT statement when combined with DISTINCT 
clause, returns records without repetition (distinct 
records). For example, while retrieving employee’s 
department number, there can be duplicate values as 
many employees are assigned to same department. To 
display unique department number for all the employees, 
we use DISTINCT as shown below:

mysql> SELECT DISTINCT DeptId
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE;
+--------+
| DeptId |
+--------+
| D02    |
| D01    |
| D04    |
| D03    |
| D05    |
+--------+
5 rows in set (0.03 sec)

(D)	 WHERE Clause
The WHERE clause is used to retrieve data that meet 
some specified conditions. In the OFFICE database, 
more than one employee can have the same salary. To 
display distinct salaries of the employees working in the 
department number D01, we write the following query 
in which the condition to select the employee whose 
department number is D01 is specified using the WHERE 
clause:

mysql> SELECT DISTINCT Salary
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> WHERE Deptid='D01';

As the column DeptId is of string type, its values are 
enclosed in quotes ('D01').

+--------+
| Salary |
+--------+
|  60000 |
|  45000 |
|  15000 |
+--------+
3 rows in set (0.02 sec)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   160 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 161

In the above example, we have used = operator in 
WHERE clause. We can also use other relational operators 
(<, <=, >, >=, !=) to specify conditions. The logical 
operators AND, OR, and NOT are used with WHERE clause 
to combine multiple conditions.
Example 8.4	 Display all the employees who are earning more 
than 5000 and work in department with DeptId D04.

mysql> SELECT  *
    -> FROM  EMPLOYEE
    -> WHERE Salary > 5000 AND DeptId = 'D04';

+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
| EmpNo | Ename    | Salary | Bonus | DeptId |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
|   104 | Gurpreet |  19000 |   565 | D04    |
|   109 | Daribha  |  42000 |  NULL | D04    |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
2 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Example 8.5	 The following query displays records of all the Think and Reflect
employees except Aaliya. What will happen if 

mysql> SELECT * in the above query 
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE we write “Aaliya” as 
    -> WHERE NOT Ename = 'Aaliya'; “AALIYA” or “aaliya” 
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+ or “AaLIYA”? Will the 
| EmpNo | Ename    | Salary | Bonus | DeptId | query generate the same 
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+ output or an error?
|   102 | Kritika  |  60000 |   123 | D01    |
|   103 | Shabbir  |  45000 |   566 | D01    |
|   104 | Gurpreet |  19000 |   565 | D04    |
|   105 | Joseph   |  34000 |   875 | D03    |
|   106 | Sanya    |  48000 |   695 | D02    |
|   107 | Vergese  |  15000 |  NULL | D01    |
|   108 | Nachaobi |  29000 |  NULL | D05    |
|   109 | Daribha  |  42000 |  NULL | D04    |
|   110 | Tanya    |  50000 |   467 | D05    |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
9 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Example 8.6	 The following query displays name and 
department number of all those employees who are earning Activity 8.8
salary between 20000 and 50000 (both values inclusive). Compare the output 

mysql> SELECT Ename, DeptId produced by the query 
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE in example 8.6 and 
    -> WHERE Salary>=20000 AND Salary<=50000; the following query 
+----------+--------+ and differentiate 
| Ename    | DeptId | between the OR and AND 
+----------+--------+ operators.
| Shabbir  | D01    | SELECT  * 
| Joseph   | D03    | FROM  EMPLOYEE 
| Sanya    | D02    | WHERE Salary > 5000 OR 	
| Nachaobi | D05    | 	   DeptId= 20;
| Daribha  | D04    |
| Tanya    | D05    |
+----------+--------+
6 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   161 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



162 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes The above query defines a range that can also be 
checked using a comparison operator BETWEEN. 

mysql> SELECT  Ename, DeptId
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> WHERE Salary BETWEEN 20000 AND 50000;
+----------+--------+
| Ename    | DeptId |
+----------+--------+
| Shabbir  | D01    |
| Joseph   | D03    |
| Sanya    | D02    |
| Nachaobi | D05    |
| Daribha  | D04    |
| Tanya    | D05    |
+----------+--------+
6 rows in set (0.03 sec)

Note:  The BETWEEN operator defines the range of values in which 
the column value must fall into, to make the condition true.
Example 8.7	 The following query displays details of all the 
employees who are working either in DeptId D01, D02 or 
D04.

mysql> SELECT  *
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> WHERE DeptId = 'D01' OR DeptId = 'D02' OR   
    -> DeptId = 'D04';
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
| EmpNo | Ename    | Salary | Bonus | DeptId |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
|   101 | Aaliya   |  10000 |   234 | D02    |
|   102 | Kritika  |  60000 |   123 | D01    |
|   103 | Shabbir  |  45000 |   566 | D01    |
|   104 | Gurpreet |  19000 |   565 | D04    |
|   106 | Sanya    |  48000 |   695 | D02    |
|   107 | Vergese  |  15000 |  NULL | D01    |
|   109 | Daribha  |  42000 |  NULL | D04    |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
7 rows in set (0.00 sec)

(E)	 MEMBERSHIP OPERATOR IN 
The IN operator compares a value with a set of values 
and returns true if the value belongs to that set. The 
above query can be rewritten using IN operator as 
shown below:

mysql> SELECT  *
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> WHERE DeptId IN ('D01', 'D02' , 'D04');
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
| EmpNo | Ename    | Salary | Bonus | DeptId |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
|   101 | Aaliya   |  10000 |   234 | D02    |
|   102 | Kritika  |  60000 |   123 | D01    |
|   103 | Shabbir  |  45000 |   566 | D01    |
|   104 | Gurpreet |  19000 |   565 | D04    |
|   106 | Sanya    |  48000 |   695 | D02    |
|   107 | Vergese  |  15000 |  NULL | D01    |
|   109 | Daribha  |  42000 |  NULL | D04    |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
7 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   162 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 163

Example 8.8	 The following query displays details of all the Notes
employees except those working in department number D01 
or D02. 

mysql> SELECT *
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> WHERE DeptId NOT IN('D01', 'D02');

+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
| EmpNo | Ename    | Salary | Bonus | DeptId |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
|   104 | Gurpreet |  19000 |   565 | D04    |
|   105 | Joseph   |  34000 |   875 | D03    |
|   108 | Nachaobi |  29000 |  NULL | D05    |
|   109 | Daribha  |  42000 |  NULL | D04    |
|   110 | Tanya    |  50000 |   467 | D05    |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
5 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Note: Here we need to combine NOT with IN as we want to retrieve 
all records except with DeptId D01 and D02.
(F)	 ORDER BY Clause
ORDER BY clause is used to display data in an ordered 
(arranged) form with respect to a specified column. By 
default, ORDER BY displays records in ascending order of 
the specified column’s values. To display the records in 
descending order, the DESC (means descending) keyword 
needs to be written with that column.
Example 8.9	 The following query displays details of all the 
employees in ascending order of their salaries.

mysql> SELECT  *
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> ORDER BY Salary;

+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
| EmpNo | Ename    | Salary | Bonus | DeptId |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
|   101 | Aaliya   |  10000 |   234 | D02    |
|   107 | Vergese  |  15000 |  NULL | D01    |
|   104 | Gurpreet |  19000 |   565 | D04    |
|   108 | Nachaobi |  29000 |  NULL | D05    |
|   105 | Joseph   |  34000 |   875 | D03    |
|   109 | Daribha  |  42000 |  NULL | D04    |
|   103 | Shabbir  |  45000 |   566 | D01    |
|   106 | Sanya    |  48000 |   695 | D02    |
|   110 | Tanya    |  50000 |   467 | D05    |
|   102 | Kritika  |  60000 |   123 | D01    |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
10 rows in set (0.05 sec)

Example 8.10	  The following query displays details of all the 
employees in descending order of their salaries.

mysql> SELECT  *
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> ORDER BY Salary DESC;

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   163 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



164 Informatics Practices – Class XI

+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
| EmpNo | Ename    | Salary | Bonus | DeptId |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
|   102 | Kritika  |  60000 |   123 | D01    |
|   110 | Tanya    |  50000 |   467 | D05    |
|   106 | Sanya    |  48000 |   695 | D02    |
|   103 | Shabbir  |  45000 |   566 | D01    |
|   109 | Daribha  |  42000 |  NULL | D04    |
|   105 | Joseph   |  34000 |   875 | D03    |
|   108 | Nachaobi |  29000 |  NULL | D05    |
|   104 | Gurpreet |  19000 |   565 | D04    |
|   107 | Vergese  |  15000 |  NULL | D01    |
|   101 | Aaliya   |  10000 |   234 | D02    |
+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
10 rows in set (0.00 sec)

(G)	 Handling NULL Values
SQL supports a special value called NULL to represent 
a missing or unknown value. For example, the village 
column in a table called address will have no value for 
cities. Hence, NULL is used to represent such unknown 
values. It is important to note that NULL is different 
from 0 (zero). Also, any arithmetic operation performed 
with NULL value gives NULL. For example: 5 + NULL = 
NULL because NULL is unknown hence the result is also 

Activity 8.9 unknown. In order to check for NULL value in a column, 
we use IS NULL.

Execute the following 
two queries and find Example 8.11	 The following query displays details of all 
out what will happen if those employees who have not been given a bonus. This 
we specify two columns implies that the bonus column will be blank. 
in the ORDER BY clause: mysql> SELECT *

    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
SELECT  *     -> WHERE Bonus IS NULL;
FROM EMPLOYEE
ORDER BY Salary, +-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
Bonus; | EmpNo | Ename    | Salary | Bonus | DeptId |

+-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
|   107 | Vergese  |  15000 |  NULL | D01    |

SELECT  * 
|   108 | Nachaobi |  29000 |  NULL | D05    |

FROM EMPLOYEE |   109 | Daribha  |  42000 |  NULL | D04    |
ORDER BY Salary,Bonus +-------+----------+--------+-------+--------+
desc; 3 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Example 8.12	 The following query displays names of all the 
employees who have been given a bonus. This implies that 
the bonus column will not be blank. 

mysql> SELECT EName
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> WHERE Bonus IS NOT NULL;
+----------+
| EName    |
+----------+
| Aaliya   |
| Kritika  |
| Shabbir  |
| Gurpreet |
| Joseph   |
| Sanya    |
| Tanya    |
+----------+
7 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   164 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 165

(H)	 Substring pattern matching Notes
Many a times we come across situations where we don’t 
want to query by matching exact text or value. Rather, we 
are interested to find matching of only a few characters 
or values in column values. For example, to find out 
names starting with ‘T’ or to find out pin codes starting 
with ‘60’. This is called substring pattern matching. 
We cannot match such patterns using = operator as 
we are not looking for exact match. SQL provides LIKE 
operator that can be used with WHERE clause to search 
for a specified pattern in a column.

The LIKE operator makes use of the following two 
wild card characters:
•	 % (percent)— used to represent zero, one, or multiple 

characters
•	 _ (underscore)— used to represent a single character

Example 8.13	The following query displays details of all those 
employees whose name starts with 'K'.

mysql> SELECT  *
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> WHERE Ename LIKE 'K%';

+-------+---------+--------+-------+--------+
| EmpNo | Ename   | Salary | Bonus | DeptId |
+-------+---------+--------+-------+--------+
|   102 | Kritika |  60000 |   123 | D01    |
+-------+---------+--------+-------+--------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)

Example 8.14	  The following query displays details of all 
those employees whose name ends with 'a'.

mysql> SELECT  *
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> WHERE Ename LIKE '%a';

+-------+---------+--------+-------+--------+
| EmpNo | Ename   | Salary | Bonus | DeptId |
+-------+---------+--------+-------+--------+
|   101 | Aaliya  |  10000 |   234 | D02    |
|   102 | Kritika |  60000 |   123 | D01    |
|   106 | Sanya   |  48000 |   695 | D02    |
|   109 | Daribha |  42000 |  NULL | D04    |
|   110 | Tanya   |  50000 |   467 | D05    |
+-------+---------+--------+-------+--------+
5 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Example 8.15	 The following query displays details of all 
those employees whose name consists of exactly 5 letters 
and starts with any letter but has ‘ANYA’ after that.

mysql> SELECT  *

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   165 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



166 Informatics Practices – Class XI

    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> WHERE Ename LIKE '_ANYA';

Think and Reflect +-------+-------+--------+-------+--------+

When we type first letter | EmpNo | Ename | Salary | Bonus | DeptId |

of a contact name in +-------+-------+--------+-------+--------+
|   106 | Sanya |  48000 |   695 | D02    |

our contact list in our |   110 | Tanya |  50000 |   467 | D05    |
mobile phones all the +-------+-------+--------+-------+--------+
names containing that 2 rows in set (0.00 sec)
character are displayed. 
Can you relate SQL Example 8.16	 The following query displays names of all the 
statement with the employees containing 'se' as a substring in name.
process? List other real mysql> SELECT  Ename
life situations where you     -> FROM EMPLOYEE
can visualize an SQL     -> WHERE Ename LIKE '%se%';
statement in operation. +---------+

| Ename   |
+---------+
| Joseph  |
| Vergese |
+---------+
2 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Example 8.17	 The following query displays names of all 
employees containing 'a' as the second character.

mysql> SELECT  EName
    -> FROM EMPLOYEE
    -> WHERE Ename LIKE '_a%';

+----------+
| EName    |
+----------+
| Aaliya   |
| Sanya    |
| Nachaobi |
| Daribha  |
| Tanya    |
+----------+
5 rows in set (0.00 sec)

8.7	D ata Updation and Deletion

Updation and deletion of data are also the parts of SQL 
data manipulation. In this section, we are going to apply 
these two data manipulation methods.
8.7.1	Data Updation
We may need to make changes in the value(s) of one or 
more columns of existing records in a table. For example, 
we may require some changes in address, phone number 
or spelling of name, etc. The UPDATE statement is used to 
make such modifications in the existing data.
	 Syntax:

UPDATE table_name
SET attribute1 = value1, attribute2 = value2, ...

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   166 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 167

WHERE condition; 

The STUDENT Table 8.7 has NULL value for GUID 
for student with roll number 3. Also, suppose students 
with roll numbers 3 and 5 are siblings. So, in STUDENT 
table, we need to fill the GUID value for student with 
roll number 3 as 101010101010. In order to update or 
change GUID of a particular row (record), we need to 
specify that record using WHERE clause, as shown below: 

mysql> UPDATE STUDENT
    -> SET GUID = 101010101010
    -> WHERE RollNumber = 3;
Query OK, 1 row affected (0.06 sec)
Rows matched: 1 Changed: 1 Warnings: 0

We can then verify the updated data using the 
statement SELECT * FROM STUDENT.
Caution : If we miss the where clause in the UPDATE statement then 
the GUID of all the records will be changed to 101010101010.

We can also update values for more than one column 
using the UPDATE statement. Suppose, the guardian 
(Table 8.6) with GUID 466444444666 has requested to 
change the  Address to 'WZ - 68, Azad Avenue, Bijnour, 
MP' and Phone number to '4817362092'.

mysql> UPDATE GUARDIAN
    -> SET GAddress = 'WZ - 68, Azad Avenue,  
    -> Bijnour, MP', GPhone = 9010810547
    -> WHERE  GUID = 466444444666;
Query OK, 1 row affected (0.06 sec)
Rows matched: 1 Changed: 1 Warnings: 0
mysql> SELECT * FROM GUARDIAN ;

+------------+---------------+----------+------------------------------------+
|GUID        |GName          |Gphone    |GAddress                            |
+------------+---------------+----------+------------------------------------+
|444444444444|Amit Ahuja     |5711492685|G-35, Ashok vihar, Delhi            |
|111111111111|Baichung Bhutia|3612967082|Flat no. 5, Darjeeling Appt., Shimla|
|101010101010|Himanshu Shah  |4726309212|26/77, West Patel Nagar, Ahmedabad  |
|333333333333|Danny Dsouza   |NULL      |S -13, Ashok Village, Daman         |
|466444444666|Sujata P.      |3801923168|WZ - 68, Azad Avenue, Bijnour, MP   |
+------------+---------------+----------+------------------------------------+
5 rows in set (0.00 sec)

8.7.2	Data Deletion
The DELETE statement is used to delete one or more 
record(s) from a table.
	 Syntax:

DELETE FROM table_name
WHERE condition;

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   167 3/31/2023   3:58:23 PM



168 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Suppose the student with roll number 2 has left the 
school. We can use the following MySQL statement to 
delete that record from the STUDENT table.

mysql> DELETE FROM STUDENT WHERE RollNumber = 2;
Query OK, 1 row affected (0.06 sec)

mysql> SELECT * FROM STUDENT ;
+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
| RollNumber | SName        | SDateofBirth | GUID         |
+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
|          1 | Atharv Ahuja | 2003-05-15   | 444444444444 |
|          3 | Taleem Shah  | 2002-02-28   | 101010101010 |
|          4 | John Dsouza  | 2003-08-18   | 333333333333 |
|          5 | Ali Shah     | 2003-07-05   | 101010101010 |
|          6 | Manika P.    | 2002-03-10   | 466444444666 |
+------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+
5 rows in set (0.00 sec)

Caution: Like UPDATE statement, we need to be careful to include 
WHERE clause while using DELETE statement to delete records in a 
table. Otherwise, all the records in the table will get deleted.

Summary
•	 Database is a collection of related tables. MySQL is a 

‘relational’ DBMS. A table is a collection of rows and 
columns, where each row is a record and columns 
describe the feature of records.

•	 SQL is the standard language for most RDBMS. 
SQL is case insensitive.

•	 CREATE DATABASE statement is used to create a new 
database.

•	 USE statement is used for making the specified 
database as active database.

•	 CREATE TABLE statement is used to create a table.
•	 Every attribute in a CREATE TABLE statement must 

have a name and a datatype.
•	 ALTER TABLE statement is used to make changes in 

the structure of a table  like adding, removing or 
changing datatype of column(s).

•	 The DESC statement with table name shows the 
structure of the table.

•	 INSERT INTO statement is used to insert record(s) in 
a table.

•	 UPDATE statement is used to modify existing data in 
a table.

•	 DELETE statement is used to delete records in a table.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   168 19-Jul-19   3:45:58 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 169

•	 The SELECT statement is used to retrieve data from Notes
one or more database tables.

•	  SELECT * FROM table_name displays  data from all 
the attributes of that table.

•	 The WHERE clause is used to enforce condition(s) in 
a query.

•	 DISTINCT clause is used to eliminate repetition and 
display the values only once.

•	 The BETWEEN operator defines the range of values 
inclusive of boundary values.

•	 The IN operator selects values that match any value 
in the given list of values.

•	 NULL  values can be tested using IS NULL and IS 
NOT NULL.

•	 ORDER BY clause is used to display the result of an 
SQL query in ascending or descending order with 
respect to specified attribute values. The default is 
ascending order.

•	 LIKE clause is used for pattern matching. % and _ 
are two wild card characters. The percent (%) symbol 
is used to represent zero or more characters. The 
underscore (_) symbol is used to represent a single 
character.

Exercise
1.	 Match the following clauses with their respective 

functions.
ALTER Insert the values in a table

UPDATE Restrictions on columns
DELETE Table definition

INSERT INTO Change the name of  a column
CONSTRAINTS Update existing information in a table

DESC Delete an existing row from a table
CREATE Create a database 

2.	 Choose appropriate answer with respect to the following 
code snippet. 

CREATE TABLE student (
		  name CHAR(30),

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   169 19-Jul-19   3:45:59 PM



170 Informatics Practices – Class XI

Notes 		  student_id INT,
		  gender CHAR(1),
		  PRIMARY KEY (student_id)

	 );

a)	 What will be the degree of student table?
i)	 30
ii)	 1
iii)	 3
iv)	 4

b)	 What does ‘name’ represent in the above code snippet?
i)	 a table
ii)	 a row
iii)	 a column
iv)	 a database

c)	 What is true about the following SQL statement?
	                        SelecT * fROM student;
i)	 Displays contents of table ‘student’
ii)	 Displays column names and contents of table 

‘student’
iii)	 Results in error as improper case has been used
iv)	 Displays only the column names of table ‘student’

d)	 What will be the output of following query?
INSERT INTO student
VALUES (“Suhana”,109,’F’),
VALUES (“Rivaan”,102,’M’),
VALUES (“Atharv”,103,’M’),
VALUES (“Rishika”,105,’F’),
VALUES (“Garvit”,104,’M’),
VALUES (“Shaurya”,109,’M’);

i)	 Error
ii)	 No Error
iii)	 Depends on compiler
iv)	 Successful completion of the query

e)	 In the following query how many rows will be deleted?
	 DELETE student
      WHERE student_id=109;
i)	 1 row 
ii)	 All the rows where student ID is equal to 109
iii)	 No row will be deleted
iv)	 2 rows

3.	 Fill in the blanks:
a)	                          declares that an index in one table is 

related to that in another table.
i)	 Primary Key
ii)	 Foreign Key
iii)	 Composite Key
iv)	 Secondary Key 

b)	 The symbol Asterisk (*) in a select query retrieves 
____________.
i)	 All data from the table
ii)	 Data of primary key only

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   170 19-Jul-19   3:45:59 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 171

iii)	 NULL data
iv)	 None of the mentioned

4.	 Consider the following MOVIE database and answer the 
SQL queries based on it. 

MovieID MovieName Category ReleaseDate ProductionCost BusinessCost
001 Hindi_Movie Musical 2018-04-23 124500 130000
002 Tamil_Movie Action 2016-05-17 112000 118000
003 English_Movie Horror 2017-08-06 245000 360000
004 Bengali_Movie Adventure 2017-01-04 72000 100000
005 Telugu_Movie Action - 100000 -
006 Punjabi_Movie Comedy - 30500 -

a)	 Retrieve movies information without mentioning their 
column names.  

b)	 List business done by the movies showing only 
MovieID, MovieName and BusinessCost.

c)	 List the different categories of movies.
d)	 Find the net profit of each movie showing its ID, Name 

and Net Profit. 
(Hint: Net Profit = BusinessCost – ProductionCost)
Make sure that the new column name is labelled as 
NetProfit. Is this column now a part of the MOVIE 
relation. If no, then what name is coined for such 
columns? What can you say about the profit of a 
movie which has not yet released? Does your query 
result show profit as zero?

e)	 List all movies with ProductionCost greater than 
80,000 and less than 1,25,000 showing ID, Name 
and ProductionCost.

f)	 List all movies which fall in the category of Comedy 
or Action.

g)	 List the movies which have not been released yet.
5.	 Suppose your school management has decided to conduct 

cricket matches between students of class XI and Class 
XII. Students of each class are asked to join any one 
of the four teams — Team Titan, Team Rockers, Team 
Magnet and Team Hurricane. During summer vacations, 
various matches will be conducted between these teams. 
Help your sports teacher to do the following:
a)	 Create a database “Sports”.
b)	 Create a table “TEAM” with following considerations:

i)	 It should have a column TeamID for storing an 
integer value between 1 to 9, which refers to 
unique identification of a team.

ii)	 Each TeamID should have its associated name 
(TeamName), which should be a string of length 
not less than 10 characters.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   171 19-Jul-19   3:45:59 PM



172 Informatics Practices – Class XI

c)	 Using table level constraint, make TeamID as primary 
key.

d)	 Show the structure of the table TEAM using SQL 
command.

e)	 As per the preferences of the students four teams 
were formed as given below. Insert these four rows in 
TEAM table:
Row 1: (1, Team Titan)
Row 2: (2, Team Rockers)
Row 3: (3, Team Magnet)
Row 4: (4, Team Hurricane)

f)	 Show the contents of the table TEAM. 
g)	 Now create another table below. MATCH_DETAILS 

and insert data as shown in table. Choose appropriate 
domains and constraints for each attribute.

Table: MATCH_DETAILS
MatchID MatchDate FirstTeamID SecondTeamID FirstTeamScore SecondTeamScore

M1 2018-07-17 1 2 90 86
M2 2018-07-18 3 4 45 48
M3 2018-07-19 1 3 78 56
M4 2018-07-19 2 4 56 67
M5 2018-07-20 1 4 32 87
M6 2018-07-21 2 3 67 51

h)	 Use the foreign key constraint in the MATCH_
DETAILS table with reference to TEAM table so 
that MATCH_DETAILS table records score of teams 
existing in the TEAM table only.

6.	 Using the sports database containing two relations 
(TEAM, MATCH_DETAILS), answer the following 
relational algebra queries.
a)	 Retrieve the MatchID of all those matches where both 

the teams have scored > 70. 
b)	 Retrieve the MatchID of all those matches where 

FirstTeam has scored < 70 but SecondTeam has 
scored > 70. 

c)	 Find out the MatchID and date of matches played by 
Team 1 and won by it.  

d)	 Find out the MatchID of matches played by Team 2 
and not won by it. 

e)	 In the TEAM relation, change the name of the relation 
to T_DATA. Also change the attributes TeamID and 
TeamName to T_ID and T_NAME respectively. 

7.	 Differentiate between the following commands: 
a)	 ALTER and UPDATE
b)	 DELETE and DROP

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   172 19-Jul-19   3:45:59 PM



Introduction to Structured Query Language (SQL) 173

8.	 Create a database called STUDENT_PROJECT having 
the following tables. Choose appropriate data type and 
apply necessary constraints. 

Table: STUDENT
RollNo Name Stream Section RegistrationID

* The values in Stream column can be either Science, Commerce, 
or Humanities.
* The values in Section column can be either I or II.

Table: PROJECT_ASSIGNED
RegistrationID ProjectID AssignDate

Table: PROJECT
ProjectID ProjectName SubmissionDate TeamSize GuideTeacher

a)	 Populate these tables with appropriate data.
b)	 Write SQL queries for the following. 
c)	 Find the names of students in Science Stream.
d)	 What will be the primary keys of the three tables? 
e)	 What are the foreign keys of the three relations?
f)	 Finds names of all the students studying in class 

‘Commerce stream’ and are guided by same teacher, 
even if they are assigned different projects.

9.	 An organization ABC maintains a database EMP-
DEPENDENT to record the following details about its 
employees and their dependents. 

EMPLOYEE(AadhaarNo, Name, Address, Department, 
EmpID)
DEPENDENT(EmpID, DependentName, Relationship)

Use the EMP-DEPENDENT database to answer the following 
SQL queries:
a)	 Find the names of employees with their dependent 

names.
b)	 Find employee details working in a department, say, 

‘PRODUCTION’.
c)	 Find employee names having no dependent
d)	 Find names of employees working in a department, 

say, ‘SALES’ and having exactly two dependents.
10.	A shop called Wonderful Garments that sells school 

uniforms maintain a database SCHOOL_UNIFORM as shown 
below. It consisted of two relations — UNIFORM and 
PRICE. They made UniformCode as the primary key for 
UNIFORM relation. Further, they used UniformCode and 
Size as composite keys for PRICE relation. By analysing 
the database schema and database state, specify SQL 
queries to rectify the following anomalies.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   173 19-Jul-19   3:45:59 PM



174 Informatics Practices – Class XI

a)	 The PRICE relation has an attribute named Price. In 
order to avoid confusion, write SQL query to change 
the name of the relation PRICE to COST. 

UNIFORM PRICE

UCode UName UColor UCode Size Price
1 Shirt White 1 M 500
2 Pant Grey 1 L 580
3  Skirt Grey 1 XL 620

4 Tie Blue 2 M 810

5 Socks Blue 2 L 890

6 Belt Blue 2 XL 940
3 M 770
3 L 830
3 XL 910
4 S 150
4 L 170
5 S 180
5 L 210
6 M 110
6 L 140
6 XL 160

b)	 M/S Wonderful Garments also keeps handkerchiefs 
of red color, medium size of  `100 each. Insert this 
record in COST table. 

c)	 When you used the above query to insert data, 
you were able to enter the values for handkerchief 
without entering its details in the UNIFORM 
relation. Make a provision so that the data can be 
entered in COST table only if it is already there in 
UNIFROM table. 	  

d)	 Further, you should be able to assign a new UCode 
to an item only if it has a valid UName. Write a 
query to add appropriate constraint to the SCHOOL_
UNIFORM database. 

e)	 ALTER table to add the constraint that price of an 
item is always greater than zero.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 8.indd   174 19-Jul-19   3:45:59 PM