Biotechnology
Textbook for Class XII

Reprint 2025-26



12150 – Biotechnology
ISBN  978-93-5292-402-8

Textbook for Class XII

First Edition ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
February 2023 Magha 1944 system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,

mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior
permission of the publisher.

 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
PD 5T BS

trade, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the
publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in 
which it is published.

© National Council of Educational  The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page,

Research and Training, 2023 Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any 
other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.

OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION  
DIVISION, NCERT

NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road 
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446

CWC Campus

 435.00 Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454

CWC Complex
Maligaon  
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869

Publication Team

Head, Publication : Anup Kumar Rajput
Division

Chief Production : Arun Chitkara
Officer

Chief Business : Vipin Dewan
Manager

Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT 
watermark Chief Editor   : Bijnan Sutar

(In charge)
Published at the Publication Division Production Assistant : Sunil Kumar
by the Secretary, National Council of 
Educational Research and Training, 
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 Cover and Layout
016 and printed at Chandra Prabhu 

DTP Cell, DESM
Offset Printing Works (P.) Ltd., C-40, 
Sector-8, Noida - 201 301 (U.P.)

Reprint 2025-26



Foreword
NCERT prepares quality curricular material for its stakeholders at all levels of school 

education. Biotechnology is a new addition in the series of textbooks for students at the 

higher secondary stage. It is always considered important that a smooth transition of 

students occur from the secondary stage to the higher secondary stage. At the secondary 

stage, children pursue science as an integrated subject, whereas specific subject 
disciplines are offered at the higher secondary stage.

 Biotechnology being an applied subject, involves the understanding of fundamentals of 

the components of Biology, Chemistry and Physics. Keeping this in mind, basic principles 

of organisms, cell and molecules have been discussed in the textbook of Biotechnology at 

initial level in Class XI. Thus, the learner can appreciate the basic aspects and principles 

with a focus on its applications. The applied aspects are dealt with in Class XII, where 

children have been given good exposure to understand as to how the basic cellular and 

molecular processes can be used for diverse applications for the welfare of society in 

general. 

 Such applications touch almost all aspects of human activities, like agriculture, 

health, food and nutrition, industry, and environment conservation. Keeping in view the 

cognitive domain of higher secondary students, attempts have been made to keep various 

aspects of applications of biotechnology in such a way that a smooth transition occurs 

from higher secondary to higher and technical level. As per the recommendations of 

the National Education Policy-2020, attempts have also been made to develop critical 

thinking analysing societal needs. 

 Being an applied subject, it is extremely crucial that children must develop skills to 

cope up with technological content of the subject. I do hope that the textbook would be up 

to the expectations of the stakeholders. Biotechnological researches have a great potential 

for exploring and establishing various enterprises with the industrial and commercial 

applications, therefore, an appropriate understanding of entrepreneurial skills among 

children pursuing the course is relevant. A chapter has been dedicated to this aspect as 

well. It is expected that this course of Biotechnology would be a perfect bridge between 

the secondary stage science and similar disciplines at higher and professional level.

 I am confident that the development team has taken due care while preparing the 
manuscript about correctness, accuracy and appropriateness of the content. However, 

NCERT believes in the continuous improvement of our curricular materials, therefore, 

feedback and suggestions provided by different stakeholders would be of great help for 

further improving its quality and utility.

New Delhi Director

September 2022 National Council of Educational 

Research and Training

Reprint 2025-26



iv

Reprint 2025-26



Preface
Biotechnology, by definition, is an applied science and its applications are widespread. 
It is becoming increasingly evident that the  role of biotechnology is increasing day by 

day. In the field of agriculture, biotechnological applications have helped in improving 
many crop varieties from the perspective of increased productivity, pest resistance, 

drought and salinity tolerance. Production of human growth hormone and insulin, 

diagnosis of various diseases whether genetic or infectious and development of a 

number of vaccines including the one against COVID-19 have become possible 

only because of the advancements in the area of biotechnology. Even in the field of 
environment protection and conservation, biotechnological tools have tremendously 

contributed through bioremediation of toxic substance on one hand to detection of 

toxic substance through biosensor and elimination of toxic substances from soil on 

the other. Last but not the least, advancements in the area of bioinformatics provide a 

tool which has predictive potentialities from the point of view of prediction of disease 

a person is likely to suffer in future and drug discovery.  It is worth mentioning that 

new researches are pouring in at a very fast speed and therefore, the understanding 

of the subject has to be fundamental and critical to address future challenges.

 In Class XI, students of biotechnology have already been exposed to the 

basic understanding of biomolecules, cell organisation with cellular processes, 

fundamentals of genetic and molecular principles, and various tools and techniques 

employed in the biotechnological study. Course content of the subject for Class XII 

largely dwells around the application of molecular and cellular principles besides 

employing different microbes for various beneficial usage. Also, appropriate emphasis 
has been given on the aspect of recent innovations and development happening in the 

area. Another important feature of the book is the component on entrepreneurship 

which would develop an appropriate understanding as to how a biotechnology-based 

enterprise can be established. 

 Attempt has been made to keep a continuity of the content of biotechnology for 

Class XII with that of the fundamentals studied in earlier class. There are five units 
in the book divided into thirteen chapters. Unit I with four chapters deals with the 

details of recombinant DNA (rDNA) technology and gene cloning in which the role of 

host and vector for transfer of gene or a segment of DNA for various applications have 

been detailed first. In Chapter 4, a few of the common and important applications 
of rDNA technology have been described. Unit II focusses on the aspect of genome 

engineering in which various advancements of DNA sequencing technology, genome 

editing, comparative genomics and protein engineering have been described. Unit 

III has five chapters in which the fundamentals and application of various culture 
techniques, be it culture of microbes, plant and animal tissues or stem cells have 

been prescribed. The usage of microbial and cell culture in most of the cases lead to 

the bioprocessing of various products. Accordingly, Chapter 10 of the Unit III deals 

Reprint 2025-26



with this applied technology of bioprocessing and biomanufacturing. Unit IV with 

one chapter emphasises on the applied aspect of microorganisms and technology for 

the treatment of wastewater and sewage besides bioremediation of toxic substances 

especially pesticides. Unit V has two chapters, one on recent innovations in the field 
of Biotechnology and the other on various aspects about entrepreneurship skill and 

its development.

 It is expected that the entire course of Biotechnology would be helpful for students 

in developing a critical understanding of the subject, its application, future prospects 

besides developing entrepreneurial skills.

 I express my deep sense of gratitude and appreciation to U. N. Dwivedi, Former 

Professor, Department of Biochemistry and Former Vice Chancellor of University of 

Lucknow, for providing leadership in this endeavour of NCERT. This task would not 

have been accomplished without the contribution of the entire development team and 

their efforts are highly appreciated.

 The department welcomes the comments as well as suggestions for bringing out 

further improvement in the textbook.

Dinesh Kumar 

Professor and Member Co-ordinator

Department of Education in Science and 

Mathematics

vi

Reprint 2025-26



Textbook Development 
Committee
ChairPerson

U. N. Dwivedi, Former Professor and Former Vice Chancellor, Department of 

Biochemistry, University of Lucknow, Lucknow

MeMbers

Akash Ranjan, Scientist, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics [CDFD], 

Hyderabad

Amit Dinda, Professor, Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical 

Sciences, Delhi

Animesh Kumar Mohapatra, Professor, Regional Institute of Education, Bhubaneswar

Anita K. Verma, Professor, Kirori Mal College, University of Delhi, Delhi

Chochong Vareichung Shimray, Associate Professor, Department of Education in 

Science and Mathematics, NCERT

G.B.N. Chainy, Professor, Department of Zoology and Biotechnology, Utkal University, 

Utkal

Indrakant K. Singh, Associate Professor, Department of Zoology, Deshbandhu College, 

University of Delhi, Delhi 

Kusum Yadav, Associate Professor, Department of Biochemistry, University of 

Lucknow, Lucknow

Manoj K. Sharma, Assistant Professor, School of Biotechnology, Jawaharlal Nehru 
University, Delhi

Poonam Sharma, Associate Professor, Gargi College, University of Delhi, Delhi 

Pushp Lata Verma, Associate Professor, Department of Education in Science and 

Mathematics, NCERT

Sarmistha Sarma, Professor, Institute of Innovation in Technology and Management, 

Delhi

Sunita Farkya, Professor, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, 

NCERT

Veda Prakash Pandey, CSIR Pool Scientist, Department of Biochemistry, University of 

Lucknow, Lucknow

MeMber Co-ordinator

Dinesh Kumar, Professor, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, 
Head, PMD and Dean (Research) NCERT

Reprint 2025-26



viii

Reprint 2025-26



Acknowledgements
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) gratefully 

acknowledges the contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in the 

development of Biotechnology textbook for Class XII. The Council is grateful to Binay 

Panda, Professor, School of Biotechnology, Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi; 

Pawan K. Dhar, Professor, School of Biotechnology, Jawaharlal Nehru University, 

Delhi; Mohammad Mahfuzul Haque, Professor, Department of Biotechnology, Jamia 

Millia lslamia, Delhi; Vinod Kumar Srivastava, Former Associate Professor, Indira 

Gandhi Government College, Tezu, Arunachal Pradesh, for their contribution in the 

review of the manuscript.

The NCERT is highly thankful to Shweta Singh, Joint Director, Central Board 

of Secondary Education, Delhi; Anjulika Joshi, PGT, Mount Carmel School, Anand 

Niketan, Delhi; Sushil Kumar Dwivedi, PGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Aliganj, Lucknow; 

Payal Priyadarshini, PGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Delhi Cantt-3, Delhi; Pratibha Sharma, 

PGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya, JNU, Delhi and Ambika Nagrath, PGT, Army Public School, 

Dhaula Kuan, Delhi; Upasna Chopra, PGT, Apeejay School, Panchsheel Park, Delhi; 

Dinesh Kumar Jamwal, HOD, Air Force Bal Bharti School, Lodhi road, Delhi; Ankit, 

PGT, Ahlcon International School, Mayur Vihar Phase 1, Delhi; Neva, PGT, Delhi 

Public School, R.K. Puram, Delhi; for their valuable suggestions.

The NCERT is also thankful to Bharat Biotech Pvt. Ltd., Dr. Banwarilal of The 

Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), for providing relevant information that was 

required for finalising a few chapters.
The Council also acknowledges the academic contributions of Ritika Gupta and 

Preeti Sharma, Junior Project Fellows, in finalising the manuscript. Contributions of 
Shilpi Singh, Lab Assistant; Suman Prajapati and Pooja Sharma, Graphic Designers 

and Rekha Sharma, DTP Operator for typesetting are also acknowledged. Without 

their effort, it would not have been possible to bring out the manuscript. Cooperation 

from Rajendra Singh, Assistant Program Coordinator, and his staff for their help in 

organising workshops and office logistics for the same is especially thanked.
The efforts of Soumma Chandra, Editor (Contractual), Chanchal Chauhan, 

Assistant Editor (Contractual), Surender Kumar, (Incharge, DTP Cell, NCERT), and 

Mohammed Aariz DTP Operator (Contractual) of the Publication Division, NCERT, in 

bringing out the first edition of this book are also highly appreciated.

Reprint 2025-26



x

Reprint 2025-26



Contents

Foreword  iii

Preface  v

Unit I: Recombinant DNA Technology 1–110

Chapter 1: An Overview of Recombinant DNA Technology 3

1.1  An Overview of Recombinant DNA Technology 3

Chapter 2: Host–Vector System 9

2.1 Two Key Components of Recombinant DNA Technology 9

2.2 Host 10

2.3 Vector 10

2.4 Eukaryotic Host Vector System 20

2.5 Expression Vectors 22

2.6 Shuttle vectors 23

Chapter 3: Gene Cloning 27

3.1 Identification of Candidate Gene 27
3.2 Isolation of Nucleic Acids 28

3.3 Enzymes used for Recombinant DNA Technology 34

3.4 Modes of DNA Transfer 40

3.5 Screening and Selection 44

3.6 Blotting Techniques 48

3.7 Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) 52
3.8 DNA Libraries 59

Chapter 4: Applications of Recombinant DNA Technology 67

4.1 DNA Fingerprinting 67
4.2 Transgenic Organism 71
4.3 Gene Therapy 85

4.4 Recombinant Vaccines 90

4.5 Therapeutic Agents/Molecules: Monoclonal Antibodies,  

 Insulin and Growth Hormone 98

Reprint 2025-26



Unit II: Genome Engineering 111–140

Chapter 5: Genome Technology and Engineering 113

5.1 Mapping of the Genome: Genetic and Physical 113

5.2 High–Throughput DNA Sequencing 118

5.3 Other Genome-related Technology 124

5.4 Genome Engineering 126

5.5 Structural, Functional and Comparative Genomics 130

5.6 Protein Engineering 132

Unit III:  Microbial, Plant, Animal Cell,   
Organ Culture and Bio processing 141–252

Chapter 6: Microbial Culture 143

6.1 Historical Perspective 143

6.2 Nutritional Requirements and Culture Media 148

6.3 Sterilisation Methods 153

6.4 Pure Culture Techniques 156

6.5 Factors Affecting Microbial Growth 159

6.6 The Growth Curve 161

Chapter 7: Plant Tissue Culture 167 

7.1 Historical Perspective 167
7.2 Plant Cell and Tissue Culture Techniques 170
7.3 Nutrient Media 173
7.4 Culture Types 174
7.5 Applications of Plant Cell and Tissue Culture   176

Chapter 8: Animal Cell Culture 185

8.1 Historical Perspective 186

8.2 Culture Media 187
8.3 Physical Environment for Culturing Animal Cells 190

8.4 Equipment Used for Cell Culture 193

8.5 Types of Animal Cell Cultures and Cell Lines 196

8.6 Cell Viability Determination 200

8.7 Advantages of Animal Cell Culture 202
8.8 Applications of Animal Cell Culture  202

xii

Reprint 2025-26



Chapter 9: Stem Cell Culture and Organ Culture 209

9.1 Stem Cell Culture 209

9.2 Organ Culture 221
##10##
Chapter 10: Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing 231

10.1 Historical Perspective 232

10.2 Instrumentation in Bioprocessing:   

 Bioreactor and Fermenter Design 233

10.3 Operational Stages of Bioprocess 236

10.4 Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing of Desired Products 246

Unit IV: Bioremediation 253–288


Chapter 11: Bioremediation 255

11.1 Waste Water Treatment 255

11.2 Solid Waste Management 265

11.3 Management and Disposal of Bio-medical Waste 272
11.4 Bioremediation of Pesticides 275

Unit V:  Recent Innovations in Biotechnology and 
Entrepreneurship 289–342

Chapter 12: Recent Innovations in Biotechnology 291

12.1 Environmental Biotechnology 291

12.2 Plant Biotechnology 298

12.3 Regenerative Medicine 304

12.4 Nanobiotechnology 308

12.5 Synthetic Biology 315

12.6 Future Prospects 317

Chapter 13: Entrepreneurship 323

13.1 Concept of Entrepreneurship 323

13.2 Sources of Funds 328

13.3  Entrepreneurship in Biotechnology 329

13.4 Concept of IPR 332

13.5 Biopiracy 336

xiii

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26



UNIT  I
Recombinant DNA 
Technology

Chapter 1: An Overview of Recombinant DNA Technology

Chapter 2: Host–Vector System

Chapter 3: Gene Cloning

Chapter 4: Application of Recombinant DNA Technology

Reprint 2025-26



Herbert Boyer

Herbert Wayne ‘Herb’ Boyer (born July 10, 1936) was a researcher 
and entrepreneur in Biotechnology. Herb Boyer hails from 
Derry, Pennsylvania. Boyer went on to graduate at the University 
of Pittsburgh, where he specialised in microbial genetics. After 
preliminary experiments in 1973, the Cohen-Boyer team was able 
to cut open a plasmid loop from one species of bacteria, insert 
a gene from different bacterial species and close the plasmid. 
This created a recombinant—plasmid containing recombined 
DNA from two different sources. The team had created the first 
genetically modified organisms. He is the recipient of the 1990 
National Medal of Science, co-recipient of the 1996 Lemelson–
MIT Prize, and a co-founder of Genentech. He was a professor 
at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) and later 
served as the Vice President of Genentech from 1976 until his 
retirement in 1991.

Reprint 2025-26

##1##

view of Recombinant
Chapter 1 An Over

DNA Technology 

This chapter gives an overview of recombinant DNA (rDNA) 1.1 An Overview of 
technology as to how the application of basic concepts of Recombinant  

molecular biology, microbiology, genetics, biochemistry, DNA Technology  

etc., led to initial development of rDNA technology. 
Potential application of rDNA technology in the field of 
medicine and agriculture is also discussed in conceptual 
manner along with some noticeable examples of products 
developed through rDNA technology.

1.1 An Overview Of recOmbinAnt DnA 

technOlOgy

In the last century when scientists discovered that 
nucleic acid (DNA) is the principal molecule responsible 
for the expression of characters, attempts were made to 
alter the genetic makeup of an organism by manipulating 
nucleic acid directly. Various methods used for directly 
manipulating nucleic acid/genome of an organism 
are collectively referred to as recombinant DNA (rDNA) 
technology or genetic engineering.

rDNA technology has been possible due to rapid 
progress in various fields of biology, which spans from 

Reprint 2025-26



biochemistry, genetics, cytology, microbiology, molecular 
biology and others. Isolation and purification of nucleic 
acids followed by the understanding of their structures, 
properties, functions and finally their sequencing in the 
last century are the most important contributions, which 
laid the foundation of development of rDNA technology. 
The first breakthrough in this journey was to establish the 
fact that DNA of an organism not only carries its genetic 
information but also propagates it from one generation 
to another. The next hallmark was the determination of 
chemical and physical structure of DNA molecule and 
double helical structure of DNA. Further, replication, 
transcription and translation of DNA was understood in 
detail by scientists.  Scientists were also able to develop 
various methods and techniques to isolate and purify 
DNA from various organisms. Several enzymes were 
simultaneously discovered using which one can precisely 
manipulate a DNA molecule. Thus, new enzymes, such 
as restriction enzymes (which act as scissors to cut the 
molecules of DNA) by Werner Arbor, Hamilton Smith 
and Daniel Nathan (during late 1960s and early 1970s) 
and ligase (which joins two DNA fragments) by Gellert, 
Lehman, Richardson and Hurwitz in the year 1967 were 
discovered.

During this period, scientists also noticed that 
foreign DNA fragments can be taken by bacteria from 
its surrounding environment where it can be integrated 
into its genome. With all this knowledge, scientists asked 
a question that is it possible to transfer the gene of 
interest from one organism to another organism to get its 
product? Stanley Cohen had the expertise in introducing 
plasmid DNA into Escherichia coli (E. coli) and subsequent 
propagation and cloning of plasmids in the bacteria. On 
the contrary, Herbert Boyer had the expertise to cleave 
the double stranded DNA to produce single stranded ends 
with identical termini using restriction enzymes. Both 
visualised the potential of combining the two discoveries 
to what would later become rDNA technology or genetic 
engineering.

4 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



rDNA technology has immensely contributed in the 
diagnosis and treatment of various diseases including 
genetic disorders and to improve and develop disease free 
high yielding crops. The contribution of rDNA technology 
in shaping our life can be judged from the given examples. 
Earlier several tons of animal pancreatic glands were 
needed to get a few milligrams of insulin to treat diabetes, 
or thousands of animal pituitary glands were required to 
isolate growth hormone to treat dwarfism. Therefore, these 
products were available in limited quantity as well as at a 
high cost. Nevertheless, such purified therapeutic proteins 
from animal source exhibited immunogenic reactions 
in humans. Needless to say, scientists circumvent the 
above obstacles by producing human insulin and growth 
hormone in bacterial system using rDNA technology. 
Production of interferon to treat cancer, plasminogen 
activator and urokinase to dissolve blood clots are a 
few examples of the contribution of rDNA technology to 
human society.

In the last few decades, by employing rDNA technology, 
scientists have been able to introduce specific targeted 
modifications in plant genome to get genetically modified 
crops. Thus, in this way, crops have been developed that 
offer resistance to diseases, thereby helping farmers to be 
free from worry about damage of their crops. Similarly, 
drought resistant or salinity tolerant crops were also 
developed so that farmers can grow them in adverse 
environment. Such modifications in genetic system of 
plants or crops by rDNA technology not only improve 
the quality of production but also enhance the value of 
products.

Days are not far, when a variety of  important therapeutic 
proteins, peptides and hormones will be produced from 
plants employing rDNA technology. Such products will 
have many advantages over animal-based products in 
terms of costs and contamination. In general, animal-
based products are costlier and require extra care to be 
free of virus and other animal protein contaminants.  

Landmark discoveries that led to the development of 
modern biotechnology (based on rDNA technology is given 
in Box 1).
Box 1

Recombinant DNA Technology 5

Reprint 2025-26



Selected developments in the history of biotechnology 

1917 Karl Ereky coined the term ‘Biotechnology’

1944 Avery, MacLeod and McCarty demonstrated that ‘DNA is the genetic material’

1952 Joshua Lederberg discovered ‘Plasmids’

1953 Watson and Crick proposed ‘Double Helical structure of DNA’

1960s Werner Arber, Matthew Meselson discovered ‘ Type I restriction enzymes’

1967 Gellert, Lehman, Richardson and Hurwitz discovered ‘ligase enzymes’

1970 Hamilton O. Smith and Thomas J. Kelly discovered ‘ Type II restriction enzymes’

Paul Berg assembled the first ‘Recombinant DNA’ from a bacterium into the 
1972

virus

Stanley N. Cohen and Herbert Boyer developed ‘DNA cloning and rDNA 
1973

technology’

Georges J.F. Köhler and César Milstein described the ‘Hybridoma Technology’ 
1975

for production of monoclonal antibodies

FDA approved world’s first recombinant DNA Therapeutic Product ‘Humulin’ 
1982

developed by Eli Lilly and Genentech

1983 Kary Mullis developed ‘Polymerase Chain Reaction’

1984 Sir Alec Jeffreys invented ‘DNA Fingerprinting’

The first recombinant vaccine ‘Recombivax HB’ for Hepatitis B was approved 
1986

for human use

‘Human Genome Project’ officially initiated which was coordinated by the U.S. 
1990

Department of Energy (DOE) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH)

The first genetically engineered crop ‘Flavr Savr’ tomato was introduced that 
1994

was produced by Calgene in 1992

Keith Campbell and Ian Wilmut cloned the first mammal ‘Dolly’ the sheep from 
1996 somatic cell using nuclear transfer technique.

6 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Researchers at Monsanto developed ‘Bt cotton’ and first commercially released 
1996 it in China and the United States in 1996, followed by its introduction in India 

in 2003

2000 Ingo Potrykus and Peter Beyer developed ‘Golden Rice’

2003 The Human Genome Project (HGP) was completed

‘Avastin’, an anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody for cancer treatment was 
2004

developed

A recombinant vaccine ‘Gardasil’ against human papillomavirus (HPV) received 
2006

FDA approval

Nobel prize awarded for discovery of RNA interference ‘Gene Silencing’ by 
2006

double stranded RNA

Robert Edwards awarded Nobel Prize for the development of human ‘in vitro 
2010

fertilization’ (IVF) therapy

Shinya Yamanaka and John B. Gurdon discovered that mature differentiated 
2012

cells can be reprogrammed into ‘Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells’

2019 Nobel prize awarded for discovery of ‘CRISPR-Cas9’ genome editing tool

2020 Recombinant vaccines against COVID-19 was developed.

2023 Nobel prize awarded for the mRNA vaccine against covid –19

In the next chapters of the present Unit, the various 
components and applications of rDNA technology are 
discussed in detail.

SUMMARY

• The methods used for manipulating nucleic acid/genome 
of an organism are collectively referred to as recombinant 
DNA (rDNA) technology or genetic engineering.

• The fundamental theme of rDNA technology is the isolation 
and propagation of a desired DNA molecule (gene) from a 
source with an aim to have its product in ample quantity. 
This technique is called gene cloning.

Recombinant DNA Technology 7

Reprint 2025-26



EXERCISES

 1. Discuss in brief how recombinant DNA technology was 
initially developed?

 2. Briefly discuss the application of rDNA technology in 
crop improvement and therapeutics.

 3. Who discovered the Plasmid?
 (a) Paul Berg
 (b) Sir Alec Jeffreys 
 (c) Joshua Lederberg
 (d) Kary Mullis

 4. Plasminogen activator and Urokinase are used as: 
(a) Antiviral agent 
(b) Blood clot dissolving drug
(c) Sugar lowering agent
(d) Cholesterol lowering agent

 5. Assertion: Restriction endonuclease cuts DNA and 
isolated mostly from bacteria.
Reason: Restriction endonuclease is a type of nuclease.

(a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason 
is the correct explanation of the assertion.

(b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason 
is not the correct explanation of the assertion.

(c) Assertion is true but reason is false.
(d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 6. Assertion: E. coli divides in 20 minutes while 
replicates its DNA in about 60 minutes.
Reason: E. coli  follows multifork replication mecha- 
nism.

(a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason 
is the correct explanation of the assertion.

(b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason 
is not the correct explanation of the assertion.

(c) Assertion is true but reason is false.
(d) Both assertion and reason are false.

8 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26

##2##

Chapter 2 Host–Vector System

Recombinant DNA technology is a two component system 2.1 Two Key 
involving a compatible host and a vector. A variety of hosts Components of 

as well as vectors are available for gene cloning. In this Recombinant DNA 
Technology 

chapter, students will be exposed to the fundamentals 
of different kinds of prokaryotic and eukaryotic host and 2.2 Host

vectors used in rDNA technology. 2.3 Vector

2.4 Eukaryotic Host 

2.1 Two Key ComponenTs of ReCombinanT Vector System

2.5 Expression Vectors
Dna TeChnology

2.6 Shuttle Vectors

As discussed in the previous chapter (Chapter 1), rDNA 
technology refers to joining two different DNA molecules with 
an aim to isolate, propagate, characterise and manipulate 
the genes for various applications. This technique involves 
two major steps (Fig. 2.1). In the first step, the desired 
DNA molecule, generally termed as insert (target gene), 
is isolated from the source. In the second step, this target 
gene is inserted into a convenient carrier DNA molecule 
called vector. The vector containing the insert is called 
recombinant DNA (rDNA). Subsequently, the rDNA is 
introduced into an organism referred to as host. Using 

Reprint 2025-26



genetic machinery of the host, the rDNA 
undergoes propagation and expression. 

Restriction This whole process of rDNA technology 
Vector Foreign DNA

digestion is covered under the term ‘gene cloning’. 
Thus, gene cloning may be considered as 
a two component system: a compatible 

Target gene
(Insert) host and a vector, where the vector 

provides essential sequences required 
Ligation

for its replication in a compatible host, 
which provides various replication 

Vector containing
target gene functions (enzymes and proteins).
(Recombinant DNA)

Chromosomal 2.2 hosT
Transformation

DNA

A large number of host organisms, both 
Host cell Recombinant DNA prokaryotic and eukaryotic are used for 

gene cloning (Fig. 2.2). A host should 

Propagation allow easy entry of the rDNA into the cell 
and should not consider the recombinant 

Recombinant DNA as a foreign DNA and degrade it. 
DNA 
multiplied The host must supply all the required 

enzymes and proteins for smooth 
Fig. 2.1: Schematic representation of gene cloning replication of the vector DNA along with 

insert. A wide variety of genetically defined strains are 
available as hosts. 

Among prokaryotic hosts, E. coli is the most extensively 
used. Typical E. coli is a rod-shaped Gram-negative 
bacterium commonly found in the lower intestine of warm-
blooded organisms. It is able to reproduce and grow rapidly, 
doubling its population about every 20 mins. K12 strain 
of E. coli is one of the most commonly used hosts in gene 
cloning. Other prokaryotic hosts have also been developed. 
For example, Bacillus subtilis constitutes an important 
alternative host, where the aim is secretion of a protein 
encoded by a cloned gene. Among eukaryotic hosts, the 
most widely used is yeast.

2.3 VeCToR

In principle, any molecule of DNA, which can replicate itself 
inside a host cell, can work as a vector for gene cloning. 
However, in order for a plasmid to act as vector, it must 

10 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



fulfil the following features:
1. For easy incorporation into the host cell, a vector 

should itself be small in size and be able to integrate a 
large size of the insert.

2. The vector should have an origin of replication or ori, 
so that the vector is capable of autonomous replication 
inside the host organism. 

3. The vector needs to have unique restriction sites. If it 
possesses too many restriction sites, then it would be 
fragmented into several pieces.

4. The vector needs to have at least one selectable 
marker. The selectable markers are required to screen 
out transformants [For example: resistance to 
antibiotics such as tetracycline (tetR) and ampicillin 
(ampR)].

A variety of both prokaryotic as well as eukaryotic vectors are 
given in (Fig. 2.2).

Two component system
of gene cloning

Host Vector

Prokaryotic Eukaryotic Prokaryotic Eukaryotic

E. coli Yeast Plasmid (pBR322) Yeast (YAC)
Plant Cells Bacteriophage (λ) Plants (pTi)
Animal Cells Animals (Vaccinia)

Fig. 2.2: Two component system of gene cloning showing various kinds of eukaryotic and 
prokaryotic hosts and vectors

2.3.1 Plasmid as a vector
Plasmids are circular, double-stranded (ds) and extra 
chromosomal DNAs capable of autonomous replication. 
They occur naturally in many bacteria, archaea, and even in 
eukaryotes, such as yeast. Size of plasmids ranges from a few 
thousand base pairs to more than 100 kilobase pairs (kbp). 
Like the host-cell chromosomal DNA, plasmid DNA is replicated 
before every cell division. During cell division, atleast one copy of 
the plasmid DNA is segregated to each daughter cell, assuring 

Host-Vector System 11

Reprint 2025-26



continued propagation of the plasmid through successive 
generations of the host cell. Some plasmids can integrate into 
chromosomes. Such plasmids are called episomes.

Several naturally occurring plasmids contain genes 
that provide some benefit to the host cell. For example, 
some bacterial plasmids encode enzymes that deactivate 
antibiotics, such as ampicillin, tetracycline and chloram-
phenicol. Such drug-resistance providing plasmids, called 
R-plasmids constitute a major category of plasmids used 
for gene cloning. Another category of plasmids produce a 
variety of toxins called ‘colicins’ which kill other bacteria 
(called Col plasmids). Some plasmids contain ‘transfer 
genes’ encoding proteins that can form a macromolecular 
tube, or pilus, through which a copy of the plasmid can 
be transferred to other host cells of the same or related 
bacterial species called F-plasmids. Similarly, based on 
the copy number plasmids can also be classified as follows:
(a) High or multi copy plasmids: Replication and 
segregation of these plasmids are free from control of 
replication of the bacterial chromosomal DNA that allows 
for many copies of these plasmids per cell (10–30 copies) 
[Fig. 2.3(a)]. 

Chromosomal DNA

Plasmid

DNA replication, cell division and random segregation of DNA
into daughter cells

(a) (b)

Fig. 2.3: (a) High copy plasmid (b) Low copy plasmid 

12 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Replication of these plasmids is referred to as relaxed 
replication. Use of a high copy number plasmid gives 
rise to higher yields and increased strength of the signals 
during screening of recombinants.
(b) Low or single-copy plasmids: Replication and 
segregation of these plasmids are under the same control as 
replication of the bacterial chromosomal DNA. As a result 
of this, the copy number of these plasmids are restricted 
to only one or few copies per cell [Fig. 2.3(b)]. Replication 
of these plasmids is referred to as stringent replication.

Development of plasmid based vectors

In order to use plasmids as a vector and to enhance their 
utility either for general purposes or to suit particular 
experimental designs, plasmids originally 
found in nature, are modified, shortened, EcoRI

reconstructed and recombined under both — 
in vivo as well as in vitro to incorporate the PstI BamHI

properties indicated above into them. For 
example, the plasmid based vector pBR313, ampR

which replicates in relaxed fashion (giving SalI
tetR

rise to high copy number), contains two 
selectable markers tetR and ampR (selectable pBR322

(4,361 bp)
markers were derived from other two naturally 
occurring plasmids) and carried a number of 
unique restriction sites (cloning sites). 
However, the size of this plasmid was too 
large (9 kb). It was observed that more than 

Origin of
half of its DNA was not essential for its role Replication PvuII

as a vector. Therefore, the first phase of this (ori)

plasmid vector development led to the 
Fig. 2.4: Vector map of pBR322 showing 

construction of vector pBR322, whose size 
the origin of replication (ori), 

was reduced to 4,361 bp by deleting most of unique cloning sites  for restriction 
the non-essential sequences of pBR313. The enzymes (PstI, EcoRI, BamHI, SalI, 

vector pBR322 became the most widely used PvuII) and antibiotic selectable 
marker genes (ampR and tetR)

vector for gene cloning (Fig. 2.4).
Subsequent development included the introduction of 

synthetic cloning sites termed as multiple cloning site 
(MCS) or poly cloning site or polylinker. MCS is a short 
synthetic DNA fragment containing a large number of unique 
restriction sites. This enables the insertion of a foreign DNA 
cleaved at any of these restriction sites into that region 

Host-Vector System 13

Reprint 2025-26



(Fig. 2.5). Further development involved the introduction of 
easy and convenient selection markers. Thus, for example, 
selection of the recombinants on the basis of blue/white 
selection was introduced (for detail refer section 3.5; Chapter 
3), which facilitated the selection of recombinants utilising 
-galactosidase (lacZ) of E. coli. A common example of such 
an improved cloning vector is pUC19 vector as shown in Fig. 
2.5. Many other plasmids are used as vectors for gene cloning 
in E. coli.

EcoRI

SacI
ampR

KpnI

XmaI/SmaI
lacZ

BamHI
Multiple

pUC19
cloning site XbaI

(2.686 kb)
(Polylinker) SalI/HincII/AccII

BspMI

PstI

SphI

HindIII
ori

Fig. 2.5: Vector map of pUC19 showing origin of replication sequence (ori), ampicillin resistance gene 
(ampR) and part of -galactosidase gene (lacZ) 

2.3.2 Bacteriophage as vectors

Another important category of vectors for gene cloning 
is derived out of the genome of bacteriophages (phages) 
i.e., viruses which infect the bacterial cells. In general, 
bacteriophage vectors are more efficient than plasmids for 
cloning large inserts, and screening large numbers of 
bacteriophage plaques (lysed bacterial cells due to phage 
infection) than screening bacterial colonies for a specific 
desired insert. The bacteriophage lambda (λ) and M13 are 
the two most common phages, whose genome has been 
frequently used to make cloning vectors for E. coli host. 
They are described in the following section.

Lambda (λ) Phage Vector

The bacteriophage lambda, a virus that infects E. coli, has 
been widely used as a cloning vector. The virus is easy to 

14 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



propagate, and therefore, has long been a 
Capsid 

model system. It consists of a head (capsid) 
and a tail (Fig. 2.6). The head contains phage 

DNA
genome. The phage particles bind to the 
surface of E. coli and insert its genome via 

Collar
tail into the cytoplasm of the bacterial cell. 
λ phage is a virus with both lytic and lysogenic 
alternatives to its life cycle (Fig. 2.7). Usually, Tail
a ‘lytic cycle’ is followed, where the λ DNA is 
replicated and new phage particles are 
produced within the cell. This causes cell Base plate

lysis, releasing the newly formed phage Tail fiber

particles. However, under certain conditions, 
the phage DNA may integrate itself into the Binding

proteins
host cell chromosome in the lysogenic 
pathway. In this state, the λ DNA is called a Fig. 2.6: Lambda (λ) bacteriophage
prophage and stays resident within the host’s 
genome without causing apparent harm to the host. 

Lytic cycle

Bacteriophage
Circular

Linear phage DNA
phage DNA

bacterial Host DNA
cell

Replication of Phage DNA
Phage The phage DNA becomes and phage proteins synthesis The cell lyses,

infection circular Formation of new phage particles releasing phage
are assembled

Lysogenic cycle

Linear
phage DNA

Phage infection
Phage DNA gets

integrated into the host genome
The phage DNA gets excised

(Prophage) Bacterial cells divide
from the bacteria l DNA and

with prophage DNA and enters the lytic cycle
is passed into
daughter cells

Fig. 2.7: Lytic and lysogenic life cycles of lambda phage Host-Vector System 15

Reprint 2025-26



The λ phage genome is linear double stranded DNA 
containing 48,490 base pairs. Each end has a 12 bases 
single stranded segment known as cos sequences (cohesive 
ends). The two cohesive ends are complementary to each 
other. The λ genome has a replication origin site, genes 
for viral head and tail proteins, enzymes of replication 
involved in lytic and lysogenic cycles. The λ genome 
remains linear within the phage head [Fig. 2.8 (a)]. Once 
inside the E. coli host cell, the cos sequences pair up and 
cohesive ends are ligated together by host enzyme forming 
the circular version of lambda genome [Fig. 2.8 (b)]. The 
sealed cohesive end is called cos site [Fig. 2.8 (b)]. The 12 
nucleotides long single stranded DNA at both ends pair 
with each other to form double stranded DNA. Therefore, 
in its circular form, the phage genome is 48,502 base 
pairs in length. The phage λ genome can be inserted into 
host chromosome and is then called a prophage (Fig. 2.7).

During multiplication, the phage genome undergoes 
rolling circle replication in which a template strand rotates, 
churning out a chain of many copies of λ genomes to form 
a long concatemer joined end to end and separated by cos 
sites. The concatemer is cleaved at the cos sites to yield 
one unit of phage DNA. This is followed by the packaging 
of single copy of λ genome into each empty head followed 
by the attachment of tail and release of newly formed 
phage particles by lysis of bacterial cells (Fig. 2.7). 

Approximately, one-third of the lambda genome, the 
middle region of the λ genome (which contains genes 
required for lysogeny) is dispensable (non-essential) for 
successful lytic infection (Fig. 2.8). Therefore, in order 
to construct a vector for gene cloning out of the lambda 
phage DNA, all or part of the middle dispensable region 
is replaced with an insert segment of appropriate length 
such that the size of the recombinant DNA (rDNA) lies 
between 38 to 52 kbp for its efficient packing into the 
λ head. 

Typical vectors coming out of lambda genome fall 
into two broad classes, namely ‘insertion vectors’ and 
‘replacement vectors’. Insertion vectors have a single 
restriction enzyme site (cloning site) for insertion of insert 
DNA, whereas replacement vectors have a pair of cloning 
sites flanking a segment of non-essential bacteriophage 

16 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



cos sequence

(a) 5 ' 3 '

3 ' 5 '

Non-essential
cos

Genes for head region Genes for replication,
sequence

and tail proteins (May be replaced regulation and host lysis
by insert DNA)

cos site 

(b)

Fig. 2.8: Lambda genome (a) linear inside virus particle (b) circular after infection of bacterial cell

λ DNA (central stuffer region) that can be replaced by 
the insert DNA. 

A large array of λ vectors has been constructed for 
different purposes. Some commonly used λ bacteriophage 
based vectors for E. coli are given in Table 2.1 below.

Table 2.1: Commonly used λ bacteriophage based vectors for E. coli as host.

Vector Maximum insert 
S.No. Type of vector Selection of recombinants

name size (kbp)

1. λgt10 Insertion vector Lytic (plaque formation) 6

2. λgt11 Insertion vector Blue white 7.2

3. λ EMBL3 Replacement vector Lytic (plaque formation) 20

Bacteriophage M13

M13 is a filamentous bacteriophage of E. coli. Its genome 
consists of a single stranded circular DNA of about 
6.4 kb  nucleotides which is packaged in a tube like 
capsid (Fig. 2.9). Almost full genome encodes genes 
(I-X)required for coat protein, viral replication and viral 
assembly, except for a small non-essential region flanking 
ori called intergenic region. Bacteriophage M13 infects 
only E. coli cells harbouring F plasmid. These cells have 

Host-Vector System 17

Reprint 2025-26



Intergenic region
ori

II
Major IV X
coat Protein Minor

Minor DNA Proteins V

Proteins
I 6407 bp VII

IX

VIII

VI

III

(a)   Bacteriophage M13 (b)

Fig. 2.9: M13 bacteriophage (a) single stranded genome (b) M13 genome indicating different genes I to X

a tube-like structure called ‘pilus’ extending from their 
membranes. This pilus is required for attachment and 
adsorption of the phage to the cell (Fig. 2.10).

During the life cycle of the M13 bacteriophage, the 
single stranded M13 phage DNA undergoes replication 
inside the host to generate a double stranded replicative 
form (RF) (Fig. 2.10). Subsequently, the mode of replication 
changes to generate a single stranded genomic DNA (+) 
from double stranded replicative form (Fig. 2.10). The 

tio
n

Infec

Progeny

E.coli cell membrane

Translation
and assembly

iption
r

Transc

Single stranded
of vira

l genes

phage DNA

Double stranded
Single stranded

phage DNA
phage genomic DNA

(Replicative form)

Fig. 2.10: Life cycle of bacteriophage M13

18 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



circular single stranded genomic DNA (+) is assembled 
with capsid proteins during their passage through the 
host cell without causing cell lysis. The double stranded 
RF DNA is readily isolated from infected cells for use as 
a vector, and the single stranded genome is abundantly 
available in the form of phage in the growth medium. 
Thus, for M13 vector construction, the double stranded 
RF of the M13 genome is used. The intergenic region is 
exploited for putting the insert so that it does not interfere 
with M13 replication. A large sized DNA (more than 42 
kb) can be cloned by M13 bacteriophage. An example of 
M13 based vector for E. coli is M13mp18 which facilitates 
blue/white selection of the recombinants. You will study 
blue/white selection in Chapter 3 of this book.

2.3.3 Cosmid vector

A cosmid is a type of hybrid 
Polylinker

(combination) vector that replicates like a 
plasmid but can also be packaged in vitro 
into lambda phage coats. A typical cosmid 
has replication functions, unique restriction 
endonuclease sites, and selective markers Cosmid vector cos site

contributed by plasmid DNA, combined ampR

with a λ DNA segment that includes the 
joined cohesive ends (cos sites) (Fig. 2.11). 
As little as 250 bp of λ DNA is sufficient ori

to provide the cos junction, including the 
sequences required for binding to and Fig. 2.11: A typical cosmid vector

cleavage by an enzyme called terminase. 
Advantage of most cosmid cloning vectors is that they 
accommodate DNA inserts as large as 45 kbp.

2.3.4 Phasmids (Phagemids)

Phasmids are true combination (hybrid) vectors between 
phage and plasmid. They are linear duplex DNAs whose 
ends are lambda phage DNA that contain all the genes 
required for a lytic infection and whose middle region is 
linearised plasmid. Both the lambda phage and the plasmid 
replication functions are intact (Fig. 2.12). Phasmid 
recombinants are packaged in vitro before infection. Once 
inside an E. coli cell, the phasmid can replicate like a phage 

Host-Vector System 19

Reprint 2025-26



repressor
Head Tail CI Lytic

EcoRI EcoRI

L cos R cos
ampR ori DNA

ori
Plasmid DNA

Fig. 2.12: A typical phasmid vector

and form plaques in a normal way. However, if the vector 
contains the gene that encodes the lambda repressor, 
then the phasmid replicates as a plasmid rather than as a 
phage. 

2.4 euKaRyoTiC hosT VeCToR sysTem

Genome analysis of the higher organisms requires the 
cloning of much larger fragments because eukaryotic genes 
contain introns, which may be hundreds of kilobases in 
length and even if a eukaryotic gene without introns is to 
be inserted, its size exceeds the maximum length as an 
insert for a plasmid. Therefore, special vectors are required 
for such large DNA fragments. Consequently, ‘artificial 
chromosomes’ have been developed to carry huge lengths 
of eukaryotic DNA.

Among eukaryotic host vector system, the most 
common is the baker’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
Although yeast can reproduce sexually, the cells usually 
multiply asexually by budding. They grow as single cells in 
suspension and produce colonies in solid medium, much 
as in E. coli. A large collection of metabolic, biosynthetic, 
and cell cycle defective mutants are known and genetically 
mapped. Because of a long history of safe use of 
S. cerevisiae in food industry, it belongs to the category 
which is ‘Generally Recognised As Safe’ (GRAS) organisms.

S. cerevisiae also harbors a double stranded circular 
plasmid called 2 µm plasmid, which has been used to 
develop a number of vectors. One important category of 
vectors that has been designed for cloning large size DNA 
insert (200–500 kb) is known as Yeast Artificial 
Chromosomes (YACs). The YAC vector consists of two 
copies of a yeast telomeric sequence (telomeres are the 

20 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



sequences at the ends of chromosomes), a yeast centromeric 
sequence, a yeast ARS (an autonomously replicating 
sequence where DNA replication begins), and appropriate 
selectable markers. YAC has two forms, a circular form for 
growing in bacteria, and a linear form for growing in yeast 
(Fig. 2.13). The circular form can be manipulated and 
grown like any other plasmid in bacteria since it has a 
bacterial origin of replication and an antibiotic resistance 
gene. In order to use this in yeast, the circular form is 
isolated and linearised such that the yeast telomere 
sequences are on each end. 

Cen MCS
S

R

(Circular in E. coli)

YAC
E. coli selectable

marker URA3 (Yeast
selectable
maker)

Tel Tel

BamHI BamHI

Digest with BamHI to linearise

Autonomously
E. coli replicating Multiple

origin of sequence cloning site
replication (yeast origin) (for insert)

Tel ori ampR TRP1 ARS Cen MCS Tel (Linear in Yeast)

Telomeric Selectable Centromere (URA3)
sequence maker for sequence Selectable marker

bacteria for yeast

Fig. 2.13: Yeast Artificial Chromosome (YAC)

Host-Vector System 21

Reprint 2025-26

amp
R

TRP1
A

or
i



Vectors like YACs are sometimes called high capacity 
cloning vectors. Some other high capacity cloning vectors 
coming from bacterial plasmid and phage are called 
Bacterial Artificial Chromosomes (BACs) and Phage 
Artificial Chromosomes (PACs).

A list of commonly used vectors for gene cloning having 
different capacities to take up different size inserts are 
shown in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: DNA insert size with different cloning vectors

S. No. Vectors Insert size (kb)

1. Plasmid ≤ 10kb

2. Bacteriophage 8–25 kb

3. Cosmids 23–40 kb

4. PAC 100–300 kb 
5. BAC ≤ 300 kb

6. YAC 200–500 kb

2.5 expRession VeCToRs

Till now we have discussed the different types of cloning 
vectors which are used to propagate DNA. Another type of 
vectors are expression vectors which act as vehicles for 
DNA insert and also allow the DNA insert (gene) to be modification (e.g. glyocosylation) for its biological activity 
expressed efficiently (Fig. 2.14). These may be plasmids 
or viruses based vectors. These vectors contain an efficient 

Bacterial promoter (P)
Ribosome

and operator (O)
binding site

sequences Polylinker with
(RBS) unique sites for several

restriction endonucleases
(i.e., cloning sites)

O
P

Transcription
Gene encoding

termination
repressor that

sequence
binds O and
regulates P

Selectable genetic marker
(e.g., antibiotic resistance)

ori

Fig. 2.14: An expression vector

22 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



promoter for expression of the cloned genes. These 
promoters are generally inducible in nature so that 
expression of the cloned gene can be regulated. 
Downstream of the promoter there are unique restriction 
sites for insertion of the gene to be expressed. Furthermore, 
in order to ensure correct termination of transcription of 
the cloned genes, a proper transcription termination 
sequence is provided by the vector near the 3' end of the 
gene. Thus, the cloned gene is inserted between a promoter 
towards the 5' end (upstream) and a terminator at the 
3' end (downstream) of the cloned gene in an expression 
vector. This portion of the vector is called expression 
cassette. Such vectors are therefore, sometimes also 
called sandwich expression vectors. 

Expression of a gene by recombinant strategies 
depends on the source of the gene as well as the host 
being used. Thus, for example, if a gene of eukaryotic 
origin is to be expressed in a prokaryotic host (or a 
vice versa) known as heterologous gene expression, as 
the gene being expressed is foreign to the host. Such 
heterologous expression requires that the eukaryotic 
gene being expressed: (i) does not contain intron(s) as 
the process of splicing is absent in the prokaryotic host, 
(ii) expressed protein does not require post translational 
modification (e.g. glyocosylation) for its biological activity 
(functionality). 

MCS
2.6 shuTTle VeCToRs (Multiple cloning site)

Vectors developed for 
replication in two alternative 

Eukaryotic Eukaryotic
hosts (either prokaryotic or origin of promoter

eukaryotic) are called shuttle replication
Selective gene

vectors. These vectors are (for eukaryotic cells)

themselves constructed by 
recombinant DNA techniques, Eukaryotic terminator

and many different types (polyA signal)

have been made. Some of Bacterial origin
of replication

them shuttle between two Antibiotic
resistance

prokaryotic species, others (for bacteria)
between a prokaryote 
(usually E. coli ) and 
eukaryotic cells (including 

Fig. 2.15: Shuttle vector for E. coli and yeast
yeast, plants and animals). 

Host-Vector System 23

Reprint 2025-26



Indeed, most of the eukaryotic vectors are shuttles. Shuttle 
vectors contain two origin of replication, however, in a 
given host, only one origin is active at a time (Fig. 2.15).

SUMMARY

• rDNA technology is a two-component system: a compatible 
host and a vector combination, where the vector 
provides essential sequences required for its replication 
in a compatible host that provides various replication 
functions.

• The cloning vector should be small in size and have an 
origin of replication (ori site), unique restriction sites 
and selectable marker. 

• Plasmids are circular, extra-chromosomal double 
stranded DNA (dsDNA) capable of autonomous replication.

• The bacteriophage lambda (λ) and M13 are the two most 
common phages whose genomes have been frequently 
used to make cloning vectors for E. coli host.

• The bacteriophage lambda, a bacterial virus that infects 
E. coli, has been widely used as a cloning vector.

• Typical vectors coming out of lambda genome fall into two 
broad classes, namely ‘insertion vectors’ and ‘replacement 
vectors’.

• M13 is a filamentous bacteriophage of E. coli having 
genome consisting 6.4kb long circular DNA packaged in 
a tubular capsid. 

• An example of M13 based vector for E. coli is M13mp18 
that facilitates blue/white selection of recombinants.

• Cosmids are a type of hybrid (combination) vector that 
replicate like a plasmid but can be packaged in vitro into 
lambda phage coats. 

• A typical cosmid has replication functions, unique 
restriction endonuclease sites, and selective markers 
contributed by plasmid DNA, combined with a lambda 
DNA segment that includes the joined cohesive ends 
(cos sites).

• Phasmids are true combination vectors between phage 
and plasmid. They are linear duplex DNAs whose ends 
are lambda segments that contain all the genes required 
for a lytic infection and the middle segment is linearised 
plasmid.

24 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



• Among eukaryotic host vector system, the most common is 
the baker’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiaes, from which 
YAC’s have been derived through genetic engineering.

• A YAC cloning vector consists of two copies of a yeast 
telomeric sequence (telomeres are the sequences at the 
ends of chromosomes), a yeast centromeric sequence, a 
yeast ARS (an autonomously replicating sequence) and 
appropriate selectable markers.

• Expression vectors facilitate efficient-expression of cloned 
genes. They contain inducible promoters, unique insertion 
sites, and termination sequences. In heterologous 
expression, genes must lack introns and not rely on post-
translational modifications.

• Shuttle vectors are versatile DNA constructs that replicate 
in two hosts (prokaryotic and eukaryotic). They are made 
using recombinant DNA methods and can switch between 
active replication origins in a host.

EXERCISES

 1. Describe the importance of host vector system in rDNA 
technology.

 2. What are the major characteristics of a vector?

 3. What is plasmid and what are its different types?

 4. Discuss the strategy applied for the development of 
(pBR322) plasmid cloning vectors.

 5. Briefly describe the structure of lambda bacteriophage 
and also discuss the role of lambda phage based 
vectors.

 6. Discuss the M13 based vectors and its application.

 7. Differentiate between cosmids and phagemids.

 8. Why is a vector required for cloning of a gene?

 9. A plasmid capable of getting integrated into host 
chromosome is called:

 (a) Col plasmid

 (b) Episome

 (c) Ti plasmid

 (d) R plasmid

 10. Why the replication of single copy plasmid called 
stringent replication?

Host-Vector System 25

Reprint 2025-26



 11. Identify the incorrect match pair from the following:

 (i) Multicopy plasmid (a) Stringent replication

 (ii) Col plasmid (b) Kills bacteria

 (iii) pBR322 (c) Plasmid

 (iv) Prophage (d)  Phage genome inserted 
into a host genome

 12. How can a large size eukaryotic gene insert be cloned?

 13. Assertion: An ideal vector should have selectable 
marker.

Reason: Selectable markers are required to screen out 
transformation.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason 
is the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason 
is not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 14. Assertion: Cosmid is a hybrid vector.

Reason: Cosmid has properties of both plasmids and 
lambda phage vector.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason 
is the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason 
is not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false

26 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26

##3##

Chapter 3 Gene Cloning

Gene cloning is a customary procedure to use a gene for its 
product in the biotechnology industry and various other 
purposes. Traditionally, it engages the transfer of a DNA 3.1 Identification of 

Candidate Gene
fragment containing the gene of interest to a host cell by a 
vector so that many copies of the gene will be available for 3.2 Isolation of Nucleic 

Acids
its characterisation and future application. Technological 
breakthrough in the field of genetic engineering have made 3.3 Enzymes used for 

it possible to analyse DNA, isolate a specific gene from a Recombinant DNA 
Technology

genome, enzymatically inserting it into an autonomously 
3.4 Modes of DNA 

replicating vector (e.g. plasmid) to generate rDNA molecule Transfer 
and ultimately introducing into host (e.g., bacteria) to 

3.5 Screening and 
produce a virtually unlimited number of copies (clones) of Selection
it. This chapter will expose students to all the procedures 

3.6  Blotting 
involved in gene cloning. Techniques

3.7 Polymerase Chain 
3.1 IdentIfIcatIon of candIdate Gene Reaction (PCR)

Over the past decades, rDNA technology has been utilised 3.8 DNA Libraries 

to produce crops that are resistant to pests, diseases, 
herbicides and pathogens. This is possible by manipulating 
the specific gene of interest of one organism followed by 
its transfer into the genome of another organism, which 
upon expression results in the desired product or activity. 

Reprint 2025-26



The first and most formidable problem in this process is to 
identify the candidate gene in the genome of an organism.

Identification of a gene to be cloned depends upon 
its significance with regard to its role in biomedical, 
economical and evolutionary fields. This information 
on a gene comes from its biochemical and physiological 
studies. For example, the cause of diseases (diabetes 
in human beings due to deficiency of insulin) or defect 
in the metabolic pathways (iron deficiency leading to 
chlorosis in plants) or resistance to environment (salinity 
tolerance in plants) or resistance to infection (both in 
plants and animals) or economically important genes 
(milk protein, blood clotting factors, etc.) are candidate 
genes for the improvement of human health and needs. 
Once a gene of interest is identified, it is explored in 
new sources and the same is cloned as mentioned in the 
subsequent sections.  

Searching a gene of interest is not an easy task. This 
will be clear from the following example. As you know, a 
haploid human genome contains approximately 3.2 billion 
bp. Therefore, searching a gene of interest having a size of 
3000 to 3500 bp, which is one-millionth of the genome; 
is perhaps more difficult than looking for a needle in 
the haystack.

There are a few methods developed to achieve this task. 
One of these methods is to deduce the DNA sequence of the 
gene coding for a specific polypeptide chain based on its 
amino acid sequence. Another way to synthesize candidate 
gene is to isolate the mRNA of the desired gene from 
specific tissue, then synthesizing single stranded cDNA by 
using reverse transcriptase enzyme and converting that in 
to double stranded cDNA as candidate gene, which can be 
cloned (as discussed in the subsequent section).

3.2 IsolatIon of nucleIc acIds

The first and foremost requirement for any molecular 
biology experiment is isolation of nucleic acids from 
organisms. Extraction of nucleic acids is encountered by 
two big challenges. First one is related to their availability 
in cells as DNA and RNA, both of which are present in very 

28 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



small amounts in cells in comparison to other biological 
macromolecules, such as proteins, carbohydrates and 
lipids. Second, the enormous length of nucleic acids, 
particularly makes it susceptible to cleavage when exposed 
to harsh physical stress. In addition, the chemical bonds 
by which different components of nucleic acids are joined 
with each other and various groups present in them make 
nucleic acid vulnerable to chemical agents.

Four important steps are involved during the extraction 
of nucleic acids. The first step involves the effective rupture 
of cell membrane or walls to release the nucleic acids and 
other cellular molecules. The second step involves the 
protection of nucleic acids from their respective degrading 

The cells and tissues are broken 
down in a lyses buffer Chilled ethanol 

Centrifuged Chilled ethanol 
Chloroform Chloroform

Ground up cells Centrifuged

transferred Phenol Isoamyl Aqueous phase is Phenol Isoamyl 
alcohol pipatted to another tube alcohol

Aqueous 
Nucleic acid phase 

Centrifuged transferred (DNA)

Aqueous phase RNase 

(Nucleic acids) added
CTAB, SDS Interface  

buffer, EDTA (Lysed proteins)
Nucleic acid 

Organic Phase  pellet
Cell lysate (Broken down proteins, lipids, DNA

and other cell debris)

Fig. 3.1: Steps involved in the isolation of DNA

Gene Cloning 29

Reprint 2025-26



enzymes, which are released in the isolation medium 
with other proteins. In the third step, the nucleic acids 
are separated from other molecules. In the fourth and the 
last step, the isolated nucleic acids are precipitated and 
concentrated by adding ethanol or isopropanol.

Although, chemical and physical properties of nucleic 
acids are similar in all organisms, the outer boundary of 
cells differs from one organism to another. Therefore, in 
order to disrupt the cell boundaries for releasing nucleic 
acids into extraction medium, different strategies are 
adopted. Animal cells have plasma membrane that can 
be easily disrupted. On the contrary, plant cells and 
bacteria are protected by tough layers (e.g., cell wall), 
which need different approaches for their lysis. These 
include homogenisation, grinding, sonication or enzymatic 
treatment. Such mechanical or enzymatic treatment 
ruptures plasma membrane or cell wall so that nucleic 
acids get released from cells and exposes them to nuclease 
enzymes (deoxyribonuclease and ribonuclease), which are 
also released simultaneously.

IsolatIon of dna
As bacterial cells have little structure beyond the cell wall 
and cell membrane, isolating DNA from them is much 
easier. An enzyme called lysozyme digest the peptidoglycan, 
the main component of bacterial cell wall. Detergents 
like sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) is used to lyse the 
cell membranes by disrupting the lipid bilayer. Plant 
and animal cells are ground to release the intracellular 
components. Plant cells are mechanically ruptured in a 
blender to break open the tough cell walls. For isolation 
of DNA from plant cells, cetyl trimethyl ammonium 
bromide (CTAB) is used as detergent (a cationic detergent). 
Plant cells have high concentration of polysaccharide 
and polyphenols in comparison to animal cells and pose 
problems during isolation of DNA. The solubility of DNA 
and polysaccharides to CTAB depends on ionic strength of 
the solution. At low ionic strength, DNA is soluble in CTAB 
solution while polysaccharides are insoluble; whereas 
at high ionic strength, polysaccharides are soluble and 
DNA is insoluble. In addition, being a detergent, it also 

30 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



lyses cell wall. Both the molecules are separated based 
on their differential affinity to CTAB. Addition of polyvinyl 
pyrrolidone (PVP) to CTAB extraction medium neutralises 
phenols. Soluble DNA present in supernatant is extracted 
with chloroform-isoamyl solution. DNA present in aqueous 
phase is precipitated using ethanol or isopropanol. In case 
of animal cells, the cell membrane is disrupted by detergent 
to release the  intracellular components.

The cells and tissues from which nucleic acids are to be 
extracted are broken down in a medium either mechanically 
or enzymatically. The media is usually a buffer having 
mild alkaline pH with minimum ionic strength (0.05 M) 
containing chelating agent ethylene diamine tetraacetic 
acid (EDTA). The mild alkaline pH facilitates the reduction 
of electrostatic interaction between DNA and basic proteins 
(histones) released during cell disruption. Chelating of 
divalent cations particularly Mn2+ and Mg2+ prevents  the 
action of nucleases. Further, inhibition of their activities 
is achieved due to alkaline pH of the buffer. In addition, 
chelating of divalent cations prevents the formation of their 
respective salts with phosphate groups of nucleic acids.

The next step is to separate nucleic acids from its 
bound proteins. This is achieved by decreasing interaction 
between proteins and nucleic acids so that nucleic acids 
are free of proteins, by exposing to detergents, like SDS, an 
anionic detergent. Exposure to SDS makes all the protein 
molecules anionic. Consequently, basic proteins that 
are positively charged and bound to negatively charged 
nucleic acids become negatively charged and dissociate 
from the nucleic acids. In addition, SDS also prevents  the 
activities of nucleases thereby giving additional protection 
to nucleic acids from nucleases. Then sodium chloride is 
added to the medium at high concentration. Increased salt 
concentration diminishes the ionic interaction between 
DNA and cations thus ensuring complete dissociation 
of DNA and protein complexes. Deproteinisation of the 
medium is achieved by exposing it to chloroform and 
isoamyl alcohol. These solvents are non-polar in nature 
when it is added to the medium that is polar in nature and 
subjected to centrifugation, it gives three distinct layers. 
Since, the density of organic solvent mixture is higher than 
water, it forms a lower layer (which contains denatured 

Gene Cloning 31

Reprint 2025-26



proteins) while the upper layer is aqueous in nature and 
contains nucleic acids. Chloroform causes denaturation of 
proteins while isoamyl alcohol prevents the formation of 
foam and helps in stabilising the interface between lower 
organic and upper aqueous phase, that can be separated 
by pipetting. The nucleic acids from aqueous phase are 
precipitated by addition of ethanol to aqueous medium 
that reduces its polarity, which makes aqueous medium 
as non-polar and thus nucleic acids become insoluble that 
were otherwise soluble in aqueous medium. To remove 
RNA, the enzyme ribonuclease A is added that digests RNA 
into ribonucleotides. DNA is then isolated by centrifugation 
and stored at low temperatures (Fig. 3.1).

RNA Isolation

RNA is single stranded, while DNA is mostly double 
stranded. Ribonucleases (RNases), a group of enzymes that 
degrade RNA molecules, are abundant in the environment 

and it is difficult to 
Cell lysis and dissolution remove or destroy RNases 
Cell lysis can be achieved using buffers or reagents containing completely. Thus, it is 
chaotropic agent Guanidinium isothiocyanate (GITC). often difficult to isolate 

intact RNA.
Denaturation of DNA and proteins Total RNA is extracted 
DNase can be used to degrade DNA, while proteinase K can be

from biological samples by 
added to digest proteins. Alternatively, repeated organic extraction
using phenol and chloroform or dissolving the sample in buffers using  a specific reagent 
containing guanidinium salts can also be used to remove proteins. known as guanidinium 

isothiocyanate (GITC)-

Denaturation and inactivation of RNases phenol-chloroform. GITC 
This can be achieved using any of the chaotropic agents,  such is a chaotropic reagent 
as phenol and chloroform. and acidic in nature as 

it disrupts the hydrogen 
Separation of cellular components bond and releases energy 
RNA can be separated from other cellular components by adding to increase entropy 
chloroform and centrifuging the solution. This separates the (chaos) that reduces 
solution into two phases: organic and aqueous phases. The
aqueous phase contains RNA. hydrophobic effect of 

the solution resulting 
in the aggregation of 

Precipitation proteins and nucleic 
RNA is often recovered from the aqueous phase using isopropanol.

acids.  Phenol causes 
denaturation of proteins 

Fig. 3.2: (a) Flow chart for the isolation of RNA

32 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



whereas chloroform solubilises lipids. Chloroform also 
enhances specific gravity of phenol with respect to water. 
When biological samples are treated with GITC solution and 
subjected to centrifugation, the solution gets separated into 
three phases: upper aqueous phase, followed by interface 
and organic phase. Although total RNA is extracted in the 
aqueous phase due to the acidic nature of the reagent 
whereas DNA and denatured proteins are retained in the 
interface or organic phase. This step also inactivates RNase 
enzyme that may hydrolyse RNA. Subsequently, RNA from 
aqueous phase is precipitated with the help of isopropanol 
[Fig. 3.2 (a) and b)].

Guanidinium isothiocyanate (GITC)-
phenol-chloroform

Sample preparation
by homogenisation or lysis

Aqueous phase
(contains RNA)

Phase Collect aqueous phase
separation in sep arate tube RNA

] and add isopropanol Precipitation

Protein Using
Interface isopropanol

DNA (Contains precipitated

RNA proteins)

Organic phase
(Contains DNA, lipids and proteins) RNA pellet

Fig. 3.2: (b) RNA extraction

Box 1: Separation of Plasmid DNA from Genomic DNA

Two types of DNA molecules are isolated in cloning experiments. One is plasmid DNA and 
the other genomic DNA from bacteria. Chromosomal DNA is separated from plasmid DNA by 
boiling bacterial lysate. The boiling of lysate causes irreversible denaturation of chromosomal 
DNA and denaturation of proteins including deoxyribonuclease. Boiling causes formation of a 
gel, which is precipitated by centrifugation. On the contrary, partially denatured plasmid DNA 
(due to boiling) is renatured as circular double helix and become soluble.  In another method, 
bacterial suspension is lysed and its contents are denatured by anionic detergent SDS and 
NaOH solution. The broken cell wall, chromosomal DNA and denatured proteins are clumped 
as a large mass coated with SDS that are precipitated from solution by replacing sodium 
ions (Na+) with potassium ions (K+). The precipitate is then separated by centrifugation. The 
plasmid DNA is isolated from the supernatant by ethanol precipitation. 

Gene Cloning 33

Reprint 2025-26



3.3 enzymes used for recombInant dna 
technoloGy

Enzymes constitute an important tool in rDNA technology. 
The major task of the manipulation of the DNA involves 
cutting and ligation of the vector DNA and the gene of 
interest. For this, the natural abilities of different enzymes 
found in organisms are exploited. The major enzymes used 
in the rDNA technology are:

 (i) Nucleases: Nucleases are the enzymes, which cleave 
nucleic acids by hydrolysing the phosphodiester 
bond that joins the sugar residues of adjacent 
nucleotides. Some nucleases are DNA specific 
called DNases and some are RNA specific called 
RNases. There are two major types of nuclease 
enzymes depending on their preference of the 
location of phosphodiester bonds of polynucleotide 
chains (DNA or RNA or synthetic polynucleotide 
chain) namely, exonuclease and endonuclease. 
Exonuclease, as the name suggests, removes the 
nucleotides one at a time, i.e., mononucleotides, 

(a) An exonuclease

Cleavage Cleavage
Nucleotide Hydrogen bond

5' 3'

3' 5'

Phosphodiester bond

5' P
3' OH

(b) An endonuclease

Cleavage
Cleavage

Blunt end Sticky end

Fig. 3.3: (a) An exonuclease, which removes nucleotides from the end of DNA molecule 
(b) An endonuclease, which breaks internal phosphodiester bonds

34 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



either from the 3′ or 5′ ends of polynucleotide 
chains. Endonuclease, on the contrary, breaks 
internal phosphodiester bonds within a DNA or 
RNA molecule [Fig. 3.3 (a) and (b)].

 (ii) Restriction endonuclease/enzyme (RE): 

  Endonuclease enzymes that cleave DNA molecules 
at a specific position are called restriction 
endonucleases or restriction enzymes. They Box 2

are mostly found in bacteria and archaea that 
The 1978 Nobel Prize in 

provide a defense mechanism against invading Physiology or Medicine 
bacteriophages. RE recognises and binds to a was awarded jointly to 
specific DNA sequence called recognition sequence Werner Arber, Daniel   
or site, often consisting of 4 to 8 bp. Nathans and Hamilton 

Restriction enzymes are categorised mainly into three Smith for the discovery 
of ‘restriction enzymes’ 

groups (Type I, II and III) based on their co-factor 
and their application to 

requirement and the position of their DNA cleavage site 
the problems of molecular 

relative to the target sequence. Type I enzymes cleave genetics. HindII was the 
DNA at a site that is about 1000 bp from the recognition first restriction enzyme to 
site and require S-adenosyl  methionine (SAM), Mg2+, ATP be isolated by Hamilton 

and has DNA strand cleavage, methylase and ATPase Smith.

activities. Type II enzymes cleave within the recognition 
site and require Mg2+ and has only DNA strand cleavage 
activity (Fig. 3.4). Type II REs find application in rDNA 
technology. Type III enzymes cleave at sites about 24 to 
26 bp away from the recognition site; require S-adenosyl 
methionine (SAM), Mg2+, ATP and has DNA strand 
cleavage and methylase activities (Table 3.1).

Table 3.1: Types of Restriction Enzymes

Cleavage site Endonuclease and methylase function Examples

Type I Random around 1000 Endonuclease and methylase function EcoKI
bp away from the on a single protein molecule  EcoAI
recognition site 

CfrAI

Type II Specific within the Endonuclease and methylase are EcoRI
recognition site separate  entities   BamHI

HindIII

Type III Random  24–26 bp away Endonuclease and methylase function EcoP1
from the recognition site on a single protein molecule  HinfIII

EcoP15I

Gene Cloning 35

Reprint 2025-26



The recognition sequences of widely applied Type II REs 
are palindromic sequences, meaning the sequence on 
the forward direction on a double stranded DNA reads 
same in a reverse direction on the complementary strand. 
These enzymes break specific phosphodiester bond in 
both strands of the DNA molecule within the restriction 
sequence recognised by the enzyme or at the site or near 
the sequence. It generates a 5′-phosphate group at one end 
of the break and a 3′-hydroxyl group at the other end of the 
break (Fig. 3.4). Several REs cleave at different locations on 
the two DNA strands to produce staggered cut having short 
single-stranded protruding ends called cohesive or sticky 
ends. Some REs produce blunt ended cut by cleaving both 
strands of DNA at same location (Fig. 3.4). 

5'P 3 3
A A G C T T OH ' 5 A OH ' 5' 3

HindIII 'P P A G C T T OH '

3' T T C G A A 3 T T C G A 5 3 A 5
OH 5

P ' ' P ' '
OH OH P '

Digest

5' Sticky ends

5' 5
C T G C A G 3 C T G C A 3 5 3

P OH ' 'P OH ' 'P G OH '
PstI

G A C G T C 3 G 5
3' 5 '

OH P ' 'OH P 3' A C G T C 5
OH P '

Digest
3' Sticky ends

5' 3
G A T A T C OH ' 5' G A T 3 5' A T C 3

P P OH ' P OH '
EcoRV

3' C T A T A G 5 3
OH ' C T A 5 3

P ' OH P ' ' T A G 5
OH P '

Digest
Blunt ends

Fig. 3.4: Type II REs generating sticky or blunt ends

Let us now understand the nomenclature of restriction 
enzymes. The enzyme is named after the microorganism 
from which it is isolated. The first capital letter represents 
the genus, the second and third letters represent species. 
The fourth letter specifies the strain of the microorganism. 
And the last Roman number represents the number of the 
enzyme isolated from the species (Table 3.2).

36 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Table 3.2: Nomenclature for restriction endonucleases

EcoRI

Escherichia (E) genus

coli (co) specific epithet
strain Ry13 (R) strain

first endonuclease (I) order of identification
HindIII

Haemophilus (H) genus

influenzae (in) specific epithet
strain Rd (d) strain

third endonuclease (III) order of identification

 (iii) DNA ligase: Ligase enzyme facilitate the joining of 
DNA strands together by catalysing the formation of 
a phosphodiester bond in the duplex form (Fig. 3.5). 
Bacterial DNA ligases, from E. coli ,use the hydrolysis 
of NAD as their energy source, whereas ATP is the 
energy source for DNA ligases from bacteriophages 
(e.g., T4) and eukaryotic cells. The 5′ P(5′ – PO ) 

4

group of one chain makes a covalent linkage with 
the 3′-OH group of adjacent chain. T4 DNA ligase 
is used to join two DNA molecules having cohesive 
ends or blunt ends. E. coli DNA ligase is used to 
join cohesive ends.

ATP (or NAD+)

(a) 5 3 Ligase 5 3

A T G C A T G C
T A C G T A C G

AMP
P HO

3 5 + 3 5
PPi

(b)

Sticky/cohesive end ligation

(c)

Blunt end ligation

Fig. 3.5: Ligation of DNA by ligase (a) Formation of phosphodiester bond (b) Ligation of sticky end 
(c) Ligation of blunt end

Gene Cloning 37

Reprint 2025-26



 (iv) DNA polymerases: DNA polymerases are a group 
of polymerases that catalyse the synthesis of new 
DNA strand by using mono-deoxyribonucleoside 
triphosphates (dNTPs) on a template strand. A DNA 
polymerase enzyme synthesises new DNA strand in 
5′→3′ direction (Fig. 3.6). It cannot initiate synthesis 
of a new DNA strand. In addition to dNTPs, they 
require a primer (oligonucleotide) carrying a free 
3′-end hydroxyl group that can be used as the 
starting point of chain growth. DNA polymerase I 
of E. coli exhibit several other activities, such as 
5′→ 3′ exonuclease and 3′→ 5′-exonuclease. 

New strand Template 5'
5'

strand
3'

3'
Sugar A T A T

Phosphate

C G C G

G C G C
3'

OH

T A T
3'

A OH

P C C
P P Pi

P OH
Pyrophosphate

5' released 5'

Nucleoside triphosphate

Fig. 3.6: DNA polymerase adds nucleotides at 3′OH end of the DNA molecule 

 (v) Alkaline phosphatase: Alkaline phosphatase is 
used to remove the terminal phosphate group from 
5′ end of DNA strands.

 (vi) Polynucleotide kinase: Using polynucleotide 
kinase, a phosphate group can be attached to 
hydroxyl (-OH) group present on 5′ end of DNA. 
Polynucleotide kinase has the reverse effect of 
alkaline phophatase, adding phosphate groups 
onto free 5′ termini.

38 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



 (vii) Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase or 
terminal transferase: This enzyme can add 
similar nucleotide residues to form a homopolymer 
tail on 3′ end of a DNA strand. Unlike most DNA 
polymerases, it does not require a template.

 (viii) Reverse transcriptase: It is also called RNA 
directed DNA polymerase and is found in many 
retroviruses. It is used to generate complementary 
DNA (cDNA) strand from a–RNA template, a process 
termed as reverse transcription (Fig. 3.7). 

Reverse
transcriptase

dNTPs
RNA

3'
5'

Primer

5'

RNA-dependent DNA polymerase
(Reverse transcriptase) activity

RNA Strand

5' 3'

3' 5'

cDNA Strand

Fig. 3.7: Reverse transcription

 (ix) Poly A polymerase: It incorporates adenine 
residues to hydroxyl group of 3′ end of RNA 
(Fig. 3.8).

Poly A polymerase A A

A A
A

5' 3'
dATPs

mRNA

5' AAAAA  3'
n

mRNA

Fig. 3.8: Addition of dATPs by poly A polymerase

Gene Cloning 39

Reprint 2025-26



3.4 modes of dna transfer

Transfer of a foreign DNA molecule to a host cell (prokaryotic 
or eukaryotic) from its surrounding environment is one of 
the basic steps in rDNA technology. In nature, bacteria 
obtain foreign DNA molecules from its surroundings in 
three different ways, which are: (i) transformation, (ii) 
transduction and (iii) conjugation.

 (i) Transformation: Transformation is genetic 
alteration of a cell resulting from the direct uptake 
of exogenous DNA molecule from its surroundings 
through the cell membrane and gets incorporated 
in the recipient genetic material. Recipient cells 
with foreign DNA molecule are referred to as 
transformants (Fig. 3.9). Transformation occurs 
naturally in some species of bacteria. 

(a) Transformation with (b) Transformation
     DNA fragment      with plasmid

uptake of DNA uptake of plasmid

Fig. 3.9: Transformation in bacteria

 (ii) Transduction: Viruses may also mediate the 
uptake of foreign DNA into the genome of a cell. 
Viruses that specifically infect bacterial cells are 
known as bacteriophages. Bacteriophages on 
infecting follow a lytic cycle or a lysogenic life cycle 
in the host. In lysogenic life cycle, the 
bacteriophage genome gets incorporated into 
bacterial DNA, and remains dormant for several 
generations. After a period of time when phage 
genome gets excised from the host DNA, they 
occasionally take small sequences of bacterial 
DNA with them. Phage genome containing bacterial 
DNA is then packaged into phage coat proteins to 

40 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



form a complete, recombinant viral particle. When 
this phage infects a bacterial cell, the recombinant 
phage genome containing bacterial DNA is 
introduced into bacteria (Fig. 3.10). The recipient 
bacterial cell is referred to as transductants. 

Virulent Phage

Phage DNA

Generalised Transduction Specialised Transduction

Phage DNA integrates
into bacterial DNA
(Lysogenic life cycle)

Cell Lysis
(Lytic life cycle)

Cell Lysis

Fig. 3.10: Transduction in bacteria

 (iii) Conjugation: Conjugation is referred to as transfer 
of genetic material (DNA) from one bacterium to 
another through cell-to-cell direct contact. The 
bacterial cell that transfers its DNA is called 
the donor cell and the one that receives is the 
recipient cell. Conjugation is usually mediated by 

Gene Cloning 41

Reprint 2025-26



Conjugation pilus F plasmids that carry a DNA sequence 
encoding for the fertility factor, or F–

Bacterial chromosome
F plasmid factor. The F-factor forms a thin tube-

like structure called pilus, through 
which the donor cell makes contact with 
the recipient. A nick is made in one of the 
strands of double stranded F-plasmid 

F + Cell F - Cell
by an enzyme relaxase in the donor cell 
and this strand is transferred to the 
recipient cell through pilus. Inside both 
donor and recipient cells, the single-
stranded DNA undergoes replication 
to form double-stranded F plasmid 
identical to the original F plasmid (Fig. 
3.11).

F + Cell F + Cell

 In rDNA technology, the rDNA is 
introduced (transferred) in host cells by 

Fig. 3.11: Bacterial conjugation numerous methods. Chemical (calcium 
chloride, lipofection, etc.) and physical 

(electroporation, microinjection and gene gun) methods 
for introducing foreign DNA molecules into host cells are 
commonly used. In calcium chloride method, the DNA to 
be transferred is mixed in a solution containing positively 
charged calcium and the negatively charged group of DNA 
to form a complex. The host cells take up the foreign DNA 
molecule by a process of heat shock. In electroporation 
method, transient micropores are created on the membrane 
of host cells by exposing them to mild electric current in 
the presence of foreign DNA molecules. The recombinant 
DNA molecules enter into host cells through transient 
micropores. Lipofection (or liposome transfection) is a 
technique used to inject genetic material into a cell by 
means of liposomes, which are vesicles that can easily 
merge with the cell membrane since they are both made 
of a phospholipid bilayer.  Foreign DNA molecules can 
be introduced directly to the nucleus of host cells using 
specialised automated Microinjection apparatus. In 
biolistic method, with the help of a gene gun (particle 
gun), microscopic particles (gold, nickel, tungsten) coated 
with foreign DNA are bombarded to cells at high velocity so 
that foreign DNA molecule enters inside the cell (Fig. 3.12).

42 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



(a) DNA
++

Ca

++
Ca ++

Ca 42C
++

Ca ++
Ca ++ ++

++

Outside Ca Ca Outside Ca

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Adhesion Adhesion 
zone

zone Heat ++
++

Ca Ca

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - shock - - - - - - - - - 0C - - - - - - - - -
Lipid Inside Cell 42C Lipid Inside Cell

++
Ca ++

molecules membrane molecules Ca membrane

Electric pulse induces
Cell ‘heals’ with

(b) Cell a voltage across
Gene of gene inside

membrane cell membrane
Interest

Before pulse During pulse After pulse

(c)
Fusion Cell membrane

DNA (Phospholipid bilayer)

+
Cell

Hollow
Liposomes DNA to

be delivered 
Outside Inside

Phospholipid
bilayer

Fused liposome
to recipient cell

(d) (e)
Injection

Gold microparticles
Projection

coated with DNA
gun

Fig. 3.12:  Methods of DNA transfer (a) Chemical (CaCl ), (b) Electroporation, (c) Lipofection 
2 

(d) Microinjection and  (e) Biolistic method

Gene Cloning 43

Reprint 2025-26



3.5 screenInG and selectIon

Selection of transformed bacteria with recombinant 
vectors is the most essential step for a successful cloning 
experiment. Here, the objective is to identify the transformed 
cells having recombinant vector from a mixture of 
non-transformed cells. Success rate of insertion of an insert 
into a plasmid and subsequent transfer of recombinant 
plasmids to bacteria is very low. Therefore, it is difficult to 
select a few bacteria containing plasmids with insert from 
a large number of bacterial populations without the insert.

The method of selection of recombinant cells is based on 
the principle of difference in biological traits present in hosts 
with recombinant DNA from those without recombinant 
DNA. Thus, the recombinant cells are distinguished 
from non-recombinants based on their expression or 
non-expression of certain traits, such as antibiotic 
resistance, or expression of some specific proteins, such 
as β-galactosidase or Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP), or 
dependence/independence of a nutritional requirement, 
such as amino acid leucine. On the basis of this principle, 
the selection procedure can be divided into two main types 
as described in the following section.

 (i) Direct selection of recombinants: In this method 
of selection, transformed cells are distinguished 
from non-transformed cells based on the expression 
of certain traits. For example, bacterial cells (host) 
are not resistant to a particular antibiotic but when 
they take up the plasmids containing antibiotic 
resistant gene, they become resistant to that 
specific antibiotic.  These cells will survive and grow 
in a media containing the antibiotic(s), whereas the 
host cells without plasmid will be killed when they 
are exposed to antibiotics.

 (ii) Selection of recombinants by insertional 
inactivation: This is more efficient than the direct 
selection method. In this method, a vector having 
two markers (either two antibiotic resistant genes, 
or one antibiotic resistant gene and one lacZ 
gene) is used. When the gene of interest (insert 
DNA) is inserted into one of the selection marker 
genes in the vector, its expression is disrupted 
and hence called insertional inactivation. Let 

44 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



us use a plasmid with two antibiotic resistance 
genes—one for ampicillin (ampR gene) and the 
other for tetracycline (tetR gene). The target DNA 
(insert) is inserted into ampR gene of the plasmid 
making them recombinant plasmids. Now we 
have plasmids with insert and without insert. 
When this plasmid mixture is added to a culture 
of bacteria as described earlier, there will be 
three different populations of host bacterial cells: 
(i) host cells without plasmids (non-transformed), 
(ii) transformed host cells with plasmids without 
insert  and (iii) transformed host cells with 
recombinant plasmids (with insert). Now it is 
essential to identify those cells that have received 
the recombinant plasmid. This process of 
screening is based on the property of resistance 
to ampicillin, which is lost in the host cell having 
recombinant plasmids. The insert gets cloned 
in ampR gene leading to insertional inactivation 
of ampicillin resistance gene (ampR) (Fig. 3.13). 
When these bacteria are plated on a media 
containing tetracycline, the non-transformed 
cells get eliminated as they are sensitive to it. 
Only transformed cells (with functional tetR) 
multiply and form colonies as they are resistant 
to it. There will be two types of colonies (master 
plate)— one of transformed cells having plasmid 
without insert (non-recombinant) and the other 
of transformed cells having plasmid with insert 
(recombinant) (Fig. 3.13). By using nitrocellulose 
membrane, bacterial cells from the master plate 
colonies are plated on a solid media containing 
ampicillin. Transformed cells with vectors (without 
insert) will only multiply to form colonies (replica 
plate) while transformed cells with recombinant 
vectors will not grow because their ampR gene has 
been inactivated. Now, if we compare the master 
plate with replica plate, the colonies present 
in master plate and absent in replica plate are 
the transformed cells with recombinant vector 
containing DNA insert of interest (Fig. 3.13).

Gene Cloning 45

Reprint 2025-26



Foreign
Tetracycline DNA inserted Foreign DNA inserted into
resistant gene ampicillin resistance gene

Ampicillin Recombinant
resistance gene plasmid

Mixture of non-recombinant Bacterial host cell
and recombinant plasmid

Transformed bacterial Non-transformed
cell with non-recombinant plasmid bacterial cell Transformed bacterial

cell with recombinant plasmid

Tetracycline in media
Colonies with recombinant/
non-recombinant plasmid

Non-transformed cells
are not resistant to tetracycline
and do not form colonies on

Colonies with media containing tetracycline
recombinant plasmids

NITROCELLULOSE
MEMBRANE

Transformed bacterial cells
Ampicillin that took up non-recombinant

Transformed bacterial
in media plasmids formed colonies

colonies with recombinant/
non-recombinant plasmid

Tetracycline in media

REPLICA PLATE MASTER PLATE

Bacterial cell that took up recombinant Transformed bacterial cell colonies
plasmids are sensitive to ampicillin and do not in tetracycline media
form colonies on media containg ampicillin

Fig. 3.13: Selection of recombinants by insertional inactivation

46 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Restriction site

lacZ gene

Ampicillin 
ampR

resistance gene

Foreign DNA Plasmid vector

Restriction digestion of vector
and foreign DNA

Sticky
ends

amp
R

am Recombinant and
pR

ampR non-recombinant 
Plasmid

ampR

amp
R

ampR

Transformation
AMP

Bacterium that does Bacterium takes up Bacterium takes up 
not take up plasmid is non-recombinant plasmid recombinant plasmid, cannot 
not ampicillin-resistant with intact lacZ gene produce β-galactosidase enzyme

Blue colonies have White colonies 
non-recombinant have recombinant 
plasmids plasmids

Fig. 3.14: Blue-white selection method

Gene Cloning 47

Reprint 2025-26



Blue-white selection method is another example of 
insertional inactivation selection method to select the 
recombinant transformed cells. In this method, lacZ gene 
present in plasmid vector (refer to Vector section of Chapter 
2) expresses the β-galactosidase enzyme. β-galactosidase 
cleaves a colourless chromogenic, substrate called X-gal 
(5 Bromo-4-chloro-3 indolyl-beta D-galactoside), an 
analog of lactose to form 5-bromo-4-chloro-indoxyl, which 
spontaneously dimerises to produce an insoluble blue 
pigment called 5,5′-dibromo-4,4′-dichloro-indigo. When lacZ 
gene in the plasmid is inactivated due to insertion of the insert 
DNA, then the enzyme β-galactosidase is not expressed in 
hosts containing recombinant plasmids (Fig. 3.14).

During transformation experiment, the bacterial 
cells (both transformed and non-transformed) are plated 
on an ampicillin and X-gal-IPTG (Isopropyl β-D-1- 
thiogalactopyranoside) containing solid media. The non-
transformed cells get eliminated and only the transformed 
cells multiply and form colonies. Two types of colonies will 
be formed i.e., blue colour and white colour colonies. The 
bacterial cells in blue colonies contain a vector with an 
uninterrupted lacZ, (no insert) while cells in white colonies, 
where X-gal is not hydrolysed, indicate the presence of an 
insert in lacZ, which disrupts the formation of an active 
β-galactosidase.

Alternative methods have been developed in order to 
screen transformed bacteria, e.g., Green Fluorescent 
Protein (GFP). The concept is similar to lacZ in which 
a DNA insert can disrupt the coding sequence within a 
vector and thus disrupt the GFP production resulting in 
non-fluorescing bacteria. 

3.6 blottInG technIques

Blotting techniques are widely used by scientists to 
separate and identify DNA, RNA and proteins from a 
mixture of molecules. This technique immobilises the 
molecule of interest on a support, which is a nitrocellulose 
or nylon or polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane. 
It uses hybridisation techniques for the identification of 
specific nucleic acids and genes. Both nitrocellulose and 
PVDF membranes are highly hydrophobic and chemically 

48 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



resistant to a broad range of chemicals. They have high 
affinity for binding to proteins and nucleic acids. Once 
proteins or nucleic acids are transferred to membranes, 
they are immobilised on the membrane. A specific protein 
can be detected on the membrane by using its specific 
antibody. Similarly, by using a specific nucleic acid probe, 
one can detect the desired nucleic acid on the membrane by 
hybridisation. Detection methods used in blotting techniques 
are chromogenic, fluorescence, chemiluminescence or 
radioactive. There are mainly three types of blotting 
techniques used in biotechnology—southern blotting, 
northern blotting and western blotting.

Southern blot technique: The original blotting technique 
was invented by British biologist Edwin Southern as 
a method to detect specific sequence in DNA samples. 
In Southern blotting, large DNA molecules are cut into 
small pieces by restriction endonuclease. The DNA 
fragments are separated on agar gel based on their size 
by electrophoresis. DNA from the gel is transferred on to 
nitrocellulose membrane through capillary action. For 
this, a solid support is placed in a tray. Buffer solution is 
added in the tray to half the height of the solid support. A 
Whatman paper strip is placed on the solid support that 
touch the buffer on two sides. The gel having DNA is kept 

DNA
Paper towels

-
Migration Filter papers

Nitrocellulose membrane
Gel

Electrophoresis
+

Whatman

Buffer solution
Solution passes through
gel and

Probe hybridised
to complementary
sequence Gel

Membrane

Expose Remove DNA transferred
X-ray m unbound

Autoradiogram Wrap in to
probe

cling m Hybridise with
unique radioactive

probe

Fig. 3.15: Identification of desired DNA by Southern blotting

Gene Cloning 49

Reprint 2025-26



on this Whatman strip. A sheet of nylon or nitrocellulose 
membrane is placed on the top of the gel. Pressure is 
applied evenly on the gel by placing a stack of filter papers 
or paper towels and a weight on top of the membrane and 
gel. Buffer solution by capillary action moves through the 
gel and membrane onto filter papers. Along with buffer 
solution, DNA moves to the positively charged membrane. 
The membranes after transfer of nucleic acids, serve 
as the replica of their respective gels. The membrane is 
then baked to permanently attach or fix the transferred 
DNA to the membrane which is mixed with probes. The 
blot membrane is then washed to remove unhybridised 
probes. The desired DNA sequence on the membrane is 
subsequently detected using probe (Fig. 3.15). Probe 
is a single DNA strand, complementary to the sequence 
present in the DNA fragment to be identified. The probe is 
labeled with a detecting tag which may be of radioactivity, 
fluorescence or chemical nature. The labeled DNA probe 
anneals with its complementary strand in the membrane. 
Location of the target DNA fragment is identified by 
visualisation on X-ray film by autoradiography.

Northern blotting technique: It is used to detect specific 
RNA molecules in a mixture of RNA. It was developed by 
American scientists J. Alwine, David Kemp and George 
Stark in 1977. Like Southern blotting, it starts with the 
extraction of total RNA from a homogenised tissue sample 
or from cells. They are separated on a agarose gel based on 
their size by electrophoresis. Then they are transferred to 
a membrane where they are immobilised. A nylon 
membrane with a positive charge is most effective for use 
in northern blotting since the negatively charged nucleic 
acids have a high affinity for them. The transfer buffer 
used for the blotting usually contains formamide because 
it lowers the annealing temperature of the probe-RNA 
interaction, thus eliminating the need for high temperatures, 
which could cause RNA degradation. Once the RNA has 
been transferred to the membrane, it is immobilised 
through covalent linkage to the membrane by UV light or 
heat. It is then mixed with radioactive probes. The probes 
are specifically designed for the RNA of interest, so that 
they will hybridise with RNA sequences on the blot 

50 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



corresponding to the sequence of interest. The blot is now 
washed to remove extra probes. The labeled probe is then 
detected by autoradiography, which appears as dark bands 
on X-ray film or by fluorescent labels (Fig. 3.16).

RNA separated
RNA by size

Extraction Electrophoresis

Sample

Northern blotting
(transfer of RNA

to nylon membrane)
Labeled
probes

RNA xed to
Visualisation membrane with

labeled RNA on UV or heat
X-ray lm

Membrane hybridised
with labeled probes

Fig. 3.16: Identification of desired RNA by Northern blotting

Western blotting technique: The name was coined by W. 
Neal Burnette in 1981. It is a technique used to detect 
specific proteins in a sample of tissue homogenate or 
extract. Proteins are isolated from a source. They are 
separated on SDS-PAGE gel based on their electrophoretic 
mobility, which depends on charge, molecule size and 

Labeled antibody 
Protein Separated Electro transfer of treatment
samples proteins proteins from gel to 

membrane (Electro transfer)

SDS-PAGE

Develop

Protein bands visualised Autoradiography

Fig. 3.17: Identification of desired protein by Western blotting

Gene Cloning 51

Reprint 2025-26



structure of the proteins. They are transferred to a 
nitrocellulose membrane. The desired protein is detected 
on membranes using an antibody specific to the protein 
(Fig. 3.17).

Using all the three blotting techniques, a person can 
identify a gene and its expression. For example, a gene in a 
DNA sequence can be identified by Southern blotting, and 
its transcripts (RNA) can be identified by northern blotting, 
and finally the expression of a protein from mRNA (by 
translation) by western blotting.

Box 3: Eastern Blot

Eastern blot is used for the detection of specific post-translational modification of proteins. 
Proteins are separated by gel electrophoresis before being transferred to a blotting matrix 
where upon post-translational modifications are detected by specific substrates (cholera 
toxin, concanavalin, phosphomolybdate, etc.) or antibodies

3.7 Polymerase chaIn reactIon (Pcr)
Several molecular and genetic experiments require 
significant amount of DNA. In order to generate multiple 
copies of DNA from a few copies, a technique was developed 
by Kary B. Mullis, which is known as ‘Polymerase Chain 
Reaction (PCR)’. In this technique, a very small amount of 
DNA can be exponentially amplified to generate thousands 
to millions of copies. PCR, sometimes called ‘molecular 
photocopying’, is often heralded as one of the most 
important scientific advances in molecular biology that 
revolutionised the study of DNA to such an extent that its 
inventor, Kary B. Mullis was awarded the Nobel Prize for 
Chemistry in 1993.

PCR technique is based on the principle that cells use to 
replicate its DNA. As the name implies, it is a chain reaction 
carried out in repeated cycles, which involves the process of 
heating and cooling called thermal cycling carried out by a 
machine called thermocycler. It requires a heat stable DNA 
polymerase enzyme that can make new strands of DNA on 
template strands at a high temperature of about 72 to 78°C 
(a temperature at which a human or E. coli DNA polymerase 
would be non-functional). DNA polymerase typically used in 
PCR is called Taq polymerase, an enzyme isolated from the 

52 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



C G

A T

DNA
Sample Primers Nucleotides

5' 3'
Mix Buffer Taq PCR Tube

Target polymerase

sequence

Genomic DNA 3' 5'

Thermocycler
5' 3'

Denaturation: Heat
1 at 95°C to separate

DNA strands

3' 5'

5' 5' 3'
Reverse
Primer

Cycle 1 yields 3' Annealing: Lowering the
2 molecules 2

3' temperature to 50–55°C to form

Forward hydrogen bond of primer with

Primer target sequence
3' 5' 5'

5' 3'
3'

5'
Extension: Taq DNA

3 polymerase adds
nucleotides to the 3' end
of each primer at 72°C

5'
3' 3' 5'

3'
5' 3' 3' 5' 3'

5'
5'

Cycle 2 yields
4 molecules

5'
' 3' 5' 3'

3' 5 3' 5'

3'
3' 3' 3' 3' 5' 3'

5' 5' 5' 3' 5' 5'
3'

Cycle 3 yields 5' 5'
8 molecules;
2 molecules
(in white boxes) 5'
match target 3' 5' 5' 5'

5 5' 3' 3' 5'
5' 3' ' 3' 3'

3'
sequence 3'

Fig. 3.18: Steps of polymerase chain reaction

Gene Cloning 53

Reprint 2025-26



thermophilic bacterium, Thermus aquaticus, which inhabits 
hot springs. Another enzyme Pfu polymerase isolated from 
Pyrococcus furiosus is used widely because of its higher 
fidelity when copying DNA. Like other DNA polymerases, 
Taq polymerase also requires a primer, a short sequence of 
nucleotides that provides 3′-OH end to start DNA synthesis. 
Two types of single stranded synthetic deoxyoligonucleotide 
primers (called forward and reverse primers) are used in 
each PCR reaction that is complementary to the DNA 
sequences in the template strands flanking the target region 
(region that should be copied). They are designed from the 
pre-existing knowledge of the sequence of DNA template to 
be amplified. 

PCR involves three steps — denaturation, annealing 
and extension (Fig. 3.18). The first step, i.e., denaturation 
is accomplished by heating the double stranded DNA to 
be amplified to a temperature of about 94–95°C. At high 
temperature, hydrogen bonds that hold two complementary 
strands of DNA molecule break down and each strand serves 
as template for the synthesis of its new complementary 
strands. The second step is annealing during which the 
temperature is lowered to around 50–55°C so that the 
specific primers can anneal to their respective template 
strands at their complementary sites and serve as the 
starting point for copying. Lowering of temperature depends 
upon the length of the primer and sequence of the primer.
In the third step, i.e., extension, the temperature is raised 
to about 72°C, and the heat stable DNA polymerase begins 
adding deoxyribonucleotides (dNTPs – dATP, dTTP, dCTP 
and dGTP) onto the 3′-OH ends of the annealed primers. 
Thus, a new chain of DNA grows from 5′ to 3′ direction 
on each template. Copies of DNA strands formed by PCR 
are known as amplicons. At the end of the cycle, again 
the temperature is raised and the process is repeated. The 
number of DNA copies doubles after each cycle hence the 
number of copies at the end of each cycle would be 2n (where 
‘n’ is the cycle number). Usually, 25 to 30 cycles are carried 
out in a typical PCR reaction.

In PCR, the amplified product is analysed by gel 
electrophoresis at the end of reaction (end point analysis). 
The amount of DNA in the band of gel plate is then estimated 
by measuring the intensity of the band by computer 

54 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Cells or tissue

Isolate total mRNA

Anneal anchored oligo (dT) primers,

mRNA AA AAA

T T T T T

First strand synthesis

mRNA AA AAA
cDNA T T T T T

RNA removal and second
strand cDNA synthesis

ds DNA

Fig. 3.19: Steps of RT-PCR.

programs and transferred into a quantitative data. This is 
called semi-quantitative PCR. If DNA material is formed 
from mRNA by reverse transcriptase and used in PCR for 
amplification (Fig. 3.19), the method is known as reverse 
transcription PCR (RT-PCR). 

The latest advancement in PCR technology is 
real-time quantitative PCR (real-time qPCR). In this method, 

Gene Cloning 55

Reprint 2025-26



fluorescent markers are used, which have specific binding 
affinity to double stranded DNA. When bound to dsDNA, 
they exhibit fluorescence behaviour. Fluorescence emission 

is detected and quantitated by a detector. The amount of 

fluorencence emitted is directly proportional to the amount 
of double stranded PCR product. Since, the amount of PCR 

product formed can be measured after each PCR cycle, and 

hence, it is called real-time quantitative PCR. One of the 

fluorescent dyes used in real time PCR is SYBR green. The 
dye only binds to double stranded DNA.

The machine in which PCR reaction is conducted is 

known as thermocycler. These are automated machines 

having control points where one can set three gradients of 

temperature (for denaturation, annealing and extension) 

for different time periods for each step. For real-time 

qPCR thermocycler it has a detector to measure emitted 

fluorescence. In real-time PCR, gel electrophoresis is not 
needed as in case of conventional PCR.

PCR has several applications in molecular biology and 

rDNA technology. One of the applications of PCR is to 

quantify mRNA to assess the expression of a gene. It is also 

used to amplify minute DNA samples collected from crime 
scenes and fossils for further investigation.

Box 4

Box 4

The Novel Coronavirus (nCoV) Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome 
Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) and COVID-19 Disease

(Corona Pandemic)

The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses on 12 February, 2020, officially named 
2019-nCoV virus as SARS-CoV-2, and on the same day, World Health Organization (WHO) 
announced it to be responsible for the pandemic Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). SARS-
CoV-2 is an enveloped virus, which contains crown-like spikes on its outer surface.
 The genome of SARS-CoV-2 is a single-stranded positive (sense) RNA of 30 kb with G + C 
content of 38%. Two-thirds of viral RNA encode a number of non-structural proteins (NSPs), which 
include papain-like protease (PLpro), 3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro), RNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase (RdRp), helicase (Hel) and exonuclease (ExoN) as major proteins while the rest 

56 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



are accessory proteins that are involved in the transcription and replication of the virus. The 
rest part of the virus genome encodes four essential structural proteins, including spike (S) 
glycoprotein, small envelope (E) protein, membrane (M) protein, and N phosphoprotein (N) 
protein, and also several accessory proteins that interfere with the host immune response. 
 On the basis of the structure, the RT – PCR tests have been efficiently optimised, and 
mRNA vaccines have been designed and being administered (Chapter 4).

0             5,000            10,000          15,000          20,000          25,000          30,000

ORF4

ORF1b
ORF1a ORF2 ORF9

ORF5
5' - - 3'

PLpro 3CLpro ExoN E M U
Hel S

RdRp

Membrane protein

Envelope protein

Spike protein

Nucleocapsid protein
Enclosing RNA

Lipid membrane

Schematic diagram of the SARS-CoV-2 genome organisation and a virion. The genome contains a 
5′-untranslated region (5′′- UTR), open-reading frames (ORFs) 1a and 1b encodes non-structural 
proteins, 3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro), papain-like protease (PLpro), helicase (Hel), and 
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) besides accessory proteins, The other ORFs code for 
structural S protein (S), E protein (E), M protein (M), and N phosphoprotein (N).

Gene Cloning 57

Reprint 2025-26



Box 5: Application of RT-PCR and COVID-19 detection test

RT-PCR plays an important role in the COVID-19 detection test. It is based on the principle 
of real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) test that qualitatively 
detects the nucleic acid from SARS-CoV-2 in the lower and upper respiratory tract specimens 
[sputum, broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL)] collected by health care staff, from individuals that 
are suspected of COVID-19.
 Principle of the RT-PCR test is same as described in the chapter. For testing, primer and 
probes are selected from Open Reading Frame gene region (ORF1a/b) and viral nucleocapsid 
region (N), or the spike protein (S) of SARS-CoV-2 genome. The kit contains primer/probe 
specific for N gene, ORF1a/b gene and the human RNase P. RNA is separated and purified 
from the upper and lower respiratory tract specimens is firstly converted to cDNA by reverse 
transcription and then amplified in real-time PCR thermal cycler. Probes consist of a reporter 
dye at 5′ and quenching dye at 3′. The fluorescent signals emitted from reporter dye are 
absorbed by the quencher, so it doesn’t emit signals. During amplification, probes are allowed 
to bind to templates and are cut off by Taq enzyme (5′-3′ exonuclease activity), separating 
reporter dye from the quencher, and generating fluorescent signals. The PCR instrument can 
then inevitably draw a real-time amplification curve that is based on the change in signal, and 
finally realising the qualitative detection of SARS-CoV-2 novel coronavirus at the nucleic acid 
level. Amplification plots shown in the figure signify the accumulation of the product over 
the duration of the real-time PCR experiment. The fluorescent signal from individual sample 
is plotted against the cycle number.

Ct value

Sample

Threshold
No template

Baseline

Number of Cycles

Threshold level and Ct value on a RT-PCR
amplication curve

 The threshold cycle or Ct value is the cycle number at which the fluorescence generated 
within a reaction crosses the fluorescence threshold — a fluorescent signal significantly above 
the background fluorescence. Ct refers to the number of cycles needed to amplify the viral 
RNA to a detectable level. At the threshold cycle, a detectable amount of amplicon product has 
been generated during the early exponential phase of the reaction. The Ct value is inversely 
proportional to the amount of the gene of interest in the sample. 

58 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26

Fluorescence



3.8 dna lIbrarIes

DNA molecules present in a genome of an organism are 
very large in terms of the number of base pairs it contains. 
The size of a DNA molecule present in any diploid cell from 
any organ of your body has around 3×109 bp. In a genome, 
gene sequences are arranged randomly and selecting or 
isolating a gene of interest is a big task, especially when the 
genomic sequences are not known. Also, a small portion 
of genome is transcribed to give mRNA, whereas a major 
portion of the genome remains untranscribed. It will be 
very difficult to isolate a gene of interest or a sequence 
of genome whose location and sequence is not known. 
Hence, DNA libraries are constructed by collecting DNA 
fragments that have been cloned into vectors so that  the 
specific DNA fragments of interest can be identified and 
isolated for further study. There are basically two types 
of DNA libraries (genomic and cDNA libraries), which are 
described in the following section.

(i) Genomic DNA Library

A genomic library is a collection of clones of small fragments 
of DNA that together represents the complete genome of an 
organism. A population of identical vectors store DNA inserts, 
each containing a different insert. In general, construction of 
genomic library is done as shown in Fig. 3.20. First, genomic 
DNA is isolated from the source,  which is too large to be 
incorporated into a vector and needs to be broken down 
into desirable fragment sizes. Therefore, the genomic DNA 
is digested with a restriction enzyme to cut the DNA into 
fragments of a specific size. DNA fragments are then inserted 
into vectors using DNA ligase to form recombinant vectors. 
This generates a pool of recombinant DNA molecules. 
The recombinant DNA molecules are now taken up by 
host bacterial cells by transformation and then allowed to 
multiply in a nutrient medium to form colonies. All host cells 
containing recombinant vectors represent a genomic library. 
The library created contains representative copies of all the 
DNA fragments present within the genome of an organism.

Gene Cloning 59

Reprint 2025-26



DNA is extracted from DNA fragments
cells and digested with are inserted into
a restriction enzyme cloning vector

Selection of
Transformants Allowed Bacterial cells

to multiply are transformed
with vectors

Fig. 3.20: Construction of genomic library 

Genomic library has several applications in 
biotechnology. Genomic library of a species may be helpful 
for complete sequencing of its genome. Also, one can search 
for many genes that are not expressed in the genome of an 
organism. It is also helpful in understanding the evolution 
of species. Genomic library can be used to compare the 
sequences of healthy and diseased tissues of the same 
organism to identify genetic aberrations. 

(ii) cDNA Library

Gene expression in higher eukaryotes is tissue-specific. 
In specific cells, certain genes undergo moderate to high 
expression. For example, the genes encoding insulin 
proteins are expressed only in beta cells of pancreas while 
albumin encoding genes are expressed in liver cells. Using 
this information, a target gene can be cloned by isolating the 
mRNA from a specific tissue. The specific DNA sequences 
are synthesised as copies from mRNAs of a particular cell 
type called cDNA (complementary DNA). Clones of such 
DNA copies of mRNAs are called cDNA clones. The cDNA 
clones of all the genes expressed in a specific cell type or 
tissue of an organism represent cDNA library. 

Construction of cDNA library involves the isolation of 
total mRNA from a cell type or tissue of interest. mRNA 
being single-stranded cannot be cloned as such and is 
not a substrate for DNA ligase. It is first converted into 
cDNA before insertion into a suitable vector, which can be 

60 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Reverse mRNA
Transcriptase 5' 3'

(RTase) RNase
3' 5'

cDNA
Source mRNA cDNA

5' 3' DNA
Polymerase

3' 5'
dsDNA

Cleaved DNA
Digestion with
restriction enzymes

Vectors

Ligation

Cleaved vectors

Insertion into
E. coli

Library amplication in rapidly
reproducing bacteria

Fig. 3.21: Construction of cDNA library

achieved using reverse transcriptase (RNA-dependent DNA 
polymerase or RTase). RTase synthesise a complementary 
DNA strand on mRNA by using mRNA as a template. 
mRNA is then removed by RNase and the single stranded 

Gene Cloning 61

Reprint 2025-26



cDNA is converted into double-stranded cDNA by DNA 
polymerase. cDNA molecules are cloned in appropriate 
host-vector system (Fig. 3.21). The total clones of cDNA 
are the representative of cDNA library of the source. Since 
the expressions of genes are different in different organs or 
cells of an organism at different physiological states, cDNA 
libraries prepared from different sources of an organism 
may vary from each other.

The cDNA library has a great significance in the 
applications of biotechnology. The most important 
application of cDNA library is to know which genes are 
active in particular tissues under a particular physiological 
state. It also helps us to isolate a specific gene. Using cDNA 
as probes, we can screen genomic libraries for a particular 
gene. 

 SUMMARY

• Isolation of nucleic acids from different organisms is the 
most essential requirement for any molecular biology 
experiment. There are four steps in the process of 
extraction of nucleic acids, i.e., disruption of biological 
samples, protection of nucleic acids from its degrading 
enzymes, separation of nucleic acids from other molecules 
and assessment of purity and quality of the isolated 
nucleic acids.

• Various enzymes play an important role in recombinant 
DNA (rDNA) technology. These are nucleases, DNA 
ligase, alkaline phosphatase, polynucleotide kinase, 
poly A polymerase, etc.

• The major task of the manipulation of DNA involves cutting 
and ligation of the gene of interest into the vector DNA.

• Nucleases are the enzymes that cleave nucleic acids 
by hydrolysing the phosphodiester bond that joins the 
sugar residues of adjacent nucleotides. Two major types 
of nuclease enzymes depending on its action on the 
phosphodiester bonds of polynucleotide chains have been 
identified, which are exonuclease and endonuclease.

• Exonuclease enzymes can remove mononucleotide either 
from the 3′ or 5′ end of the DNA molecule.

62 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



• Endonuclease enzymes cleave DNA molecules at a specific 
sequence, hence called restriction endonucleases or 
restriction enzymes (REs). REs are mainly categorised 
into three groups (i.e., Types I, II and III) based on their 
cofactor requirement and the position of their DNA 
cleavage site relative to the target sequence. Type II REs 
find application in rDNA technology.

• DNA ligase can join two DNA strands together by catalysing 
the formation of a phosphodiester bond in the duplex 
form.

• DNA polymerases are a group of enzymes that catalyse 
the synthesis of new DNA strand by using dNTPs on a 
template strand.

• Alkaline phosphatase is used to remove the terminal 
phosphate group from 5′ end of DNA strands.

• Reverse transcriptase is used to generate complementary 
DNA (cDNA) strand from an RNA template, a process 
called reverse transcription.

• In rDNA technology, the recombinant DNA is introduced 
(transferred) in host cells by a number of methods, 
such as chemical based transfection (calcium chloride, 
lipofection etc.) and physical transfection (electroporation, 
microinjection and biolistic) methods.

• Selection of transformed bacteria is the most essential 
step for a successful cloning experiment, i.e., to identify 
the transformed cells having recombinant vector (with 
gene of interest) from a mixture of transformed and 
non-transformed cells. These selection methods may be 
direct or through insertional inactivation.

• In direct selection, the transformed cells are distinguished 
from non-transformed cells based on expression of certain 
traits, such as resistance to antibiotics.

• In insertional inactivation method, a vector is used having 
two markers (either two antibiotic resistant genes or one 
antibiotic resistant gene and lacZ gene).

• Blue – white selection method is another example of 
insertional inactivation to select recombinant transformed 
cells in which the expression of lacZ gene can directly be 
observed in bacterial colonies.

• Blotting techniques are widely used to separate and identify 
DNA, RNA and proteins from a mixture of molecules.

• Southern blotting technique is used to detect specific 
sequence of DNA in DNA samples.

Gene Cloning 63

Reprint 2025-26



• Northern blotting technique is used to detect specific RNA 
molecules in a mixture of RNA.

• Western blotting is used to detect specific proteins in a 
sample of tissue homogenate or extract.

• Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) is used to amplify a 
small amount of DNA into thousands to millions of copies, 
which involves three steps, i.e., denaturation, annealing 
and extension. The amplified product of PCR can be 
analysed by gel electrophoresis at the end of reaction (end 
point analysis).

• The latest advancement in PCR technology is real-time 
quantitative PCR (qPCR), in which the fluorescent markers 
are used that have specific binding affinity to double 
stranded DNA. In qPCR, gel electrophoresis is not needed 
as in the case of conventional PCR.

• DNA libraries are constructed by collecting DNA fragments 
that have been cloned into vectors so that specific DNA 
fragments of interest can be identified and isolated. There 
are basically two types of DNA libraries — genomic and 
cDNA library.

• A genomic library is a collection of clones of small fragments 
of DNA that together represent complete genome of an 
organism.

• The cDNA library constitutes cDNA clones of all the genes 
expressed in a specific cell type or tissue of an organism.

EXERCISES

 1. Describe the methods used for isolation of DNA.

 2. What is the role of biological detergent in the process 
of isolation of nucleic acid?

 3. How does DNA isolation from plant tissue differ from 
that of bacterial cell?

 4. How many types of restriction enzymes (REs) are 
there? Can all REs be used in rDNA technology? Give 
justification.

 5. What are the challenges faced during the process of 
nucleic acid extraction?

 6. Write the role of alkaline phosphatase, DNA ligase, 
terminal transferase in rDNA technology.

 7. Describe the role of chelating agent in the process of 
DNA extraction.

64 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



 8. Briefly describe the modes of DNA transfer into the 
host.

 9. Identify the correct statement for blue – white selection 
method.

 (a) A specific dye is used to stain bacterial colony.
 (b) It is based on the expression of lacZ gene.

 (c) The recombinant bacterial colony remains blue.

 (d) lacZ gene is inserted in an antibiotic resistant 
gene.

 10. Identify the correctly matched pair from the following 
options.

 (a) Northern blot: Detect specific sequence of DNA
 (b) Southern blot: Detect specific sequence of RNA
 (c) Western blot: Detect specific proteins
 (d) Eastern blot:  Detect transcriptional modifications 

in RNA

 11. Identify the incorrect matched pair from the following 
options.

 (a) Taq polymerase: Thermus aquaticus

 (b) Pfu polymerase: Pyrococcus furiosus

 (c) HindIII: Haemophilus influenzae

 (d) PstI: Pyrococcus stuartii

 12. How are recombinants screened? Describe the methods 
in detail.

 13. Differentiate between the Southern, Northern and 
Western blotting.

 14. What is PCR? Describe in detail.

 15. Write a comparative account of the genomic and cDNA 
libraries.

 16. Diploid human genome contains:

 (a) 3.2 × 109 base pairs

 (b) 6.4 × 108 base pairs

 (c) 3.2 × 108 base pairs

 (d) 6.4 × 109 base pairs

 17. Select the incorrectly matched pair from the following.

 (a) Nucleases : Hydrolyse phosphodiester bond 

 (b) Restriction enzymes: Cleave DNA at specific 
sequence

 (c) Palindromic sequence: Read same backwards  and 
forward

 (d) EcoRI: Type I Restriction Enzyme

Gene Cloning 65

Reprint 2025-26



 18. Assertion: PCR can be used to amplify very small 
amount of DNA using DNA modifying enzymes.

Reason: PCR uses Taq Polymerase.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason 
is the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason 
is not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 19. Assertion: Foreign gene can be introduced into 
host bacterium by transformation techniques like 
electroporation.

Reason: Bacteria have cell wall/membrane.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason 
is the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason 
is not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

66 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26

##4##

Applications of Recombinant
Chapter 4

DNA Technology

Recombinant DNA (rDNA) technology has revolutionised 4.1 DNA Fingerprinting

our life in various ways. In recent years breakthrough 4.2 Transgenic 
discoveries have provided solutions to many of the problems. Organism 

These include establishing the identity of an individual, 4.3 Gene Therapy 
introduction of foreign genes into other organisms, 4.4 Recombinant 
diagnosis of many diseases and their treatment, production Vaccines
of therapeutic agents/molecules and so on. In this chapter, 4.5 Therapeutic 
students will be acquainted with a few applications of rDNA Agents/Molecules: 
technology, like DNA fingerprinting, developing transgenic Monoclonal 

organisms, gene therapy, recombinant vaccines and antibodies, insulin 
and Growth 

production of therapeutic agents/molecules.
Hormone

4.1 DNA FiNgerpriNtiNg

As you are aware, chemical structure of every individual’s 
DNA is identical and is made up of four nitrogenous bases: 
A (Adenine), G (Guanine), C (Cytosine) and T (Thymine). 
The arrangement of these bases along the DNA strands 
is specific to an individual. The human genome consists 
of  3.2 × 109 bp. However, there is very little uniqueness 
in the genetic makeup of humans. About 99.9% of the 
genome among humans is same and the remaining 0.1% 
of the genome consists of sites of inherited variations. It is 
these variations in DNA, which make each of us unique. 
Identifying these differences is helpful in determining the 

Reprint 2025-26



relatedness between two individuals. One way of achieving 
this is by DNA sequencing. However, sequencing and 
comparing DNA of individuals every time would not be 
feasible. Therefore, to study and compare the inherited 
variations in human DNA without sequencing, a new 
technique known as ‘DNA fingerprinting’ was developed 
by a British geneticist Sir Alec Jeffreys in 1984 at the 
University of Leicester.

More than 90% of the human genome consists of 
DNA which does not code for protein. Within the non-
coding regions of an individual’s genome, there exists short 
sequences of nucleotides which are repeated a number 

of times in tandem called STR 
VNTRs (short tandem repeats) at a locus 

which are called VNTR (variable 
number tandem repeat). VNTRs 
are commonly subdivided into two 
principal families: microsatellites 
(repeated sequences of 1 to 9 
bp) and minisatellites (repeated 

Fig. 4.1: Schematic representation of VNTRs in 3 alleles
sequences of 10 to 100 bp) as 
shown in Fig. 4.1. 

These sequences show a high degree of polymorphism 
(or variations) and form the basis of DNA fingerprinting. 
Furthermore, as the polymorphisms are inheritable from 
parent to offspring, DNA fingerprinting is the basis of 
paternity testing in case of disputes.

Father Mother Child 1 Child 2

Fig. 4.2: DNA profiling to determine the child of a couple. In the above figure, the DNA profile of a child 
is compared with father and mother to confirm paternity. Here, father and mother are parents 
of child 1 but not of child 2.

68 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



We carry two different copies of every VNTR locus because 
we inherit one chromosome from mother and one from father. 
In simplest way, DNA fingerprinting can be performed using 
restriction digestion of DNA. This technique is referred to 
as Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP). In 
RFLP, after restriction enzyme digestion of individual’s DNA 
in specific regions, unique patterns are generated that are 
used for genetic analysis and identification (Fig. 4.2).

Conceptually, the DNA fingerprinting shown in Fig. 4.2 
is correct but in reality, the identification of individual bands 
on gel is difficult and therefore, hybridisation (Southern 
Hybridisation) using a VNTR probe is used. Hybridisation 
with VNTR probes produces a pattern of bands which 
are characteristic to every individual (Fig. 4.3). The steps 
involved in this technique are as follows:

1. DNA is isolated from different samples like blood, 
hair, skin, semen, buccal swab, etc. 

2. The collected DNA sample is cut into several 
fragments of different sizes using one or more 
restriction enzymes. 

S S
1 2

Restriction
digestion

Sample Extracted Fragmented
DNA DNA

Electrophoresis gel

nylon
Probe membrane

gel

DNA pattern Hybridisation with DNA Transferred
compared with labelled probe to nylon membrane

known subjects

Fig. 4.3: Steps involved in DNA Fingerprinting

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 69

Reprint 2025-26



3. The DNA fragments are then separated by agarose 
gel electrophoresis. The different sized DNA pieces 
are separated based on size.

4. The separated DNA on the gel is thus transferred 
to a nitrocellulose/nylon membrane. The nylon 
membrane is then exposed to UV radiation on UV 
transilluminator for three minutes or baked at 80°C 
for two hours to permanently attach DNA to the 
membrane.

5. Now, Southern hybridisation is performed using 
VNTR Probes (the labeled stretches of single-stranded 
DNA used to detect the presence of complementary 
target sequences). 

6. Finally, the hybridised DNA fragments are detected. 
7. The patterns of DNA bands are highly specific for 

each individual and can be used in forensics and 
paternity disputes.

Note: Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) is often used to increase the sensitivity of the 
technique as it amplifies the DNA, irrespective of the amount of DNA.

Applications of DNA Fingerprinting

1. VNTR patterns are used to ascertain the paternity 
and maternity of a person given the fact that they are 
inherited from their parents. Since, these patterns 
are very specific, even a parental VNTR pattern 
can be reconstructed from their known offspring(s) 
VNTR patterns. Therefore, VNTR patterns of 
parent – child can be used to solve paternity and 
maternity cases.

2. DNA isolated from tissues like blood, hair, skin, 
semen, etc., from the scene of a crime is used for 
VNTR patterns analysis as evidence, where such 
a pattern of DNA isolate is compared with VNTR 
patterns of a criminal or suspect for establishing 
guilt or innocence. Hence, DNA fingerprinting helps 
in criminal identification and forensic studies.

70 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



3. DNA fingerprinting is also used to compare DNA 
extracts from fossils to modern day counter parts 
and therefore, finds great significance in evolutionary 
biology studies.

4. DNA profile of people suffering from some particular 
disorder, or comparing it to a large number of people 
with and without the disorder helps to identify the 
DNA patterns in studying inherited disorders.

5. In addition to social security numbers, picture ID 
and other more routine methods, even the DNA 
profile (VNTR patterns) of an individual are also being 
proposed to be used as a sort of genetic barcode for 
personal identification.

4.2 trANsgeNic OrgANism

You must have heard about ‘Bt Cotton’ or ‘Rosie, the cow’, 
but have you ever wondered what these are? Are these 
naturally found in the environment? If not, then how have 
these been created? Or why these have been created at all? 
Both the examples mentioned above are a transgenic plant 
and animal, respectively. These have been produced by the 
introduction of new gene segments through the process 
of transgenesis and these are not naturally found in the 
environment. These have been created for the benefit of 
human beings.

The process of insertion of a foreign gene (transgene) 
into the genome of an organism and its transmission 
and expression in the organism’s progeny is termed as 
transgenesis. The organisms carrying the transgene, are 
known as transgenic organisms or genetically modified 
organisms (GMOs).

4.2.1 Historical background

The first genetically modified organism was a bacterium 
made by Herbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen in 1973. In the 
subsequent year, it was followed by the engineering of first 
transgenic animal (transgenic mice) by Rudolf Jaenisch 
and Beatrice Mintz in 1974. In 1994, Flavr Savr tomato 
was released as the first genetically modified (GM) food 
crop approved by the US Food and Drug Administration 
(USFDA).

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 71

Reprint 2025-26



Box 1: History of GMO Technology

30,333 BCE

7,800 BCE wolves began

Oldest evidence of

1973

Boyer & Cohen develop
1974

Genetic engineering (GE)

Jaenisch & Mintz create
the

1975

Asilomar conference sets guidelines
for future GE experiments

1980

U.S. Supreme court allows
patenting of GE organism

1982

FDA approves Humulin ,  the
pharmaceutical manufactured
using GE technology

1994

Flavr Savr Tomato becomes the first
GE food crop approved by U.S.

1995
Department of Agriculture

US EPA approves the
insecticide producing crop

1996

Herbicide-resistant crops

2000

2009 Golden Rice engineered to

The drug ATryn, the
biological product produced by

GE animal approved by US FDA

Timeline for ‘Advancements in the concept of transgenic organisms’ 
Ref: Rangel, G. (2015). From Corgis to Corn: a Brief Look at the Long History of GMO Technology. 
Science in the News.

72 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



4.2.2 Production of transgenic organisms

Transgenic Plants
Transgenic or genetically modified plants are those plants 
whose genome is modified (by the introduction of one 
or more genes from another species) through genetic 
engineering. Basic requirement for genetic transformation 
is construction of genetic vehicle (vector), which carries 
the genes of interest flanked by necessary regulating 
sequences, like promoter or terminator. Most commonly 
used techniques for gene transfer are of two types. 

• Vector-mediated or indirect gene transfer

• Vector-less or direct gene transfer

A. Vector-mediated or indirect gene transfer 

•	 Bacteria-mediated transfer: Agrobacterium 
tumefaciens is a rod shaped Gram-negative soil 
bacterium that is capable of naturally transferring 
DNA into the plant genome, and causes crown gall 
disease (a type of plant tumor). Agrobacterium has 
the natural ability to transfer its own DNA to plant 
genome randomly, where it can produce copies of 
itself, and therefore, is also known as ‘Natural Genetic 
Engineer’. It contains a large size tumor inducing 
(Ti) plasmid. A portion of the plasmid carrying tumor 
inducing genes is called T-DNA, which is transferred 
to plant genome upon infection. These genes encode 
for phytohormones, like auxin and cytokinins, which 
induce rapid cell division in the host plant cell and 
cause the formation of tumor called crown gall. This 
natural ability of A. tumefaciens to transfer T-DNA has 
been exploited to transfer the genes of interest to plants 
and produce transgenic plants. The tumor inducing 
genes of T-DNA are replaced with genes of interest like 
Bt gene for insect resistance. Ti plasmid without tumor 
inducing genes is a disarmed plasmid and this process 
is called disarming. Antibiotic marker genes can be 
introduced along with genes of interest, to differentiate 
among the transformed and non-transformed cells. 
Vectors containing modified T-DNA (recombinant 
disarmed T-DNA) are transferred to Agrobacterium 

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 73

Reprint 2025-26



cells, which are further used for plant transformation. 
Agrobacterium infection causes the T-DNA to get 
transferred into plant cells and subsequent integration 
of T-DNA carrying the target gene into plant nuclear 
DNA. These are further cultured on regeneration 
media supplemented with the bacteriostatic agent 
to stop further growth of Agrobacterium and lethal 
concentrations of marker antibiotic, which selectively 
eliminates the non-transformed plant cells. In a 
few weeks,  the transformed tissue forms shoots, 
which are transferred onto the rooting media, where 
the transformed shoots make roots within two to 
three weeks. Plantlets are then transferred to soil. 
A schematic representation of Agrobacterium mediated 
plant transformation is given in Fig. 4.4.

Agrobacterium
tumefaciens

Restriction bacteria

cleavage site Foreign DNA is
Right border cut by the same restriction

enzyme

Transfer
Plant

DNA
Plant expression

expression vector with

Left vector foreign DNA

border

The plasmid is
transferred into
bacteria

Inserted T-DNA
carrying foreign gene

A plant is generated
from a cell clone. All

The bacterium is
of its cells carry the

used to insert the
foreign gene and Culture of plant The plant cells are

T-DNA carrying the
may express it as a cell with antibiotics grown in culture

foreign gene into
new trait containing media

the chromosome
of a plant cell

Fig. 4.4: Stepwise procedure for Agrobacterium mediated transformation in plants

74 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



•	 Plant virus-mediated transfer: Plant viruses, such 
as caulimoviruses have the ability to enter intact plant 
cells and introduce their own DNA into the plant’s 
DNA. Use of plant viruses constitutes another method 
to transfer gene of interest into plant cells. However, 
this is not a common method of plant transformation 
as compared to Agrobacterium.

B. Vector - less or direct gene transfer

Many physical or mechanical methods have been developed 
to help direct entry of DNA in plant cells.

•	 Particle Bombardment gene transfer: It is a popular 
direct gene transfer method and is capable of delivering 
foreign DNA in both monocot and dicot plants. It is 
also called biolistics. The DNA having genes of interest 
and antibiotic resistance marker gene is coated on 
to the surface of gold or tungsten particles (1 mm – 3 
mm in size). These particles are accelerated with high 
velocity and bombarded onto the target tissue or cells 
using a powerful gun, which is called a particle gun 
or gene gun. Tissues bombarded are then cultured on 
the nutrient media having an appropriate antibiotic. 
Transformed cells grow to make callus and then 
transgenic plants are regenerated. This method is very 
useful for those plant species, where Agrobacterium-
mediated transformation may not be very successful, 
for example, cereals. Particle bombardment technique 
is also utilised for the transformation of chloroplast. As 
a plant cell contains many chloroplasts, this method 
allows much higher transgene expression.

•	 Protoplast Transformation and Electroporation: 
Protoplasts are spherical naked plant cells, which are 
produced by the removal of cell walls. These naked cells 
are capable of taking up DNA from their surroundings, 
which get integrated into the genome of transfected 
cells. Gene transfer process can be accelerated with the 
application of polyethylene glycol (PEG) and dextran 
sulphate. Alternatively, electric current can also be 
used for gene transfer in protoplast and the method 
is known as electroporation. Transfected protoplasts 
are allowed to regenerate cell walls and then the cell 

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 75

Reprint 2025-26



division begins. Transformed cells are selected on the 
selective nutrient medium and transgenic plants are 
regenerated. 

Transgenic Animals

In transgenic animals, genetic makeup has been altered 
by the use of various genetic engineering techniques. 
Most commonly used techniques for developing transgenic 
animals are:

1. DNA pronuclear microinjection

2. Embryonic stem cell-mediated gene transfer

3. Retrovirus-mediated gene transfer

1. DNA Pronuclear Microinjection

This is one of the earliest strategies used for creating 
transgenic mice. Just after fertilisation, the egg contains a 
small female pronucleus and a large male pronucleus. In 
pronuclear microinjection technique, transgene is directly 
injected into the larger male pronucleus. The embryos with 
injected transgene are cultured in vitro and then implanted 
into the uterus of foster mothers. The transgene may get 
integrated into the DNA of zygote, resulting in animals that 
are transgenic. 

The technique is simple and reliable, but the rate 
of success is low as the transgene may or may not get 
integrated into the host DNA. Also, the site of integration 
of transgene is random which may lead to unpredictable 
effects.

2. Embryonic stem cell-mediated gene transfer

Embryonic stem (ES) cells have the potential to differentiate 
into any other cell type of the body including germ cells. 
ES cells are collected from the inner cell mass region of 
the blastocyst stage. The r-DNA is transfered into these 
ES cells by electroporation. Few ES cells take up the 
transgene and get transformed. These transformed ES 
cells are then transferred back to the inner cell mass of 
blastocyst through micro-injection. The blastocyst is 
implanted into the uterus of a foster mother. The offspring 
are then monitored for expression of the transgene.

Box 2: Chimeric Mouse

76 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Biotechnological production of transgenic animals

Genetic
material Nucleus is

removed from
the ovocyte

Electrical
discharge

1A DNA sequence 2Cells from the ear of 3 A cell transfection procedure
a goat are multiplied is carried out using an 4The best transgenic cells

containing the human are selected and inserted
glucocerebrosidase from a small or electrical discharge. It cause into goat ovocyte from
gene with a genetic auricular biopsy. the membrane of goat cells which the maternal DNA

to open allowing the had been removed.
promoter was taken
as a gene of insert. introduction and integration

of glucocerebrosidase gene
into the genome.

Non-transgenic
nanny goat

Protein
milk

Electrical
discharge

Goat

Milk

Another electrical Groups of 12 to 15 To determine whether the In order to become a

5 discharge is applied to 6 embryos containing 7glucocerebrosidase 8 medication, the milk
fuse the ovocytes and the human protein is present in the protein has to be puried
transgenic cell glucocerebrosidase gene offspring, hormones are and transformed into
which generate are implanted in a used to induce lactation in injectable product.

non-transgenic goat.
transgenic embryos. the animal when it reaches

six months of age.

Fig. 4.5: Stepwise procedure for production of transgenic animals 

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 77

Reprint 2025-26



Box 2: Chimeric Mouse

Chimeras are organisms composed of at least two genetically 

distinct cell lineages originating from different zygotes. A 

chimeric mouse contains both normal cells and genetically 

manipulated ‘knockout’ cells. Coat colour can reflect this 
with a spotted pattern. It is a patchwork of normal cell and 

genetically manipulated ‘knockout’ cells. Embryonic chimeras 

of the mouse have become a tool to investigate the critical 

developmental processes, including cell specification, differentiation, cell lineage, potential 
patterning and the function of specific genes. In addition, chimeras can also be generated to 
address biological processes in the adult, including the mechanisms underlying diseases or 

tissue repair and regeneration.

3. Retrovirus mediated gene transfer

The genetic material of retroviruses is RNA. Retroviral 
vectors are used to stably introduce transgene into early 
embryos or ES cells. The advantage of this method is that a 
single copy of retrovirus carrying the transgene integrates 
at a particular location in the host genome. An example of 
such retroviruses is the lentivirus.

4.2.3 Applications of Transgenic organisms

Applications of Transgenic Plants

In Agriculture

One major goal of plant transgenics has been to increase 
the yield of crops and also to improve the nutritional 
quality of crop products to cater to the needs of ever 
increasing human population. Biotic stress due to 
pathogens, like bacteria, fungi, viruses or insects, and 
abiotic stress factors, like drought, salinity, extreme 
temperatures causes huge loss to crop productivity in 
terms of yield. Biotechnological strategies have been used 
effectively to generate newer and effective cultivars with 
increased resistance to pathogens or perform better in 
harsh environmental conditions. Abiotic stress response 
reaction involves the production of stress related 
osmolytes, like sugar (e.g., trehalose and fructans), amino 
acids (e.g., betaine, proline) and certain proteins have been 

78 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



produced, which over express one of the above-mentioned 

compounds. These show better tolerance to environmental 

stresses. A common example of a plant offering resistance 

to insect is Bt cotton. This insect resistant transgenic 

crop has been developed by transferring and expressing 

Bt gene (also called cry gene) from bacterium Bacillus 

thuringiensis into a cotton plant. Bt gene encodes a toxin 

(Bt toxin), which is naturally produced by B. thuringiensis 

as an insecticidal protein to kill insects. There are several 

classes of cry genes and products of each class are harmful 

only to a specific group of insects and do not affect other 
useful insects, like butterflies and silkworms. For example, 
cryIAc and cryII Ab codes for a toxin that control cotton 

bollworms whereas cryIAb encodes for a toxin that controls 

corn borers. Some of the other crops for which transgenic 

plants have been developed by introducing Bt genes are 

brinjal, maize, rice, tomato, etc. All these transgenic crops 

have been proven to be effective in controlling the insect 

pests. Many of these transgenic crops are currently grown 

commercially and have resulted in significant increase in 
the total yields. Most notable example in India is Bt cotton 

(offering resistance to the insect pest pink bollworm) which 

is grown commercially since 2002.

Similarly, transgenic crops have been generated 

for several other traits, which results in significant 
enhancement in the crop productivity. These traits include 

tolerance to herbicides; resistance to bacteria, pests, 

viruses or nematodes; tolerance to environmental stresses; 

nutrient quality and delayed fruit ripening, etc.

Strategies for increasing crop yield also include 

modifying the photosynthetic machinery of the plant, 

manipulating the enzyme activity, increasing sugar to 

starch conversion, improving the nutritional quality; for 

example increasing the expression of vitamins, such as 

vitamin A in plants, e.g., Golden Rice. Many traits have 

been already commercialised and several others are being 

tested for their performance in the field conditions. 

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 79

Reprint 2025-26



Box 3: List of some transgenic crops and their engineered traits

Crop Source of Inserted Trait Trait

Resistance to insects

Tolerance to herbicides

Male corn sterility
Bacteria, and other 

Corn
species of corn Alpha-amylase expression

Increased lysine level for use in animal feed

Reduction of yield-loss under 
water-limited conditions

Tolerance to herbicides
Cotton  Bacteria

Resistance to insects 

Tolerance to herbicides
Bacteria, corn, oats, and 

High oleic acid soybean oil
Soybean other species of soybean

Resistance to insects

Mustard greens Resistance to insects

Tolerance to herbicides

Bacteria Fertility restoration
Canola

Male canola sterility 

Fungus Degradation of phytate in animal food

Bacteria Resistance to insects

Potato virus Resistance to potato viruses

Potato Lower level of reducing sugars 

Other species of potato Lower level of free asparagine

Reduced black spot bruising

Bacteria, potato Delayed softening
Tomato

Bacteria Resistance to insects 

Tolerance to herbicides
Radicchio Bacteria

Male radicchio sterility 

Alfalfa Bacteria Tolerance to herbicides

Sugar beet Bacteria Tolerance to herbicides

Rice Bacteria Tolerance to herbicides

Apple Other species of apple Reduced browning and bruising 

Cantaloupe Bacteria Delayed ripening 

Squash Viruses Resistance to viruses

Papaya Viruses Resistance to viruses

Flax Mustard green Tolerance to herbicides

Plum Virus Resistance to viruses

Creeping 
Bacteria Tolerance to herbicides

Bentgrass

80 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Antisense technology 

The antisense technology is used to inhibit/silence the 
gene expression. In this technique, the inhibition of 
expression of a specific gene is achieved by preventing 
the translation of its mRNA. There are two approaches, 
the first one is known as antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) 
technique. In this technique, a synthetic  oligonucleotide 
(a short RNA or DNA  molecule), which is complementary 
to the mRNA of the target gene, is introduced into a cell. 
The ASO can mediate its effect in two ways: (i) by binding 
of ASO to the target mRNA followed by RNase H mediated 
degradation (ii) by blocking of its translation by hindering 
its binding to ribosomes. The second approach is known 
as RNA interference  (RNAi) technique. In this technique, 
the expression of target gene is inhibited by inactivating 
its mRNA through RNA induced silencing complex 
(RISC).  A double stranded RNA of exogenous (viral origin) 
or endogenous origin (cellular origin)  is cleaved  in the 
cytoplasm into shorter fragments by the endoribonuclease 
named DICER. The shorter double stranded fragments 
are separated by a multiprotein complex RISC into guide 
strand and passenger strand. The passenger strand is 
degraded while the guide strand attached  to RISC  binds 
to the target  mRNA and cleaves it, thereby  the target gene 
is silenced (Fig. 4.5).

A Antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) B RNA interference (RNAi)

ASO
dsRNA (e.g. siRNA)

mRNA

ASO - mRNA Dicer
Complex

passenger strand
guide strand

RNA-H RISC

Ribosome

2. Steric block of mRNA

translation
Degraded RISC

mRNA

1.  RNA-H mediated RISC-mediated 
degradation of mRNA cleavage of mRNA

Fig. 4.5: (A) Mechanism of antisense oligonucleotide-mediated gene silencing, (B) Mechanism of RNA 
interference (RNAi). 

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 81

Reprint 2025-26



Using a combination of Agrobacterium-mediated 

transformation and antisense technology, pest-resistant 

plants have been created. An example is provided by the 

tobacco plant, which is infected by nematode Meloidogyne 

incognita. Nematode-specific genes were introduced into 
the plant using Agrobacterium as a vector. The genes, 

when transcribed, produced antisense RNA, which binds 

to the sense RNA of the nematode, being complementary to 

each other, and thus prevents its translation into proteins 

that are necessary for nematode survival. This makes 

transgenic plants resistant to the parasitic attack of the 

nematodes.

For Industrial Production

Plants are the backbone of all life forms on earth as they 

convert the energy of sun to chemical energy that feed 

the world. Today thousands of plants are being used for 

food, feed and medicines to cure acute and chronic health 

problems. Advances in our understanding of plant genetics 

and biotechnological tools has led to the development 

of relatively new bioscience ‘Molecular Farming’. It 

involves the genetic modification of the host plant through 
purposeful addition of a gene or group of genes leading to 

the production of new desired biomolecules. Foreign genes 

can be inserted either to nuclear genome or chloroplast 

genome. As chloroplast has several copies of the genome, 

the insertion of gene of interest in chloroplast results in 

higher accumulation of target biomolecules. In this way, 

a large number of products have been produced in plants 

which include vaccine antigens, therapeutic proteins, 

diagnostic reagents, nutritional products, bioplastics, or 

industrial enzymes, etc. In 2012, U.S. FDA approved 

the first plant-made human biologics ‘Elelyso’. It is an 

enzyme that is used to treat Gaucher’s disease and has 

been produced in carrot cell cultures. Table 4.1 lists the 

examples of a few therapeutic molecules that have been 

produced in plants through genetic engineering.

82 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Table 4.1: List of industrial or therapeutic products produced in plants through genetic 
engineering.

Transgenic Plant Industrial/ Therapeutic Product(s) Disease/ Other Usage

Lettuce Hepatitis B antigen Hepatitis B

Tobacco Cancer vaccine Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma

Carrot Human glucocerebrosidase Gaucher’s Disease

Safflower Insulin Diabetes

Rice Human lysozyme Anti-infection, anti-inflammatory

For Environmental benefits

• Biodegradable plastics: Plastics are non-biodegradable 
and are harmful to the environment. Transgenic plants 
can be exploited to produce biopolymers that can replace 
plastics. Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are an attractive 
source of non-polluting and biodegradable plastic. 
Production of PHAs using transgenic plants provides 
an economically viable alternative. An example is the 
production of bacterial polyester polyhydroxybutyrate 
(PHB) in transgenic sugarcane.

• Phytoremediation: Phytoremediation refers to the use of 
plants for the removal of pollutants from the environment, 
especially soil. Metal detoxifying genes from bacteria 
and other organisms are introduced into plants, and 
the transgenic plants then uptake and convert the toxic 
elements into less toxic forms.

Mercury is a hazardous heavy metal, largely found in the 
aquatic ecosystems. Transgenic plants have been designed 
to incorporate the mercuric reductase gene, which helps in 
the detoxification of harmful mercury into less toxic forms. 
Such transgenic plants act as ‘Mercury-breathing plants’, 
and can be used for environmental remediation.

Applications of Transgenic Animals

For Industrial production

Transgenic animals are used as bioreactors for production 
of normal and recombinant protein products in large 
quantities (Molecular Pharming). An early example of 
success in 1990s was the transgenic ewe, Tracy, which 

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 83

Reprint 2025-26



produced high levels of human protein α1-antitrypsin in 
her milk. Deficiency of α1-antitrypsin in humans causes 
lung diseases. The protein produced in the milk of  Tracy 
was thought to cure the symptoms of this deficiency but 
clinical trials for this recombinant protein revealed the 
side effects in patients.

In 1997, the first transgenic cow, Rosie was created 
that could produce human α-lactalbumin-enriched milk. 
Human α-lactalbumin-enriched milk was found to be a 
more balanced product for human infants compared to 
natural cow milk. Table 4.2 lists the examples of a few 
human recombinant proteins that have been produced in 
transgenic animals through genetic engineering.

Table 4.2: List of human recombinant proteins produced in the 
milk of transgenic animals through genetic engineering 

Name Transgenic Animal

Albumin Cow

α-fetoprotein Goat

Growth hormone Goat

Tissue plasminogen activator Goat

Coagulation factor IX Mouse

Coagulation factor VIII Rabbit

For Research

Transgenic animals are also used as model organisms 
by scientists for studying the normal human physiology, 
development and diseases.

The transgenic animals are genetically manipulated to 
develop symptoms of diseases, such as cancer, Alzheimer’s, 
etc. This also allows the researchers to understand the 
function of genes involved in various diseases.

Transgenic animals are also used for toxicity testing 
of vaccines, drugs and chemicals before they can be used 
on humans.

4.2.4 Concern over GMOs

The major concern over GMOs is the potential risk to 
human health and the environment. Transgenic crops 
may produce proteins that may cause allergic reactions in 

84 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



humans. Concerns arise over the use of viral vectors and 
promoters in GMOs, as these can lead to viral infections 
in humans. The improved characteristics of GMOs may 
make them invasive for the native or wild type species. 
Variable insertion of transgene can lead to unpredictable 
or non-target effects.

For ethical issues related to the use of transgenic 
animals, India has established biosafety regulations 
for the production and use of GMOs. The Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change has established 
the Genetic Engineering Appraisal Committee (GEAC) 
which regulates manufacture, use, import, export and 
storage of genetically modified organisms and cells/
hazardous microorganisms and decides upon the validity 
and safety of introducing GMOs.

4.3 geNe therApy

Many diseases in humans are known to be caused either 
due to the absence of normal gene, or the presence of 
defective and disease-causing gene. Can such disorders 
be corrected? The answer lies in the approach known 

1 T cells

Bacterium Genetically
Remove ADA-decient carrying DNA disabled

T cells from the SCID patient vector with cloned retrovirus
normal ADA gene

2

Culture T cells in
3

laboratory
Infect the T cells with

Cloned ADA
a retrovirus that contains

gene incorporated
the normal ADA gene

into the virus

Reinfuse the ADA gene containing T cells back into
4 the SCID patient; genetically altered T cells produce ADA

Fig. 4.6: Steps involved in gene therapy for SCID by replacement of a functional adenosine 
deaminase (ADA)

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 85

Reprint 2025-26



as ‘Gene therapy’. Gene therapy is a technique designed 
to repair faulty genes in humans by introducing 
correct genetic material inside the cells. The obvious 
candidate diseases for gene therapy include immune 
disorder called Severe Combined Immunodeficiency 
(SCID) and inherited genetic disorders, such as cystic 
fibrosis, hemophilia, muscular dystrophy, etc. The first 
gene therapy was performed in 1990 in a four-year-old 
girl suffering from SCID caused due to the defect in 
adenosine deaminase (ADA) coding gene. Deficiency of 
ADA led to the inability to produce sufficient immune 
cells, which subsequently made the girl suffer from 
frequent life-threatening infections. A functional copy of 
ADA gene was inserted into a viral vector, which was 
then introduced into lymphocytes collected from the 
patient and these lymphocytes were then reintroduced 
into the patient’s bloodstream (Fig. 4.6). The immune 
system functioning of the patient improved but the cure 
was not permanent.

4.3.1 Approaches for Gene Therapy

There are three main approaches for gene therapy— 
(i) gene replacement or gene addition, (ii) gene inhibition 
and (iii) gene repair or gene editing therapies.

In gene replacement or gene addition 
Thin layer of mucus therapy, a functional copy of the gene is 

delivered into the genome to replace the 
non-functional defective gene. The new 
gene carries the instructions to synthesise 
the protein that was not available in the cell 
due to defective gene. For example, cystic 

(a)
fibrosis is an inheritable disease caused due 
to a defective membrane protein known as 

Thick mucus layer cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator (CFTR) protein. The defective 
protein is produced due to a mutation in the 
CFTR gene. Due to the defective protein, the 
movement of salt and water are hampered 
in body cell causing damage to respiratory 
and digestive tract (Fig. 4.7). If the mutated 

Narrow air CFTR gene is replaced by normal CFTR 
passage gene, the disease can be cured. Another 

(b)
example is p53 gene that normally prevents 

Fig. 4.7: Cross section of air tumor growth. Several types of cancers 
passage  (a) normal and 

have been linked to defective forms of p53. 
(b) in cystic fibrosis

86 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Replacement of the defective form of p53 in cancer cells 
may cause inhibition or death of cancer cells thereby, 
curing cancer. 

In case of gene inhibition, the function of a gene, 
which causes a disease in cell is inactivated. Therefore, 
gene inhibition approach is applicable in case of infectious 
diseases such as Tay-Sachs disease, phenylketonuria and 
colour-blindness. In gene inhibition, a gene is introduced 
in a cell whose product either blocks the expression of the 
faulty gene or disarms the products of the faulty gene.

Finally, in case of gene repair or gene editing, the 
DNA is inserted, deleted, modified or replaced in the 
defective gene in living cells. This is achieved by a recent 
technology known as CRISPR/Cas9 system. (Clustered 
Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats/
CRISPR associated protein 9). The CRISPR/Cas9 system 
was adopted from the natural defense system of bacteria 
or archea against viruses that attack them. With CRISPR 
system, bacteria recognise the invading virus and with 
the help of Cas9 enzyme, they cut the viral DNA into 
small pieces. The technique offers an easy way to snip 
out mutated DNA and replace it with correct sequence. 
This technique shows the possibility of treating several 
genetic disorders in future for details (refer section 5.4.2, 
Chapter 5).

4.3.2 Types of Gene Therapies 

On the basis of the strategy used for gene delivery, gene 
therapy can be classified into ex vivo and in vivo (Fig. 4.9). In 
ex vivo (ex means ‘out of’ and vivo means ‘something alive’) 
gene therapy, cells are taken out from the diseased person, 
grown in culture, normal genes are then introduced 
into these cells, and finally these transformed cells are 
reintroduced into the patient. This is also known as cell-
based delivery. Ex vivo approach is much simpler as 
compared to in vivo approach, because it becomes easier 
to manipulate the cells externally (Fig. 4.8).

In case of in vivo gene therapy, normal functional genes 
are directly introduced into the target cells and tissues of 
the person with the diseased condition. This is also known 
as direct delivery method.

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 87

Reprint 2025-26



ex vivo gene therapy in vivo gene therapy

Remove small portion Normal gene for
of liver to isolate cells a blood-clotting

protein

Grow cells in
culture

Virus as
vector for
gene delivery

Directly introduce normal
gene for clotting protein into

patients’s liver cell
Introduce normal

genes  for clotting protein

Patient with liver
cell genetic defects, lacks gene

for blood-clotting protein.
Transplant liver cells back into
the patient. Genetically altered cells

provide clotting protein.

Fig. 4.8: ex vivo and in vivo gene therapies

On the basis of the nature of target cells or tissues, 

gene therapy can be classified into: somatic and germ-line 

gene therapy. In somatic gene therapy, functional copies 

of the target gene are introduced into the somatic cells of 

the patient. In germ-line gene therapy, functional genes 

are introduced into the germ cells (egg or sperm). The 

functional gene then gets integrated into the genome of the 

germ cells. Changes made to the germ-line are heritable.

Thus, based on the functional strategy used, gene 

therapy can be classified into:
• Gene augmentation therapy: Addition of functional 

gene to the genome with the aim of replacing the 

missing gene product.

88 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



• Gene inhibition therapy: Using antisense RNA or 
other inhibition techniques to block the expression of 
dominant acting mutated genes.

• Gene targeting therapy: Replacing the non-
functional gene with a normal gene using homologous 
recombination.

Attempts to correct the function of a defective gene 
as described above could become possible only after 
advancements in rDNA technology, gene transfer and 
gene editing mechanism. You have already studied the 
mechanism of the delivery of target gene (desired DNA 
sequence) either through viral (direct gene transfer) or 
non-viral (indirect gene transfer) method earlier in this 
chapter and also in Chapter 3.

4.3.3 Merits and Demerits of Gene Therapy

Gene therapy provides a potential cure for the treatment of 
the devastating inherited diseases for which conventional 
treatment strategies provide little hope. Advancements in 
human genomics have shown that cancer is caused due to 
somatic aberrations in the human genome. This has led to 
enthusiasm among cancer researchers to use gene therapy 
approach for genetic manipulation of cancer cells and to 
find a possible cure to the disease.

However, uncontrolled expression of the therapeutic 
gene needs to be resolved for efficient gene therapy 
mechanism. Introduction of therapeutic gene in non-
target cells or its random integration at a wrong place in 
the host genome is another concern. For example, if the 
DNA gets integrated into a tumor-suppressor gene, this can 
result in tumor. There may be a requirement of frequent 
administration of the therapeutic gene as gene therapy is 
short-lived in nature. Host rejection of the therapeutic gene 
or the viral vector employed in the process can stimulate 
the host’s immune system. Besides being a costly process, 
gene therapy is effective for single-gene defects but not for 
multigene disorders.

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 89

Reprint 2025-26



4.3.4 Ethical Issues

Bioethics refers to the assessment of risks associated with 
the procedures and moral implications of new techniques. 
While genetic modification of somatic cells is approved by a 
large part of scientific community, genetic therapy in germ 
line cells often forms a subject for heated discussion in 
the field of science. Since, gene therapy includes making 
changes to the body’s basic set of genes, it raises unique 
ethical considerations. Some of the ethical concerns 
associated with gene therapy include:

1. Use of gene therapy for gene enhancement in another 
concern.There is a need for strict regulations so that 
it is not used, where the outcomes are unpredictable

2. Should gene therapy be allowed to enhance the basic 
human trait like athletic abilities intelligence etc?

3. Germ line alternation are controversial. Though it 
can cure a genetic disorder in future generations, it 
may result in long term side effects. 

Gene therapy as an approach is often criticised for 
promising too much but delivering very little. However, 
with constant efforts it is expected to become a common 
practice for the treatment of genetic diseases with single 
gene defects.

4.4 recOmbiNANt VAcciNes

A preparation of killed or weakened pathogen or their 
components given to elicit an immune response that 
subsequently recognises the infectious agent and fights 
off the disease is known as vaccine. The word vaccine 
was coined by Edward Jenner (Latin word vacca means 
cow), who injected cow pox virus in the skin of a person 
to confer successful protection against small pox. The 
process of injection and administering vaccines is known 
as ‘vaccination’. The term vaccination was coined by Louis 
Pasteur in 1881. During vaccination, the pathogen (live or 
inactivated) or a component of pathogen known as antigen 
is injected into an individual with a purpose to induce 
immunity. Consequently, on the subsequent exposure 

90 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



to the same pathogen, a quick and enhanced immune 
response is elicited involving antibodies and memory 
immune cells. The most common vaccines given to infants 
and young children are DPT (diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus) 
and MMR (measles, mumps, rubella), etc. Initially, vaccines 
were developed mostly by attenuation or inactivation of 
pathogens. To avoid several potential concerns raised 
by conventional vaccines, like chances of infection in 
case of live attenuated vaccine, reversal of the toxoids to 
their toxigenic forms, or co-purification of undesirable 
components and to overcome the complexity involved 
in obtaining sufficient quantities of purified antigenic 
components, recombinant vaccines were developed using 
the various tools of rDNA technology. There are three main 
types of recombinant vaccine:

1. Live genetically modified vaccines

The live pathogenic organism (bacteria or virus) is modified 
into a risk free and safe non-pathogenic organism by 
either the deletion or inactivation of one or more gene. 
These deletion or gene-inactivated vaccines are primarily 
developed to weaken or attenuate the disease agent.

Vector-based vaccines that carry a foreign gene from 
another disease agent also falls under this category of 
live genetically modified organisms (GMD). These when 
injected into the host, induces an immune response. 
Examples of such vaccines include Salmonella vaccine (for 
sheep and poultry) and a Pseudorabies virus vaccine (for 
pigs). Foreign genes must be inserted into the genome of 
the vaccine vector in such a way that the vaccine remains 
viable. Example of vector-based vaccines includes vaccinia 
virus, an enveloped virus belonging to the pox family. It has 
a large linear double stranded DNA genome with around 
200 genes. The genome of this virus can accommodate 
stretches of foreign DNA, which can be expressed alongside 
with its own genes.

With the help of rDNA technology, vaccinia virus carrying 
antigenic genes of several different pathogens have been 
constructed which are capable of simultaneously providing 

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 91

Reprint 2025-26



Vaccinia virus

A portion of genome

Hepatitis B virus gene

Herpes simplex
virus gene

Inuenza virus gene

Vaccinia virus genome with 3 inserted genes

Plasmid

Recombinant plasmid
(allowed to multiply in E. coli)

Plasmid insertion vectors

Vaccinia virus

Animal cell

Recombinant vaccinia virus

Fig. 4.10:  Production of vector based vaccine using virus

92 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



protection against several different diseases. Such vaccines 
are known as polyvalent or multivalent vaccines based 
on their antigenic sites (Fig. 4.9). 

Thus, for the production of vaccinia vector to be used 
as vaccine, a small DNA portion of vaccinia virus is cloned 
in a plasmid vector (now known as insertion vector). This 
part of vaccinia DNA is used as recombination site in the 
later stage, for homologous recombination.

After this, the antigen gene of hepatitis virus, herpes 
simplex virus and influenza virus are inserted into this 
insertion vector and a recombinant plasmid is formed, 
which is the normal vaccinia virus host cells along with 
the normal vaccinia virus. During viral DNA replication, 
recombinant plasmid DNA recombines with viral DNA 
and antigen coding genes get incorporated into normal 
vaccinia virus genome. Thereby, generating recombinant 
vaccinia virus. Consequently, vaccinia virus offers elevated 
levels of protection against pathogens.

Box 4: Edible Plant Vaccines

Edible vaccines are vaccines manufactured in plants that can be administered easily by 
consuming the plant material containing the vaccine e.g. fruits, leaves and seeds, etc. 
The significant antigenic genes have been inserted into different plants, like tobacco, 
banana, potatoes, tomatoes and rice, etc. using various vectors. These recombinant vectors 
are introduced within the plants by using either a bacterial transformation system, like 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens or by microprojectile bombardment method. The ingestion of 
the edible vaccine stimulates the mucosal immune system and elicits an immune response.

Example: Edible vaccine for Hepatitis B banana has been successfully made by inserting the 
HBsAg gene in banana genome. Banana is the best plant for oral vaccine production as it is 
easy to digest, requires no cooking, palatable, inexpensive and available throughout the year.

Gene from a Vector Leaf segments sprout into Eating banana triggers
human pathogen introduced into whole plants carrying the gene immune response against
is inserted into a plant cells from human pathogen pathogen

vector

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 93

Reprint 2025-26



2. Recombinant subunit vaccines

Subunit vaccines contain only a part of the whole pathogenic 

organism. These can be either synthetic peptide or an expressed 

whole protein extracted from the pathogenic organism or 

expressed from cloned genes in the laboratory. Prokaryotic 

systems, such as Escherichia coli or eukaryotic systems, such 

as yeast can be used to express recombinant proteins. The 

advantages of these vaccines include purity, stability and safe 

use. One such example of a subunit vaccine developed against 

Hepatitis B, a widespread disease that mainly affects liver 

leading to cirrhosis, chronic hepatitis and cancer. Hepatitis 

B virus consists of a core containing a viral genome (DNA) 

surrounded by a phospholipid envelope carrying surface 

antigens HBsAg, the key element for the hepatitis B vaccine. 

Culturing Hepatitis B virus and producing these surface 

antigens is very complicated. Therefore, with the advent of 

rDNA technology, the gene coding HBsAg surface protein was 

identified and inserted in pMA56, a yeast plasmid vector and 
expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast cells. (Box 5)

3. DNA vaccines

In recent years, DNA vaccines are one of the promising 

advancements in vaccine technology. For DNA vaccines, 

genes of interest (antigens) are identified and cloned in 
plasmids. DNA vaccine carrying the plasmid harbours a 

promoter site, cloning site, origin of replication, a selectable 

marker sequence and a terminator sequence, like a poly-A 

tail. During vaccination, DNA is directly injected into the 

muscles of the animal model system like mice, generally 

using a ‘gene gun’ that is based on compressed gas, to 

inject the DNA into the muscle. DNA vaccines can also be 

administered by nasal spray. The antigenic DNA is taken 

up by a few muscle cells, which after protein expression, 

induce the immune system. DNA vaccines are capable of 

inducing both humoral and cellular immune responses.

94 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Box 5

The HBsAg gene is cleaved and ligated to a strong alcohol dehydrogenase promoter (ADH) of 
a pMA56 yeast vector promoter. These plasmids are then transferred and cultured. pMA56 
plasmid also carries a termination sequence from yeast gene and the origin of replication 
from bacteria. For selection of recombinants, an antibiotic resistance marker and a gene that 
permits growth only in the absence of amino acid tryptophan were used in pMA56. The protein 
is separated, purified and used for immunisation. This was the first recombinant subunit 
vaccine for public use, licensed in 1987 and marketed as Recombivax and Engerix-B. 

Trpl 2µm ARS

HBsAg
pMA56 ADH
yeast Promoter 
Vector

Restriction digestion of HBsAg
and yeast vector with EcoRI

Trpl 2µm ARS

HBsAg

ADH 

yeast cells

Transform yeast cells

Select the cells on
tryptophan free medium

Culture cloned yeast cells

Sediment yeast cells

Lyse cells and purify
HBsAg

Production of HBsAg in yeast cells (ADH: alcohol dehydrogenase TrpI: Tryptophan biosynthesis 
gene I; 2µm ARS (Autonomously replicating sequence of yeast)

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 95

Reprint 2025-26



4. RNA Vaccines

RNA vaccines contain mRNA. Once injected for vaccination, 
the mRNA is directly taken up by antigen presenting cells 
(APCs) and other target cells, where the mRNA is expressed 
as properly folded and glycosylated protein that acts as an 
antigen (Fig. 4.10). These vaccines elicit both humoral and 
cellular immune response against the encoded protein. 

mRNA encoding Lipid delivery

antigen vehicle

After entering and
mRNA self-replicating inside

the cell , RNA translated

Amplication to produce antigen

Antigen
Elicit both humoral and
cellular response

Host cell

 
Fig. 4.10: RNA vaccine 

RNA being labile, the stability of injected mRNA is 
prevented by modifying it in a variety of ways, e.g., the 
addition of a 5' cap; the length and structure of a 3’ 
PolyA tail, etc. Therefore, RNA vaccines are formulated 
with specific delivery systems such as lipid nanoparticles 
(LNPs), which protect RNA from degradation and increase 
target cellular uptake.

Thermostability of a vaccine is vital to reduce the need 
for cold conditions during vaccine storage and use. Since 
RNA is unstable, it needs to be frozen when stored to 
ensure long-term stability. Efforts are underway to improve 
the thermostability of RNA vaccines. Lyophilisation or 
freeze-drying has been proposed as a way to improve their 
thermostability. In this direction, formulation of RNA with 
thermostable lipid nanoparticles, as mentioned above, has 

96 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



also been suggested for improving the thermostability of 
RNA vaccines.

RNA vaccines are comparatively simple and have high 
yield production. Their virus-free production process 
enables modest and scalable production facilities. As a 
result of cell-free production, there is less concern with 
respect to contaminating agents. Another important 
advantage of mRNA vaccine technology is its ability to 
respond rapidly to emerging viral variants. This means 
making modified mRNA vaccines for mutants with changed 
sequences, is quick and simple.

Thus, RNA vaccines offer several advantages over 
other categories of vaccines including rapid and low-
cost development, reduced need for  optimisation and 
regulatory testing (due to already existing optimised and 
licensed formulation and delivery method). Furthermore, 
mRNA vaccines require less amount of vaccine dose in 
each shot and may not even require two doses. Also, it 
can be produced more quickly and efficiently as compared 
to other vaccines in case of new emerging variants of the 
pathogens. RNA vaccines are comparatively safe. There is 
no risk of pathogen reactivation and RNA is degraded in 
vivo with no risk of antigen persistence or integration into 
the genome.

mRNA Vaccine Development against 
COVID-19

The COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated the threat of 
pandemics caused by novel, previously unrecognised, 
or mutated Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Corona 
Virus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) strain with high transmissibility. 
Vaccines namely, Covaxin (inactivated whole virus) and 
Covishield (Adenovirus based DNA vaccines) are used 
in India for protection against COVID-19. However, for 
effective control of pandemics, RNA-based vaccines have 
also being developed. A member of mRNA-based vaccine 
candidates for COVID-19 are in different phases of 
preclinical and clinical trials. 

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 97

Reprint 2025-26



4.5 therApeutic AgeNts/mOlecules: 
  mONOclONAl ANtibODies, iNsuliN AND 

grOwth hOrmONe 

Recombinant DNA technology has revolutionised 
health care by facilitating the large-scale biological 
production of a variety of safe, pure and efficient human 
proteins. Compounds used for treating a disease and 
for improving the health of human beings are called 
therapeutic agents. With the advent of rDNA technology, 
not only the newer therapeutic agents are produced but 
also more efficient forms of conventionally produced 
therapeutics are being manufactured. Since these 
recombinant therapeutics produced are identical to 
the natural human proteins unlike those isolated from 
animals (like cow and pig), hence, they do not induce 
immune responses and are free from threat of any allergic 
responses. Presently, numerous products, like antibiotics, 
monoclonal antibodies, blood clotting factors, hormones 
(insulin and growth hormone), cytokines and vaccines are 
being produced for human welfare.

Antibodies are the protein molecules produced by B 
cells of the immune system and protect the body against 
the invading foreign substances called antigens. In human 
serum, five different types of antibodies are present: IgA, 
IgD, IgE, IgG and IgM. B cells, in response to a foreign 
particle, produce many different types of antibodies 
specific to different regions of antigen called epitopes 
present on the surface of antigen and hence, designated 
polyclonal antibodies. This polyclonal antibody-mediated 
response leads to the antigen processing and degradation 
and therefore, has obvious advantage for the organism, in 
vivo. However, due to their heterogenic nature, the efficacy 
for in vitro use is restricted. On the contrary, antibodies, 
specific to a particular region or epitope of an antigen, 
known as monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) can be very 
well exploited for in vitro purpose, like in therapeutic and 
diagnostic applications.

Earlier, following a brief exposure of an animal to an 
antigen, B cells were isolated and cultured for producing 
monoclonal antibodies. However, B cell culturing is very 

98 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



tricky and complicated, and also the monoclonal antibodies 
produced were short lived. An invention made by George 
Kohler and Cesar Milstein (1975) provided a way out, 
through which the large-scale production of monoclonal 
antibodies using hybridoma technology, where the short-
lived antibody secreting normal plasma cell is fused with 
immortal myeloma cells with the help of Polyethylene 
Glycol (PEG) leading to the formation of hybrid cells called 
hybridoma. Hybridoma cells acquire immortal growth, a 
typical attribute of a myeloma cell, besides the antibodies 
production property bestowed by B plasma cell. Myeloma 
cells are genetically engineered such that they cannot use 
hypoxanthine, aminopterin and thymidine (HAT medium) 
as a source for nucleic acid biosynthesis and will die in 
culture. On the contrary, B cells are able to survive in 
HAT medium but have a definite life span and die after 
that. Only B cells that have fused with these engineered 
myeloma cells will survive in culture when grown in HAT 
medium (Fig. 4.11). With the advances in rDNA technology, 
it is possible to develop mouse antibodies carrying a few 
human segments known as chimeric or humanised 
antibodies possessing higher effectiveness and activity. 

Antibody forming
plasma cells

Antigen

Fusion
+

Hybridoma cells
Polyethylene Glycol

Immunisation
(PEG)

Tumor cells

Hybridoma cells screened
Monoclonal Antibody producing

for antibody production
antibodies puried hybridomas cloned

Fig. 4.11: Production of monoclonal antibodies using hybridoma technology

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 99

Reprint 2025-26



Monoclonal antibodies have revolutionised the 
diagnosis of various diseases and are used in a number of 
commercially available diagnostic kits, like pregnancy 
detection kits and use of monoclonal antibodies in the 
diagnostic imaging of cancer, wherein the tumor specific 
monoclonal antibodies can help in differentiating 
cancerous and non-cancerous cells. In recent years, 
monoclonal antibodies are employed as a very specific 
targeted therapeutic agents and are coupled or attached 
with toxins or drugs and carried to target tissues for 
efficient action.  

Box 6

In 1921, a series of classic experiments were 

performed by Frederick Banting and Howard 

Best, which lead to the isolation of insulin. 

Insulin is distributed to all cells of the body 

through the bloodstream. The primary structure 

of insulin was studied by Sanger (1955) for 

which he was awarded Nobel Prize in 1958.

Insulin, a hormone secreted by beta cells of pancreas 
acts on different types of cells resulting in the uptake of 
glucose from blood. Insulin also stimulates the conversion 
of glucose to glycogen (glycogenesis) in the target cells. A 
disease caused by the deficiency of insulin hormone and 
characterised by the presence of sugar in urine is Diabetes 
mellitus.

Structurally, insulin consists of two chains: an 
A chain of 21 amino acids and a B chain of 30 amino 
acids interconnected with disulphide bonds (Fig. 4.12). 
After Banting and Best experiments, insulin was purified 
from the pancreas of pigs and cows. Human insulin, 
porcine insulin (from pig) and bovine insulin (from cow) 
are very similar except one or three amino acids. But 
these minor differences in the chemical structure can 
lead to an allergic response in some diabetic patients. 
As a result, the use of human insulin for treatment 
is more suitable as compared to the animal insulin. 
Physiological insulin first gets translated into a primary 
protein called preproinsulin composed of 110 amino 

100 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



H2N
Phe

Val
Leu Ala

Asn

Tyr Glu
Gln

Val
Leu

His

Leu
Val Chain B

Leu
Cys 30 amino acids His

Gly
Glu Cys

Ser
Arg S Gly

H2N
S S

Gly Gly
S

COOH Asn
Cys

Phe Ile
Tyr Cys

Val Cys

Phe Asn Gln
Glu Thr

Glu S
Tyr Chain A Ser

S
Leu 21 amino acids

Thr Ile
Gln Cys

Pro Tyr Leu Ser

Lys

Thr
COOH

Fig. 4.12:  Insulin Structure: Primary structure of human insulin. A-chain is shown in red and  the B-chain in 
green

acids. In endoplasmic reticulum, first the signal peptide 
fragment is cleaved off from preproinsulin, thus turning 
preproinsulin to proinsulin (composed of 86 amino 
acids). Proinsulin carry three distinct peptide chains: 
A-chain, B-chain, and C-chain (composed of 31 amino 
acids). In the next step inside endoplasmic reticulum, the 
C-chain and additional four connecting amino acids are 
removed to produce biologically active insulin of 51 amino 
acids residues (Fig. 4.13).

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 101

Reprint 2025-26



C chain C chain
A chain

S S
A chain A chain

H N COOH
2

– COOH – COOH
S S

S S

S S S S

H N H N
2 H N COOH

2 2

Signal B chain B chain B chain
peptide

Preproinsulin Proinsulin Insulin
(110 Amino acids) (86 Amino acids) (51 Amino acids)

Fig. 4.13: Conversion of Preproinsulin to Insulin

Promoter Promoter
-galactosidase

-galactosidase gene
gene 1

Insert genes for each of the 
two insulin polypeptides 
next to a highly expressed 
gene for -galactosidase. 

Insulin gene
Antibiotic Antibiotic Insulin gene

A subunit
resistance gene resistance gene B subunit

2
Transform E. coli with the 
recombinant expression 

Transform into vectors, and select 
A B

E. coli transgenic cells by their 
antibiotic resistance.

Purify the
3

fusion proteins

4
Chemically remove insulin 
polypeptides from the 
-galactosidase protien 

A B

5
Combine the polypeptides to 

NH COOH produce functional insulin
2

NH COOH
2

Active insulin

Fig. 4.14: Steps involved in the production of genetically engineered insulin

102 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



In late 1970s, biochemists exploited various tools of 
rDNA technology for the production of insulin. Isolated 
insulin gene from a gene library was inserted in a bacterial 
plasmid of E. coli. A promoter site derived from the lac 
operon was inserted next to the insulin gene. The gene 
expression produced a fusion protein, i.e., insulin molecule 
fused with the enzyme β-galactosidase (β-gal), which was 
later cleaved to produce the human insulin. Because the 
processing of preproinsulin was not feasible in bacteria, 
scientists sidestepped this difficulty by cloning separately 
the genes for A and B insulin chains in bacteria. The fusion 
protein, β-gal-insulin was extracted and treated with 
cyanogen bromide (CNBr) to separate β-gal fragment from 
A and B chains. Subsequently, the disulfide bonds were 
again reestablished between A and B chain to reconstruct 
the final product, insulin (Fig. 4.14).

The first genetically engineered human insulin marketed 
as Humulin (Fig 4.15) was manufactured in 1982 which 
was more effective as compared to the pig and 
cow-derived insulin and the correct  sequence 
was completely free from any allergic response.

Another important hormone secreted 
by the pituitary gland, human growth 
hormone (HGH), was produced using rDNA 
technology. HGH containing 191 amino 
acids is peptide hormone and promotes 
body growth by increasing the amino 
acids, lipids and carbohydrate metabolism 
during childhood as well as the adulthood. Fig. 4.15: Eli Lilly Company has been 

Childhood deficiency of HGH  leads to marketing E.coli expressed insulin 

Dwarfism. Dwarfism is characterised by as Humulin

retarded body growth, chubby face, added fat deposition 
at waist and short height of about four feet, while the 
deficiency in adult leads to an average intelligence but 
with an abnormal body proportion (Fig. 4.16). Since 
the bone growth is not fully complete at an early stage, 
dwarfism can be treated at this stage by providing HGH 
shots. To obtain sufficient HGH quantity for one year using 
conventional treatment, the pituitary glands from more 
than 80 cadavers were required. Not only, this method 
was expensive but also carried a risk of developing disease 
from infected brain tissue of cadavers.

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 103

Reprint 2025-26



Box 7

In 1978, the use of cadaver tissue was restricted in the United States and Great Britain because 
of the possibility of transferring Creutzfeldt-Jacob (CJ) Syndrome. This disease is believed to be 
caused by a virus-like agent ‘prion’ and it is accompanied by tremors, convulsions, dementia 
and wasting of the muscles. Indeed, by 1993, 24 cases of CJ syndrome had been identified in 
French recipients of HGH from cadaver tissue.

rDNA technology has enabled 
the production of the entire HGH. 
The production process for HGH is 
similar to that for human insulin 
production. 

Though the natural HGH 
molecule consists of 191 amino 
acids but during its production in 
the body, an intermediate molecule 
having an extra 26 amino acids is 
encoded as a signal peptide. This 
signal peptide chain is finally cut 
free during secretion. Consequently, 
to synthesise the gene for HGH, the 
HGH encoding mRNA was used as a 
template, and a complementary DNA 
(cDNA) molecule was synthesised. 
However, the bacterium fails to 
remove the signal peptide from the 
intermediate HGH molecule.

Nucleotide sequence coding for 
signal peptide was removed from 
the HGH gene. Since, no known 
restriction enzyme can make this 
cut, restriction enzyme EcoRI was 
used to remove the base sequences 
for the signal peptide (26 amino 
acids) plus an additional 24 amino 
acids (a total of 50 amino acids) from 
the cDNA molecule. The extra 24 
amino acids base sequence removed 
were chemically synthesised 

Fig. 4.16: Deficiency of human growth hormone results in and put back on the cDNA 
retarded growth and unusual body proportions molecule to generate the complete 

104 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



human growth hormone gene (Fig. 4.17). 
In the absence of signal peptide sequence, the human 
growth hormone gene was inserted in bacterial cells for 
hormone production. In 1985, genetically engineered 
human growth hormone was produced and marketed as 
Humatrope and Protropin.

Base sequence Base codes for Base codes for 
for signal peptide 24 amino acids 167 amino acids

cDNA for HGH

First codon for EcoRl Last codon
mature HGH

EcoRl cleavage

signal 24 amino 167 amino 
peptide acids acids

Last codon

Segment ligation by ligase

Synthethetic code for Final ligation 
24 amino acids by ligase

Cloned in expression 
vector

cDNA for HGH

Remainder of expression vector

Insertion

E. coil

Fig. 4.17: Production of genetically engineered human growth hormone

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 105

Reprint 2025-26



SUMMARY

• To study and compare the inherited variations in human 
DNA without sequencing, a new technique, known as ‘DNA 
fingerprinting’ was developed by Sir Alec Jeffreys in 1984 at 
the University of Leicester.

• In DNA fingerprinting, a stretch of mini-satellite DNA known 
as Variable Number Tandem Repeats (VNTR) tandemly 
arranged are exploited using the technique, referred to as 
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP).

• The process of insertion of a foreign gene (transgene) into the 
genome of an organism and its transmission and expression 
in the organism’s progeny is termed as transgenesis. The 
organisms carrying the transgene are known as transgenic 
organisms.

• Transgenic plants are also called genetically modified plants, 
whose genome is modified, like introduction of one or more 
genes from another species through genetic engineering 
techniques. 

• Basic requirement for genetic transformation is construction 
of genetic vehicle, which carries the genes of interest 
flanked by necessary regulating sequences, like promoter or 
terminator. The most commonly used techniques for gene 
transfer are of two types: vector-mediated or indirect gene 
transfer and vector-less or direct gene transfer.

• Vector-mediated or indirect gene transfer includes 
transformation using Agrobacterium tumefaciens, in 
planta transformation, plant virus-mediated transfer 
while vectorless or direct gene transfer includes particle 
bombardment, protoplast transformation and microinjection.

• Transgenic animals are animals whose genetic makeup has 
been transformed by the use of various genetic engineering 
techniques, such as DNA pronuclear microinjection, 
embryonic stem cell-mediated gene transfer and retrovirus-
mediated gene transfer.

• Transgenic plants have been developed with improved 
agronomic traits in crop plants and products, for example, 
resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses nutrient quality and 
delayed fruit ripening, etc. 

• Transgenic plants are used in Molecular Farming for large 
scale production of industrial and therapeutic products.

• Transgenic animals have also been used in molecular 
pharming for large scale production of proteins, such as 
α1-antitrypsin, human α-lactalbumin, etc. 

• There are a number of concerns related to use of 
GMOs on human health and environment. The Genetic 

106 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Engineering Approval Committe (GEAC) established by 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
regulates the manufature, use, import, export of hazardous 
microorganisms.

• Gene therapy is a technique designed to repair faulty genes in 
humans by introducing correct genetic material inside cells. 
There are three main approaches for gene therapy, they are: 
(i) Gene replacement / Gene addition, (ii) Gene inhibition 
and (iii) Gene repair/ Gene editing. 

• Since, gene therapy includes making changes to the body’s 
basic set of genes, it raises unique ethical considerations. 

• A preparation of killed or weakened pathogen or their 
components given to elicit an immune response that 
subsequently recognises the infectious agent and confers 
protection against disease is known as ‘Vaccine’.

• To avoid several potential concerns raised by conventional 
vaccines like reversal of the toxoids to their toxigenic forms, 
recombinant vaccines were developed using the various tools 
of  rDNA technologies. 

• There are  three main types of recombinant vaccines: Live 
genetically modified vaccines, recombinant subunit vaccines 
and RNA/DNA vaccines

• rDNA technology enables health care by facilitating large 
scale biological production of a variety of safe, pure and 
efficient therapeutic agents, such as a Drugs: Monoclonal 
antibodies, human proteins, e.g., Insulin, HGH.

• With the advances in rDNA technology, it is possible to 
develop mouse antibodies carrying a few human segments 
known as chimeric or humanised antibodies possessing 
higher efficacy and activity. 

• In late 1970s, biochemists exploited various tools of  rDNA 
technology for the production of insulin. They isolated the 
insulin gene from a gene library and then inserted this gene 
in a bacterial plasmid of E. coli.

• The first, genetically engineered human insulin marketed 
as Humulin was manufactured in 1982. Successful 
production of human insulin proved without any ambiguity, 
the possibility of genetically engineering diverse biological 
organisms to produce human proteins for medicinal and 
therapeutic use.

• DNA technologists can now produce Human Growth 
Hormone entirely using rDNA technology. In 1985, genetically 
engineered human growth hormone was produced and 
marketed as Humatrope and Protropin.

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 107

Reprint 2025-26



EXERCISES

 1. What do you mean by DNA fingerprinting? Explain it 
through RFLP.

 2. What are GMOs? Describe the method of development of 
transgenic plants.

 3. Differentiate between direct and indirect method of gene 
transfer. Name one indirect method suitable for gene 
transfer in dicot plants.

 4. What is molecular pharming? Give applications of 
transgenic animals in molecular pharming.

 5. Differentiate between gene gun and gene therapy.

 6. Give the procedure of development of recombinant 
subunit vaccines.

 7. Write a short note on DNA vaccines.

 8. Describe the advantages of monoclonal antibodies 
developed by rDNA technology over that developed by 
Hybridoma technology.

 9. Briefly describe the development of Humulin through 
rDNA  technology.

 10. Write a short note on humatrope and Protropin.

 11. Briefly describe the applications of rDNA technology in 
crop improvement.

 12. List the ethical issues related to the use of transgenic 
animals?

 13. What is the role of vaccinia virus in the development of 
recombinant vaccine?

 14. Write a short note on recombinant therapeutic agents.

 15. Write a short note on humanised antibodies.

 16. Assertion: In hybridoma technology, B cells are fused 

with myeloma cells.

Reason: Myeloma cells are immortal.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 17. Assertion: In Humulin, polypeptide A and polypeptide B 

are linked with disulfide bridges.

108 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Reason: C peptide is removed from proinsulin to form 

biologically active insulin.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 18. DNA fingerprinting depends on identifying specific:
 (a) Coding sequences

 (b) Non-coding sequences

 (c) mRNA

 (d) Promoter

 19. Short stretch of DNA used to identify complementary 
sequences in a sample is called:

 (a) Probe

 (b) Marker

 (c) VNTR

 (d) Minisatellite

 20. Variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) are:

 (a) Repetitive coding short DNA sequences

 (b) Non-repetitive non-coding short DNA sequences

 (c) Repetitive non-coding short DNA sequences 

 (d) Non-repetitive coding short DNA sequences

 21. Cry genes or Bt genes are obtained from:

 (a) Cotton pest

 (b) Tobacco plant

 (c) Bacillus thuringiensis

 (d) E. coli

 22. When gene therapy is done in somatic cells, it is ______.

 (a) non-heritable

 (b) heritable

 (c) rarely heritable

 (d) not related to heritability

 23. In gene augmentation therapy, genetic material is ______.

 (a) modified
 (b) replaced

 (c) suppressed

 (d) removed

Applications of Recombinant DNA technology 109

Reprint 2025-26



 24. Germ cell therapy is used for ____________.

 (a) RBC

 (b) Stomach cells

 (c) Egg cells 

 (d) Bone marrow cells

 25. For the first time, from which animal material was 
isolated for vaccination?

 (a) Cat

 (b) Cow

 (c) Goat

 (d) Horse

 26. Vaccination was invented by:

 (a) Jenner

 (b) Pasteur

 (c) Watson

 (d) Crick

 27. For the production of insulin by rDNA technology, which 
bacterium was used?

 (a) Saccharomyces

 (b) Rhizobium

 (c) Escherichia

 (d) Mycobacterium

 28. Genetically engineered insulin is called __________.

 (a) Humulin

 (b) Promulin

 (c) Bovulin

 (d) Proculin

 29. Monoclonal antibodies are produced by_________.

 (a) Mutations

 (b) Transfection

 (c) Hybridoma technology

 (d) RNA interference

110 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



UNIT II
Genome Engineering
##5##
Chapter 5: Genome Technology and Engineering

Reprint 2025-26



Stanley Norman Cohen
17 February 1935—present

Stanley Cohen was born in Perth Amboy, New Jersey. 
Aer graduating from Rutgers College in 1956, Cohen 
went to the University of Pennsylvania School of 
Medicine. He nished his medical degree in 1960. He 
accepted a position at Stanford University’s Medical 
School in 1968 and began experimenting with plasmids. 
Cohen is a Professor of Genetics at Stanford University. 
He is a member of the National Academy of Sciences, 
and in 1980, won the Albert Lasker Basic Medical 
Research Award. He was awarded the National Medal 
of Science in 1988. Stanley Cohen is well-known for his 
innovation with Herbert Boyer of recombinant DNA 
technology, which they published in 1973. Stanley 
Cohen and Herbert Boyer were the rst two scientists to 
transplant genes from one living organism to another, a 
fundamental discovery for genetic engineering.

Reprint 2025-26



Chapter 5 Genome Technology and 
Engineering

Gradual developments in the area of biotechnology and Ph5y.s1i caMl ampappinpgin ogf o tfh teh e 

molecular biology, especially in genome mapping and its genomGe e(pnhoymseic: aGl eanndet ic 
genetic mapping)

implication, has led to the opening of new frontiers for and Physical

research as well as its applications in many fields. Hi5g.h2- tHhrigohu-gthhprouut gDhNpAut  
sequencing 

Advancement in genome research has opened up scope DNA sequencing 
Other genome-related 

for understanding of transcriptome and proteome of 5.3 Other genome-
technorleolgayted technology

any organism on one hand, and application of genomics 
Structural, functional and 

and related engineering in prediction and treatment of 5.4 Genome 
comparative genomics

diseases on the other. Applications in crop improvement, Engineering
Protein engineering 

gene therapy and remediation of environmental hazards 5.5 Structural, 
functional and 

are yet another frontier in which genome technology has 
comparative 

tremendous potential and scope. In this chapter, concepts genomics
related to genome, its sequencing, analysis and its impact 

5.6 Protein  
on understanding the biology of organisms have been engineering 
detailed. In Chapter 7 of Class XI, students have already 
studied as to how genetic information is encoded in DNA 
and the processes, like transcription and translation.

5.1 Mapping of genoMe: genetic and 
physical

Genome of an organism is the complete genetic information 
present in the cell of an organism. For prokaryotes, it includes 

Reprint 2025-26



Nucleoid
(DNA) Plasmid

(a) Prokaryotes 

(b) Eukaryotes

Mitochondria
Rough
endoplasmic

Nucleus
reticulum Chromosome

Nucleolus
Centriole

Lysosome Nuclear envelope
DNA

Plasma membrane
Smooth thread
endoplasmic
reticulum

Golgi body

(i) Animal Cell

Mitochondria

Golgi
Endoplasmic body
reticulum

Nucleus

Nucleolus Vacuole

Chloroplast Cell membrane

Cell wall
Cytoplasm

(ii) Plant Cell

Fig. 5.1: Genome represents DNA content present in Prokaryotes or Eukaryotes. (a) For prokaryotes, 
it includes the DNA present in the nucleoid and plasmid (b) For eukaryotes, it includes the 
DNA present in the chromosomes of the nucleus as well as in organelles, like mitochondria and 
chloroplast

the DNA present in the nucleoid region and plasmid (as it 
is present in bacteria); and for eukaryotes, it includes the 
DNA present in the chromosome of the nucleus as well as in 
organelles, like mitochondria and the plastids, e.g. Protists 
and all multicellular organisms (Fig. 5.1).

114 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



One of the important tasks for many biologists is to 
compare genomes or DNA of two organisms for various 
purposes including the understanding of conserved 
genes or DNA sequences and relationships, etc. In simple 
words, from multiple samples of a biological organism, 
a scientist wants to know whether DNA samples from 
two or more sources are similar or different. If DNA from 
two sources are different, then how are these different 
from each other. Further, if an interesting phenotype 
is noticed, the scientist might also be interested to 
know the genetic basis (genes and mutations in it) of a 
particular phenotype. Therefore, a set f  g  

  h a
of techniques is required to answer a 

b
such questions. Ideally, if we know 

c
the complete DNA sequence of each 
sample, we can compare them and d
answer all such questions. 

e
In genome research, it is extremely 

f
important and crucial to create a map 
of the genome of an organism from g

the point of view of identification and c h

relative position of genes or loci. d

Maps of genome can be created by two (a) (b)
different approaches, i.e., the genetic 
approach and the physical approach, 

Fig. 5.2: Genome map (a) Map of a prokaryotic/
giving rise to genetic and physical 

organelle genome. (b) Map of a eukaryotic 
mapping techniques for genome genome, where a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h are genetic 

mapping in biological organisms loci or physical sites like SSLP, STS  arranged 

(Fig. 5.2). based on genetic distances

5.1.1 Genetic Mapping
Genetic mapping experiments give us an estimate of 
distances between two or more genetic loci responsible for 
a set of well-known phenotypes. A genetic map, as shown in 
Fig. 5.2, is created by carrying out crossover analysis. You 
have already studied about the phenomenon of crossing 
over in Class XI (refer section 6.2, Chapter 6). Rate of 
crossing over (also referred to as recombination frequency) 
between two or more genes or loci has been successfully 
used to measure relative genetic distance between 
them. One map unit is equal to one per cent of observed 

Genome Technology and Engineering 115

Reprint 2025-26

e 

  
b 



cross-over (recombinants). The unit centimorgan (cM) is 
used to denote genetic distance between genes based on 
offspring phenotype frequency. Chances of segregation 
of two loci by recombination are directly proportional 
to the distances between them. Therefore, decreased 
recombination frequency is an indication that distance 
between said loci is less. When genetic loci are arranged 
based on the genetic distances between them, it creates a 
genetic map of the organism. The main drawback of this 
approach is the availability of limited number of genetic 
loci responsible for a set of well-known phenotypes. 
This makes genetic maps sparsely populated or coarsely 
grained and therefore, it limits on the utility of such maps 
for fine mapping of new phenotypes to the genome.

5.1.2 Physical Mapping
An alternative to genetic mapping is physical mapping of 
the genome in which specific locations on the genome are 
identified using DNA based map features. The presence 
of restriction enzyme sites (restriction mapping), Simple 
Sequence Length Polymorphism (SSLP), and Sequence 
Tagged Sites (STS) have been used as map features (Fig. 5.2). 
These features are helpful in creating a high resolution 
physical map of genome. Let us briefly understand these 
genome map features.
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP): 
RFLP is a mapping technique that uses a DNA endonuclease 
enzyme called restriction enzymes (refer Section 3.3, 
Chapter 3) that cuts DNA at a specific base sequence 
resulting in the fragmentation of DNA. The fragmentation 
pattern of the digested DNA can be visualised when the 
fragments are separated based on their sizes by agarose 
gel electrophoresis. Typically, a single cut in a circular 
DNA yields one fragment of DNA, while the dual cut leads 
to two fragments. For linear DNA, a single cut results in 
two fragments of DNA while the dual cut results in three 
fragments. The DNA is digested with some of the enzymes 
such as a EcoRI, BamHI, etc., either singly or sequentially 

116 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



to create a map of restriction sites based on the size of 
fragments they produce. This exercise results in a 
high-resolution physical map of restriction sites of the 
genome. Such a map can easily be compared with others 
noticing the gain or loss of certain restriction sites resulting 
in observed RFLP from DNA samples by the changes in 
length of DNA fragments (Fig. 5.3). For example, in a family 
with a history of certain disease, comparison of these maps 
among the diseased and disease-free members may help to 
identify specific RFLP locus associated with the disease. 
Association mapping can also help to identify the genetic 
divergence between populations. However, it is also 
important here that a mammalian genome may have 
several sites for different restriction enzymes and it is 
quite possible that a restriction enzyme like EcoRI may cut 
a mammalian genome in lakhs of fragments and these 
cannot be distinguished based on the electrophoresis. This 
problem is addressed by the technique of Southern 
hybridisation in which specific DNA probe between 
different RFLP sites are used. (Fig. 5.4). 

f f (x) (y)
 a  

 a 

c
d d

(1) Genome (2) Genome (3) RFLP Pattern

Fig. 5.3: Comparing physical genome maps. The two maps differ at site c. The restriction site c is absent 
or lost in genome (2) with respect to genome (1) or the restriction site c is present or gained 
in genome (1) with respect to genome (2). Physical map of a prokaryotic/organelle genome (1) 
and  genome (2), where a, b, c, d, e, f are physical sites (such as restriction enzyme sites) 
arranged based on physical distances, (3) RFLP pattern of genome (1) and genome (2) obtained 
by restriction digestion of both the genomes and separating on agarose gel electrophoresis. 
Presence of restriction site c in genome (1) results in two smaller unique bands in (x) whereas 
absence of restriction site c in genome (2) gives one larger unique band in (y).

Genome Technology and Engineering 117

Reprint 2025-26

e 

e 

  
b 

  
b 



RFLP

DNA morph of individual 1 DNA morph of individual 2

RE RE RE RE RE

Probe P Probe P

Origin
(a) Southern

Hybridisation

Morph 1 Morph 2 Heterozygote

homozygote homozygote

Fig. 5.4: Physical mapping using restriction fragment length polymorphism — A probe P detects two 
DNA morphs when the DNA is cut by a certain restriction enzyme (RE).

Simple Sequence Length Polymorphism (SSLP) map: 
A large genome contains arrays of different repeat 
sequences, which may be of varying length. Microsatellites 
and minisatellites are such repeat sequences that can 
also be used for physical mapping of genome based on its 
length variant (refer Section 4.1 in Chapter 4 of this book).
Physical Mapping using Sequence Tagged Sites (STS): 
Sequence tagged sites are a useful addition to physical 
mapping. STS are unique DNA sequence (200–500 bp) that 
occur once in a genome and whose unique location in the 
genome is known. The presence or absence of STS site in 
a given fragment of DNA can be easily demonstrated using 
PCR. Hence, the presence of these sites serve as a useful 
location landmark in the creation of physical map of a 
genome. They are often combined with the restriction maps 
to improve the resolution and effectiveness of association 
mapping.

5.2 high-throughput dna sequencing

While we can compare the physical and genetic map to 
differentiate and classify organisms, it is highly desirable to 
get the complete DNA sequence of the organism. In earlier 

118 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



days, sequencing complete genomes was prohibitively 
expensive and therefore, less expensive techniques were 
used to narrow down the region of interest to small locus 
of DNA, that is, statistically associated with the phenotype 
of interest. Only this small region of interest is  used for 
sequencing to avoid the prohibitive cost of full genome 
sequencing. However, this approach requires a map of 
genome that could be referred to or compared with others. 
Advances in sequencing technology have now made it 
possible to obtain complete DNA sequence of any organism, 
if we can get its DNA. Initially, the cost of DNA sequencing 
per base was prohibitive to carry out full DNA sequencing 
of eukaryotic organisms including human beings. However, 
this has changed drastically at present. In this section, we 
will see as to how the DNA sequence technology has evolved 
over last three decades. 

5.2.1 First generation DNA sequencing 
technology

Initial or first phase of genome sequencing was an 
elaborate and a multistep procedure. It involved separation 
of chromosome on agarose gel using Pulse Field Gel 
Electrophoresis (PFGE). Separated chromosome was then 
subjected to restriction digestion and the digested fragment 
were ligated to high-capacity cloning vectors, such as BAC, 
YAC, PAC, etc. (Refer Section 2.3, Chapter 2). The DNA 
present in these clones are often overlapping and the clones 
from such exercises can be organised in a set of minimum 
clones that carry overlapping set of DNA from the organism. 

DNA segments from these clones are physically mapped 
and sub-cloned into sequencing plasmid for sequencing 
the cloned DNA using the first generation DNA sequencing 
techniques.

The first generation DNA sequencing technique used 
a method called sequencing by chain termination (refer 
Section 12.9.1 of Class XI Biotechnology textbook). 
In this method, a ladder of single stranded DNA is 
created, each terminating at a specific base (identified 
by a specific fluorescence tagged to the terminating base) 
location. These fragments are separated based on their 
size using capillary gel electrophoresis technique (in 

Genome Technology and Engineering 119

Reprint 2025-26



which the electrophoresis of the charged molecule, i.e., 
DNA fragments, is done in a capillary filled with gel). 
A fluorescence detector is positioned near the bottom 
end of the capillary to read the fluorescence of the single 
stranded DNA passing in front of the detector. Output of 
this technology is a chromatogram of fluorescence, where 
each peak represents a base position and colour of the 
peak indicates which DNA base is present there. Each 
capillary in a single run, sequences about 800-1000 
base–long DNA. A single DNA sequencer can have 
as many as 96 capillaries (with 96 different sequencing 
reactions loaded) operating in parallel in one machine. 
This type of setup can provide up to 96000 bases per run, 
per machine.

One of the drawbacks of this technology is that it is 
time consuming and labour intensive which leads to a 
prohibitively high cost of genome sequencing. To overcome 
this challenge, the next generation of DNA sequencing 
technology was developed.

5.2.2  Next (second) generation DNA sequencing 
technology

Next generation DNA sequencing technology uses a 
massively parallel (millions of parallel sequencing 
reactions in one machine) DNA sequencing approach. 
This technology does not require time consuming cloning 
and subcloning steps and therefore, reduces cost required 
for the genome sequencing project. Compared to the first 
generation sequencing methods, next generation methods 
provide advantages, such as simple workflow high data 
accuracy (due to high depth of coverage) and a broad range 
of application.

Although there are many approaches to this strategy, 
we will look at working of one of the most popular Next 
generation sequencing technologies platform, i.e., Illumina 
Sequencing Technology (Fig. 5.5). It uses a flow cell (glass 
slide) where DNA fragments are amplified through a special 
method called Bridge PCR Amplification. A flow cell is a 
solid support, where single stranded small oligonucleotides 
(8 –10 bases) are attached. Initially, DNA is fragmented into 
small pieces (~1– 2 kb) and small oligonucleotide adaptors 
are attached to these DNA fragments. These adaptors are 

120 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



complementary to the  oligonucleotides on the flow cell and 
hence, help in the attachment of DNA fragments to flow 
cell. These adaptors are used as primers and new DNA 
strands are synthesised. During this process, fragments 

1 2 3 4

 Denatured template DNA strand New strand Detachment of
DNA fragments with attached to flow synthesised DNA strand

5
adapters ligated cell

in both ends

DNA bends over
and forms a bridge

Amplified clusters Repeat until dense Denaturation Bridge amplification
of templates on clusters of templates of bridge of reverse strand

flow cell are amplified

9 8 7 6

G G C

C G
C

A T

T A
A .

.

T .

Signal scanning

Sequencing

10

Fig. 5.5: A popular Next generation sequencing technology 

Genome Technology and Engineering 121

Reprint 2025-26



make a bridge like structure because of complementarity 
of adaptors with the oligonucleotides attached to the flow 
cell. Therefore, it is called bridge amplification. It results 
in a cluster of similar fragments at the same location. 
After the PCR amplification, sequencing primer is used, 
which binds to one of the adaptors and each fragment is 
sequenced at the same time. For sequencing, fluorescently 
tagged dNTPs are used for the synthesis of complementary 
strand and each of the bases, i.e., dATPs, dTTPs, dGTPs 
or dCTPs, is attached with different fluorescent tags. Only 
one base is added at one time and incorporated bases 
are read based upon the type of its fluorescence. This is 
followed by the addition of next base and fluorescence is 
imaged. In this way, millions of fragments are sequenced 
parallelly at the same time.

The sequencing reaction is polymerase based and 
it is carried out in the flow cell by passing labelled 
base (these bases have unique fluorescence tag). These 
fluorescent bases would get incorporated depending on 
the DNA template initially attached to the flow cells. 
The fluorescence of the newly incorporated base reveal 
the sequence of the DNA fragment attached on the flow 
cells (Fig. 5.5). After recording the image of the flow cell, 
the fluorescent tag of the incorporated base is removed 
and then next base is passed through the flow cell (Fig. 
5.5). The whole sequencing is recorded as an array of 
fluorescent images, where the DNA sequencing is recorded 
as fluorescence changes at a given coordinate or spot. 
Such an array of images reveals the sequence of millions 
of such spots in parallel. 

Although this technology is capable of sequencing 
millions of DNA in parallel, it generates a very short (75 
to 300 base long) length of sequences compared to the 
first generation technology. Also, additional sequencing 
strategies are available to overcome some of the limitations 
posed by short sequencing output.

5.2.3 Some recent advances in DNA 
sequencing technology

One of the recent advances in DNA sequencing technology 
is the use of nanopores for DNA sequencing. This is also 

122 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



considered a third generation sequencing technology.  Here, 
sequencing is carried out by measuring the pattern change 
in electric current across a nanopore when a specific base in 
single stranded DNA passes through a nanopore (Fig. 5.6). The 
current implementation of this technology makes use of two 
proteins — a DNA helicase and a porins like molecule that 
is assembled to form nanopore on a synthetic membrane. 
The DNA helicase captures and unwinds a double stranded 
DNA and pushes one of its strand through the nanopore. 
An ionic current is maintained across the nanopore, and 
it is monitored continuously. When the single stranded 
DNA bases pass through the pore, the porins like molecule 
interacts differentially with DNA bases and it disrupts 
the ionic current. The disruption caused by each base is 

C
T

A G

Time

Unwinding enzyme (Helicase)

Protein pore (Porin)

Synthetic membrane

Current

Fig. 5.6: Nanopore based sequencing technology. Yellow dots are ions flowing through a pore 
creating current across nanopore formed by protein pore. Passage of each base through 
the nanopore results in specific changes in the ionic current. These changes in the ionic 
current are measured and the corresponding bases are identified. The sequence read 
here is ACGT. The unwinding enzyme efficiently captures the DNA, docks on the protein 
pore and drives one strand of DNA through the nanopore.

Genome Technology and Engineering 123

Reprint 2025-26

Current



very specific and by measuring these signatures of electric 
current changes, corresponding bases can be identified. 
The nanopore based sequencing technology offers a rapid 
and simple sample processing and has the potential to 
display sequencing results in real-time, making it highly 
useful for genotyping even in the field setup. Another major 
advantage of the nanopore sequencing is the production of 
very long sequencing reads (as long as 1 Mb or even more) 
at a relatively low cost. 

5.3 other genoMe-related technologies

Genome sequencing comes in multiple flavours or 
variations. This includes whole genome sequencing (WGS), 
targeted sequencing, metagenomics etc., as described in 
the following sections.

5.3.1 Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS)
WGS is a comprehensive method of determining the DNA 
sequence of the entire genome of an organism. Using WGS, 
the first genome of Haemophilus influenzae was sequenced. 
The availability of the whole genome sequences is helpful 
in understanding the genetic regulation of inheritance, 
identification of the genetic disorders that are inherited and 
so on. Whole genome sequencing of human genome  started 
in 1990 and complete sequence was published in 2003. 
With advances in sequencing technologies (as discussed 
in the previous section), now it is possible to sequence the 
entire genome in a few days. Whole genome sequence of a 
large number of microbes, animals and plants has already 
been obtained. Availability of the WGS can help to create 
personalised plans to treat human diseases or reading the 
variations in the cancer cells can help the physician to select 
the best chemotherapy.

When a whole genome sequencing uses a reference 
genome sequence (already sequenced and phylogenetically 
related genome sequence) to assemble its individual 
sequencing reads into genome sequence it is called 
reference based genome sequencing. When no such 
reference is used, it is called de novo genome sequencing.

124 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



5.3.2 Targeted sequencing
Targeted sequencing project is done to know as to whether 
targeted regions of a genome have variation or not. Such 
projects make use of already sequenced genome as reference 
genome sequence in order to assemble the newly sequenced 
genome. Targeted sequencing focuses on the sequencing 
and analysis of a set of selected genes or genomic regions 
of the genome. It can be used to compare the smaller set 
of the genomic regions among different genomes to identify 
variations like mutations, insertions or deletions, etc. For 
this purpose, target genomic regions is selected, isolated 
and then sequenced. Usually, PCR is used for this purpose.

Clinical exome sequencing is also very similar to targeted 
sequencing. Clinical exome sequencing is done for genes 
that are known to be disease associated (as reported and 
curated from databases, like OMIM, HGMD, etc.). Genetic 
diagnostics tests based on clinical exome sequencing are 
cost effective than whole genome sequencing. 

With the development of high-throughput DNA 
sequencing, DNA sequencing technology itself has been 
adapted to do much more than just reveal the genome 
sequence of an organism. One can use this technology to 
study the biology of an organism at genome level. Some of 
the advance applications of sequencing technologies are 
ChipSeq, RNASeq, etc.

ChipSeq sequencing projects are used to map 
genome-wide DNA binding site of a transcription 
regulator. Since transcription regulators play an 
important role in controlling the gene expression of 
one or more genes, ChipSeq projects are used to know 
ginome-wide DNA binding sites (as well as target genes) 
of a transcription regulator.

RNASeq projects are carried out to study the global gene 
expression profile (transcriptome) of an organism, a tissue 
or a sample. Total RNA is extracted from the target sample 
and cDNA is synthesised, which is sequenced using next 
generation sequencing technologies.

The sequencing read thus generated mapped to various 
genes on the genome and count of such reads mapping to 
those genes are in proportion to their expression reads.

Genome Technology and Engineering 125

Reprint 2025-26



5.3.3 Metagenomics: Sequencing of DNA or 
cDNA present in a microbial community

Metagenomics projects are used to study the genomics 
of community of organisms. Here, we do not separate the 
organisms or culture them individually. Metagenomics, 
in fact, is the study of the total genetic material directly 
obtained from the microorganisms living in a particular 
environment, like microbes living in the animal gut or 
in any particular ecological environment. It has several 
applications in medical microbiology, agriculture as well 
as environmental microbiology. In particular, it helps to 
study the diversity of microbial communities and how the 
diversity of these microbes changes with changes in the 
environment. Metagenomics may also help in identifying 
novel genes or enzymes with the significant industrial 
applications. For example, the study of microbial 
communities living in extreme environments, like high 
temperature sulphur springs can help to identify the 
novel enzymes that are resistant and functional at such 
high temperatures.

Thus, metagenomics has applications in understanding 
the genomes of gut microbes, throat microbes, microbes 
present on a toilet seat, and many more. It provides an 
insight about the genome of diverse forms of microbes and 
their correlations. For example, study of genomes of diverse 
forms of viruses may provide an understanding about 
virus-host interaction, epidemiology and also evolution of 
viruses. Presence of multiple genomes in metagenomics 
sample creates special challenges in data analysis, hence 
they require a different set of computing algorithms.

5.4 genoMe engineering

This technology is used to modify the genome. It is often 
carried out to introduce or remove one or more genes. The 
goal of this engineering is to introduce a new functionality 
or to modify (or remove) the existing functionality of 
a biological organism. In this section, we would get a 
glimpse of the approaches that had been used to engineer 
a genome. One of the approaches uses transposon or 
jumping genes to inactivate or delete a gene(s) in a genome. 
Another approach is to edit the genome without having 
any additional unwarranted changes in the genome.

126 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



5.4.1 Knock-out and knock-in of a gene by 
transposon insertion

Transposons are DNA sequences also known as ‘Jumping 
Genes’ that move from one location to another on the 
genome found in almost all organisms (both prokaryotes 
and eukaryotes). DNA transposon generally moves by a 
‘cut and paste’ mechanism in which the transposon is 
excised from one location and integrated elsewhere in the 
genome. Many a times, such movement of DNA segment 
results in the insertional inactivation of a gene located at 
the site of insertion. This behaviour of transposon is 
exploited to knock-out an existing gene. In such a strategy, 
the transposon is engineered, so that it recognises a 
specific sequence of a target gene, where it gets inserted. 
Once the transposon is inserted at the target site, the 
coding frame of target gene is disrupted and therefore, it 
can no longer produce the original transcript required to 
code the gene product (Fig. 5.7). 

Transposon
Donor
DNA

Excision of
transposon

Excision site Excision site

Integration site

Target
DNA

Excised transposon

Integration

Donor DNA

Fig. 5.7: Genome engineering through transposition

In certain cases, when a transposon gets inserted at 
a particular site, it alters the genetic locus of interest, 
resulting in the addition of DNA sequence, that was 
not present on the said genetic locus. This property of 

Genome Technology and Engineering 127

Reprint 2025-26



transposon is used to knock-in of a functional gene. This 
knock-in and knock-out technology helps in the generation 
of animal/plant models to understand the molecular basis 
and development of new drugs for the disease.

5.4.2 Genome editing using Clustered 
Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic 
Repeats (CRISPR-Cas9)
Genome editing is a set of techniques or technologies 
that can be used to change the DNA of an organism by 
adding, removing or altering the specific DNA sequence of 
the genome. Like restriction enzymes, this technique is a 
biotechnological adaptation or repurposing of a naturally 
occurring genome editing system present in bacteria. 
In its natural context, this system is used to memorise the 
DNA signature of past viral attacks so that any subsequent 
viral infection with matching DNA signature present on 
the viral DNA can be countered or destroyed effectively. 

Guide RNA

Cas9

Genomic DNA

Double strand
DNA break

Repair

Non-homologous End Joining Homologous DNA recombination

OR
Knock-in

Gene knock-out by deletion or insertion

Fig. 5.8: Gene editing using CRISPR-Cas9 technology. Guide RNA position the specific region of genomic 
DNA with Cas9 protein complex for inducing double strand break. After double strand break, 
gene knock-out can be created using deletion or insertion of DNA sequence. For gene editing, a 
desired mutant copy (for correction/replacement around the break site) can be introduced to this 
region to undergo homologous recombination in the presence of desired mutant template DNA, 
thereby introducing these mutations in genomic DNA at a specific place.

128 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



In this approach, a guide RNA is designed and produced 
in the cell along with Cas9 endonuclease. The guide 
RNA are required for positioning of Cas9 endonuclease 
at a location, where DNA are required to be edited or 
engineered. Part of the guide RNA is complementary 
to the DNA sequence, where the sequence needs to be 
edited. The other part of guide RNA attracts and binds 
to Cas9 endonuclease. Once this whole complex (the 
guide RNA bound to target DNA and Cas9) is assembled, 
a double strand break is introduced in the DNA by the 
endonuclease (Fig. 5.8). The broken DNA undergoes a 
template based homologous DNA repair where a modified 
or edited DNA template is provided that has the desired 
changes (edited sequence). As a consequence of such 
double strand break and template guided DNA repair, 
the repaired genomic DNA now possess an edited DNA 
sequence.

Box 1 Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2020 for discovering the CRISPR-Cas9 genetic scissors

Emmanuelle Charpentier Jennifer Doudna 

Emmanuelle Charpentier, a researcher at the Max Planck Unit for the Science of 
Pathogens, in Berlin, Germany; and Jennifer A. Doudna, a biochemist at the University 
of California, Berkeley were awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry 2020 for discovering the 
CRISPR-Cas9 genetic scissors, a gene-editing method. 
 The concept of CRISPR-Cas9 was modified from naturally occurring ancient bacterial 
immune systems. Bacteria use CRISPR-Cas systems to recognise and cut the DNA of 
invading viruses into inactive segments called CRISPR arrays. This effectively disables the 
virus and contributes to immune ‘memory’ of the bacteria. While studying Streptococcus 
pyogenes in 2011, Dr. Charpentier discovered a new molecule in the CRISPR-Cas system, 
called tracrRNA, and started a collaboration with Dr. Doudna to reprogram the CRISPR 
system. Together, they discovered that CRISPR could be directed to cut DNA at the target 
sequences using Cas9 protein. This allowed the genetic material to be subsequently added, 
deleted or changed as desired, using the cell’s own DNA repair machinery. Researchers 
can use this technique to modify the DNA of living organism with extremely high precision. 
This specialised gene editing tool allows very small and precise changes to be made to the 
genetic code, it can halt a disease that causes premature ageing in a mouse model and 
double the lifespan of the treated animals.

Genome Technology and Engineering 129

Reprint 2025-26



5.5 structural, functional and coMparative 
genoMics

Next generation sequencing projects generate large 
volume of data that require extensive computing for data 
analysis. Computational genomics is a field that uses 
high performance computing clusters and workstations 
to analyse genomics data including the data generated 
by the sequencing technology. Computational genomics 
helps in understanding the functions of the genome based 
on computational and statistical analysis to decipher 
biology from genome sequences and related data based on 
DNA and RNA sequences, as well as other experimental 
data. With the increasing number of genome sequence of 
different organisms, one major step is the identification 
of common genes through homology search and gene 
annotation (assigning functional value). Secondly, 
sequence comparisons across multiple sequences can be 
carried out by advanced computational genomics tools, 
such as BLAST, ClustalW, Phylip to understand the 
evolutionary relationship. Rapid progress in the field has 
led to advancements in structural genomics, which deals 
with the three dimensional information of the proteins 
encoded by the genome.

Advancements in the area of powerful computer 
graphics processing units (GPU) and graphic cards have 
been utilised [General purpose (GP-GPU) and Computer 
Unified Device Architecture (CUDA) programming] for 
scientific computing including computational genomics 
to bring high performance computing for accelerated 
data analysis.

Genomics work is capital intensive. Since genomics has 
become a major tool to study biology and has a profound 
effect on biotechnology, the Department of Biotechnology 
(under Ministry of Science and Technology, Government 
of India) has taken an initiative to establish three National 
Genomics Core facilities in India. These facilities would 
help Indian scientists and entrepreneurs to execute their 
genomic projects. These facilities are located within two 
national laboratories (Centre for DNA Fingerprinting 
and Diagnostics, Hyderabad and National Institute 

130 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



of Biomedical Genomics, Kalyani) and one university 
(University of Allahabad, Prayagraj).

5.5.1 Structural genomics
Structural genomics means two different things to two 
different sets of people. For those who are interested 
in protein structure, it refers to 3D structure of every 
protein encoded by a particular genome. For those who 
are interested in chromosome organisation, it refers to 
physical nature of the whole genome.

Earlier, the focus of structural genomics (as defined by 
structural genomics consortium) was to search for new 
protein folds or structure in newly sequenced genomic 
DNA. Through this approach, scientists address the need 
for solving more protein structures, especially of proteins 
with sequence that are of unknown fold types.

An expanded view of structural genomics includes 
the study of structural organisation of DNA region in 
chromosome and nucleosome status of the genome. This 
includes the study of large structural changes in genome 
organisation of related species. An interesting example is 
to see as to how genes that are common between mice and 
human are redistributed across different chromosomes of 
two species. 

5.5.2 Functional genomics 
Functional genomics aims to understand as to how the 
physiological function information encoded in genome is 
executed. A set of genomics based tools and techniques, 
such as RNAseq, ChipSeq, Metagenomics (of microbial 
community), etc., are used to understand the physiological 
and pathological function associated with the state of a 
cell. 

5.5.3 Comparative genomics
Comparative genomics deals with the comparison of 
genes and genomes of multiple species or within multiple 
individuals of the same species. It can help in genome 
annotation of the newly sequenced genome based on its 
comparison with related well-known genome. It can also 
help identify the set of common genes that form core 

Genome Technology and Engineering 131

Reprint 2025-26



genome and other genes that are unique to a species. The 
latter may be responsible for unique behaviour or function 
of a particular species. Comparative genomics may also 
identify whether a functional molecule is present or absent 
in a genome. It may also be used as a starting point for 
genome based taxonomy and phylogenetic lineage study.

5.6 protein engineering

In this unit, we would learn about another advanced usage 
of rDNA technology that can be used to create and produce 
engineered proteins having additional or extended property 
as compared to the original protein.

The engineered proteins may have greater stability 
when exposed to elevated temperature, change in pH, 
presence of salts or organic solvent. Proteins can also 
be engineered to develop and produce novel reagents for 
research, diagnostics and therapeutics.

5.6.1 Applications of protein engineering 
To engineer a protein, the critical amino acids responsible 
for the desired trait is identified. Its codon sequences 
on the gene are modified by creating point mutations so 
that it can be mutated or replaced by another amino acid 
that modulate the desired activity. Let us discuss some 
examples of engineered proteins. 
1) Recombinant protein to improve cleansing action 
of detergent: Subtilisin is a proteolytic enzyme that is 
added to detergents to hydrolyse the protein component of 

dirt. This improves the cleansing 
N N action of the detergent. The 

H H
catalytic triad of subtilisin is Ser 

O H R 221, His 64 and Asp 32. However, 
Peptide C

N Peptide O in the presence of bleach, Met 222 
H

R H is oxidised, this leads to reduced 
Substrate H O

N
side-chain O H N action of subtilisin. If the codon 

recognition site Asp 32 for Met 222 is replaced by codon 
Ser 221 for Ala by point mutation by site 

His 64
directed mutagenesis (a process 

Fig 5.9 : Catalytic Triad in Subtilisin  

132 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



by which point mutation can be introduced at a specific 
site), the engineered protein becomes stable even in the 
presence of bleach (Fig. 5.9).
2) Recombinant protein for protein purification: A 
peptide with six consecutive His amino acids called 6-His-
Tag, can bind to metal ions, like Nickel, Zinc and Cobalt 
with great affinity at mildly alkaline pH. This property of 
6-His-tag is exploited for the purification of recombinant 
protein. DNA encoding for 6-His-tag is fused with the 
gene sequence of recombinant protein of interest. During 
protein purification by affinity chromatography, the 
6-His-tagged recombinant protein will be immobilised by 
the presence of metal ions in the agarose gel. All other 
proteins will be removed by washing the gel. 6-His-tagged 
recombinant protein can then be eluted by using an 
elution buffer (Fig. 5.10). 

Wild type or 
natural DNA Site Direct Mutagenesis Mutant or engineered DNA

(SDM) or PCR
DNA ----- AUT GGGTU---------- ----- AUT GGGTU---------- CAATT  CAAC  CAATT  CAAC  CAATT  CAAC

RNA ----- AUGGGU----- ----- AUGGGU----- CAATUT   CAAC   CAATUT   CAAC   CAATTU  CAAAC

M
Protein M

Wild type or natural protein Mutant or engineered protein
without His-tag with six His-tag

Fig. 5.10:  Protein engineering for protein purification. The engineered protein with 6-His-tag are easily 
and efficiently purified on Nickel ion columns

3) Recombinant protein for tracking the location of the 
protein in a cell: The gene encoding for green fluorescent 
protein (GFP) obtained from jelly fish, Aequorea victoria, 
is fused with the DNA sequence of interest. This chimeric 
DNA now encodes for an engineered protein that appears 
as a green fluorescent molecule when exposed to UV light, 
thus revealing its location inside the cell (Fig. 5.11).
4) Recombinant protein as immunotoxin: Recombinant 
immunotoxins are rationally engineered protein agents 
(often anti-cancer agents) that combine the selectivity of 
antibody with cell-killing potency of toxin. 

Genome Technology and Engineering 133

Reprint 2025-26



Mutant or engineered DNA Gfp – tag
Wild type or natural DNA

SDM/PCR
DNA ----- AUT GGGTU----------- ----- AUT GGGTU-----------

RNA ----- AUGGGU------ ----- AUGGGU------

M
Protein M

Wild type or natural protein Mutant or engineered protein
with No tag GFP-tag

V V
V U U

U

Nucleus Cytoplasm Cytoplasm

Mitochondria Mitochondria

Cytoplasm
Nucleus OR Nucleus

Mitochondria

Protein localised to nucleus Protein localised to mitochondria

Fig. 5.11: Protein engineering for protein localisation. The engineered protein with Green Fluorescent protein 
(GFP) tags are easily visualised and localised in the specific regions of cell using epifluorescence 
or confocal microscopy. The nucleus localised GFP tagged protein appears green in the presence 
of UV light.

Box 2 Recombinant Immunotoxin

Recombinant immunotoxins are engineered proteins in which the selectivity of antibody is 
combined with the cell killing potency of toxins. Antibodies are in fact multi-chain proteins 
having two heavy and two light chains. The function of each fragment of antibody is well 
defined i.e., the antigen binding activity (present in Fab fragment) and the effector function 
(in the Fc fragment). The Fab fragment is further divided into the Fv fragment, the smallest 
fragment which is responsible for antigen binding via contact with both the heavy and 
light chains. For the production of recombinant immunotoxins, recombinant single-chain 
antibodies, also known as single-chain variable fragments (scFv) are produced through 
rDNA technology. These antibodies consist of the variable regions of the heavy (VH) and 
light (VL) chains of immunoglobulins, linked by a short flexible peptide linker. Such scFv 
can be conveniently produced in bacteria as it can be encoded by a single gene with  genetic 
manipulation and is expressed as a single-function polypeptide chain. During production 
of recombinant immunotoxins, scFv that specifically binds to the target antigen on the 
surface of cancer cells are designed. Then toxin fragment that can effectively kill the target 
cells are selected (such as Pseudomonas exotoxin A (PE), Diphtheria toxin (DT), or ricin). 
The designed scFv with the toxin is finally fused with a linker, which allows for proper 
folding and activity of both the components (Fig. 5.12). This engineered protein uses the 
antibody part for selectivity targeting the cancer cells displaying their antigens and gets 
internalized. The toxin part gets released from the endosome and effectively kills the cells.

134 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



VH Light Chain Heavy Chain Toxin
Fab VL CH1 Linker DNA

CL RNA

CH2 Linker Linker

C. DNA code of Light Chain, Heavy chain 
Fc A. Variable Light and 

and Toxin attached by two separate linkers
CH3 Heavy Chain attached 

with a linker (scFv)

A. Natural Antibody Endosome

Linker

Cancer 
cell

ER
Cell 

Linker
death

D. Recombinant Immunotoxin E. Recombinant immunotoxin Cancer cell
binds to cell surface receptor

F. Internalization of recombinant 
immunotoxin leading to cell death

Fig. 5.12: Production of recombinant immunotoxin (A) Natural Antibody (B) Single chain variable 
fragment joined with a linker (C) Variable part of light chain coding DNA (blue) is fused with 
the equivalent part of heavy chain coding DNA (green) and toxin coding DNA (yellow) through 
a flexible linker DNA code (black) giving rise to an engineered single chain recombinant 
immunotoxin; [D] Recombinant immunotoxin; [E] The antigens expressed on the cancer cell 
are the antigen binding sites on which the recombinant immunotoxin binds. [F] After binding 
it gets internalized by endocytosis and the toxin is released in the cytosol from the endosome 
that kills the cancer cells.

Box 3 Humanised monoclonal antibody

Monoclonal antibodies are very useful reagents that bind their targets in a well-defined way. 
These antibodies are easily produced using Mouse hybridoma technology (refer Section 4.5, 
Chapter 4), a biotechnological tool that exploits normal mouse immune response to develop 
a specific antibody producing immortalised mouse plasma cells by fusing it to mouse 
myeloma cells. Such immortalised hybrid cells become cell factories for producing specific 
antibodies. While these mouse monoclonal antibodies are useful as reagents but the same 
cannot be used as immune-therapeutics in humans. This restriction is due to the ability 
of human immune system to recognise the mouse antibody as a foreign antigen leading 
to anti-mouse monoclonal antibody immune response. Raising monoclonal antibodies is 
not practical in humans. As a result, a biotechnological strategy of protein engineering is 
applied to humanise the mouse monoclonal antibody. In this strategy, the part of mouse 
antibody involved in antigen binding is identified and transferred to a human antibody, 

Genome Technology and Engineering 135

Reprint 2025-26



which again is done at the DNA level. The DNA coding sequence that codes part of mouse 
antibody involved in binding the antigen is transferred to the equivalent position in a 
human antibody coding genes using recombinant DNA techniques, thereby producing a 
humanised version of mouse monoclonal antibody (Figure). The humanised antibody is 
often considered self and therefore, has good immune acceptance in human beings when 
administered for therapeutic purposes. 

Humanised 
Mouse Ig gene Human Ig gene mouse Ig gene

DNA

RNA

Protein

Mouse Ig protein Human Ig protein Humanised mouse
Ig protein

Humanised mouse Ig using protein engineering

SUMMARY

• The genome of an organism is the complete DNA content, 
which includes DNA present in the nucleoid in prokaryotes 
and the DNA present in the chromosomes of the nucleus, 
mitochondria and plastids in eukaryotes.

• There are two different approaches of genome mapping, 
physical mapping and genetic mapping.

• A genetic map estimates genetic distances between genetic 
loci, which are responsible for a set of well-known phenotypes. 
Genetic distances are measured in centimorgan or map unit 
(a unit to measure genetic linkage of two phenotypes).

• Physical mapping is based on map features, such as 
restriction enzyme sites (restriction mapping) and sequence 
tagged sites (STS).

• In restriction mapping, restriction enzymes cut DNA at a 
specific base sequence, resulting in fragments of DNA that 
can be visualised by agarose gel electrophoresis in which 
DNA fragments are separated based on their sizes.

• STS are unique DNA sequences (200–500–bp) with well–known 
location, these serve as a useful landmark in the creation of 
a physical map of a genome. STS can be demonstrated by 
PCR.

136 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



• First generation DNA sequencing technology was a multistep 
procedure involving separation of chromosomes, restriction 
digestion and ligation to high capacity cloning vectors.

• First generation DNA sequencing technique used a method 
of sequencing by chain termination, where a ladder of single 
stranded DNA with specific fluorescence tagged terminating 
bases are separated and detected by a fluorescence detector. 
By this method, base position and type of DNA bases are 
identified.

• Next generation DNA sequencing technology depends on 
advance computing algorithms to take millions of short 
sequence outputs, assembling in large contigs, representing 
DNA sequences of large genomes.

• Next generation sequencing includes techniques, like whole 
genome sequencing (WGS), Targeted resequencing, clinical 
exome sequencing, etc., and Chipseq, RNAseq are some of 
the advance applications of sequencing technologies.

• Nanopore sequencing technology uses two proteins: DNA 
helicase and porins like molecules to bind, unwind double 
stranded DNA and push single stranded DNA through porins 
like molecules to identify base pattern. This technique is 
simple, rapid, cost efficient, and displays results in 
real-time, and useful for genotyping and high mobility 
testing.

• Metagenomics involves sequencing of DNA or cDNA present 
in a microbial community. 

• Computational genomics involves usage of high performance 
computing clusters and workstations to analyse genomics 
data.

• Genome engineering is a technology to modify a genome 
(such as inactivate, delete, integrate, transduce and edit the 
genome).

• Transposons are DNA elements with the ability to move 
from one position of DNA to another, and can be exploited to 
engineer a knockout of the existing genes.

• Genome editing using CRISPR-Cas9 (use guide RNA along 
with Cas9 endonuclease) involves double strand break, 
homologous DNA repair to generate the edited DNA sequence.

• Structural genomics includes the study of structural 
organisation of DNA region in chromosome and nucleosome 
status of genome.

• Comparative genomics identify a set of common genes that 
form core genome and other genes that are unique to a 
species. So, it is a starting point for genome based taxonomy 
and phylogenetic lineage study.

• Functional genomics aims to study the physiological and 
pathological function associated with the state of a cell.

Genome Technology and Engineering 137

Reprint 2025-26



• Protein engineering is applied to develop novel reagents, 
diagnostics and therapeutics. It is used to develop 
recombinant protein with 6 histidine-tag (6-His-tag) for the 
ease of purification and to develop fluorescent proteins to 
track the cellular localisation of proteins.

• Protein engineering technology is also involved in the 
production of humanised monoclonal antibody, single chain 
antibody and a recombinant immunotoxin which is an 
engineered antibody that delivers toxin to specific cellular 
targets.

EXERCISES

 1. What is a genome? How is the genome of prokaryotes 
different from eukaryotes?

 2. What are the types of genome mapping? Explain each 
with a comparative approach.

 3. Suppose a DNA is extracted, purified and digested 
with enzyme BamH1. What type of mapping can be 
achieved? Mention the application of this type of 
mapping.

 4. What is STS and its role in genome mapping?
 5. Give a brief insight about the development of DNA 

sequencing technology and genomic workflow.
 6. Discuss how next generation DNA sequencing 

technology has overcome the drawbacks of 
the first-generation DNA sequencing technology. 
Elaborate the methodology.

 7. What is a unit of physical mapping? Discuss in detail.
 8. Discuss the methodology and applications of third 

generation sequencing technology.
 9. What are the different variations of Next Generation 

Sequencing? Explain in brief.
 10. What are the applications of advanced sequencing 

technologies? Elaborate.
 11. Discuss the applications of metagenomics. 
 12. What are the goals of genome engineering? Explain 

each in detail.
 13. One of the applications of genome engineering is to 

achieve high level recombinant protein production. 
How can we achieve this? Explain in detail.

138 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



 14. What is a genome editing? Why is there a need to edit 
a genome? Explain the methodology of editing using 
CRISPR-Cas9.

 15. What are the structural, functional and comparative 
genomics?

 16. What are the applications of protein engineering? 
Discuss in brief.

 17. If you are given a recombinant protein with 6-His-tags, 
how are you going to use it? Explain the methodology 
and application in detail.

 18. How do you apply protein engineering to track cellular 
localisation of proteins?

 19. How to generate a recombinant immunotoxin? Why 
do you think there is a need for generation of an 
immunotoxin? Mention its mechanism of action.

 20. Assertion: RFLP is variation in length of DNA fragments 
when cleaved by same restriction endonuclease.
Reason: Genome of every individual has different 
position of restriction sites.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason 
is the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason 
is not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.
 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.
 21. Assertion: Recombinant immunotoxins are rationally 

engineered protein agents.
Reason: It is prepared by fusing DNA-coding region of 
antibody with the DNA code of toxin.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason 
is the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason 
is not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.
 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

Genome Technology and Engineering 139

Reprint 2025-26



140 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



UNIT III
Microbial, Plant, Animal Cell, 
Organ Cultures and  
Bioprocessing
##6##
Chapter 6: Microbial Culture

Chapter 7: Plant Tissue Culture

Chapter 8: Animal Cell Culture

Chapter 9: Stem Cell Culture and Organ Culture

Chapter 10: Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing

Reprint 2025-26



Gottlieb Haberlandt
(28 Nov 1854 – 30 Jan 1945)

Gottlieb Haberlandt was an Austrian Botanist. He was 
the son of European ‘soybean’ pioneer Professor Friedrich 
J. Haberlandt. Haberlandt first pointed out the possibilities 
of the culture of isolated tissues and plant tissue culture. 
He suggested the potentialities of individual cells via tissue 
culture and also suggested that the reciprocal influences of 
tissues on one another could be determined by this method. 
Haberlandt’s original assertion methods for tissue and cell 
culture have been realised, leading to significant discoveries 
in Biology and Medicine. His original idea presented in 1902 
was called totipotentiality: ‘Theoretically all plant cells are 
able to give rise to a complete plant.’ The term Kranz (German 
for wreath) anatomy was given by Gottlieb Haberlandt in 
1904 to describe the specialised leaf anatomy found in more 
efficient C4 photosynthesis in land plants.

142

Reprint 2025-26



Chapter 6 Microbial Culture

The world of microorganisms has unusual diversity 6.1 Historical 

pertaining to their structure, function, habitat and Perspective

applications. They are ubiquitous in nature, i.e., they 6.2 Nutritional 

are present everywhere. Microbiology is the study or Requirements and 
Culture Media

science (logos) of the small (micro) organisms (bios). 
Microbiology has gained a dominant position in fundamental 6.3 Sterilisation 

Methods
research, agriculture, pharmaceutical industry, medicine, 
environmental  science, food technology and genetic 6.4 Pure Culture 

Techniques 
engineering, etc. In this chapter, you will learn about the 
nutrition of microorganisms, culture media, sterilisation 6.5 Factors Affecting 

Microbial Growth
techniques, and growth curve.

6.6 The Growth Curve

6.1 Historical PersPective

Discovery of microscope during the mid 1600s laid the 
foundation of microbiology. In the 1670s to 1680s, a 
Dutch merchant, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek developed 
the microscope and observed the microscopic organisms 
and coined the term ‘animalcules’. After the era of 
Leeuwenhoek, the developments in microbiology were 
slow, due to rare availability of microscopes and lack of 
interest towards microorganisms. Scientists at that time 

Reprint 2025-26



believed that the microorganisms originate from lifeless 
matter. But, on the contarary, Lazzaro Spallanzani observed 
that there were no microscopic forms of life in boiled broth. 
In the middle and late 1800s, Louis Pasteur had performed 
experiments to prove the importance of microorganisms in 
everyday life and encouraged scientists to think about the 
role of bacteria in human illness.

Box 1 Pasteur’s Experiment

Pasteur exposed the 
boiled broths to air in  a 
filter containing flasks to 
prevent all the particles 

(a)
from penetrating to the 

Let ask sit No bacterial growth medium. He also 
growth

Heat put broth in the flasks 
(Broth boiled to with a long twisted ‘S’ 
sterilise and kill

shaped neck that would 
microorganisms)

not allow dust particles 
to pass. He observed 
that nothing grows in 
the broth [Fig. (a)]. He 

(b) then broke the long neck 
of the flask and bacterial 

Remove the neck of Bacterial growth
Heat growth was observed 

ask, allow air and observed
(Broth boiled to dust to enter the [Fig. (b)]. He also tilted 
sterilise and kill ask and let it sit the flask sideways and 
microorganisms) allowed the broth to 

touch the neck, thereby 
exposing the broth to the 
outside environment. 
After letting it sit, he 

(c)
found bacterial growth 

Tilt the ask sideways Bacterial growth [Fig.  (c)]. These [Fig. (b) 
Heat and allow the broth present and (c)] prove that the 

(Broth boiled to to touch the neck
sterilise and kill and let it sit living organisms grow 

microorganisms) in such broths due 
to the agents coming 

Louis Pasteur’s experiment that illustrates the idea of germ from outside, rather 
theory of disease. (The unique design of neck allowed air to enter than spontaneously 
the flask but prevented the entry of fungal spores and bacteria) generated within the 

broth. Thus, his pioneer work further proved that the microorganisms were present in the 
air, and could cause diseases. On the basis of on his experiments, Pasteur disproved the 
theory of spontaneous generation and postulated the germ theory of disease, which states 
that ‘the microorganisms were the cause for infectious diseases.

144 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



 The German scientist, Robert Koch further proved 
the germ theory by injecting pure cultures of Bacilli 
into mice and showed that the Bacilli caused anthrax. 
Accordingly, Koch postulated (Fig. 6.1) and provided a set 
of principles that implicated the microorganisms to be the 
causative agents for diseases.

Box 2 Koch’s Experiment

Diseased animal Healthy animal

Red blood
Suspected

cells
pathogen

Culture sample from diseased
Red and healthy animal

blood cell

Culture
of pathogen

Inoculate healthy animal No pathogens present
with the suspected pathogen

Healthy animal
become diseased

Suspected Culture
pathogen

Pictorial representation of Koch’s experiments

Microbial culture 145

Reprint 2025-26



In the course of development of microbiology, based on 
the suggestions made by Pasteur and Koch, the period of 
late 1800s and the early decade of the 1900s is referred 
to as the Golden Age of Microbiology. During this period, 
various causative agents responsible for microbial diseases 
were discovered.

In the 19th century, the bacteriologists have attempted 
the use of food or material to grow the microbes. In 
1860, Louis Pasteur used a media containing yeast, ash, 
and ammonium salts. This medium contained the basic 
nutrients for microbial growth, such as carbon source 
(e.g., sugar), nitrogen (e.g., ammonium salts), and vitamins 
(e.g. ash). In order to develop more versatile basal medium, 
Ferdinand Cohn further refined the Pasteur’s medium by 
varying the types of sugars. Robert Koch observed that 
broths based on fresh beef serum or meat extracts could 
be used for optimal growth.

The use of solid media instead of liquid medium also 
proved an important milestone in the development of 
bacteriology. In 1881, Robert Koch had recognised the 
difficulties of using broth media for the isolation of pure 
cultures and considered the use of solid media alternatives. 
During the isolation of Bacillus anthracis, Koch evaluated 
media with coagulated egg albumin, starch paste and an 
aseptically cut slice of a potato, but it proved to be relatively 
poor at recovering the pathogenic bacteria. After that, Koch 
further developed medium with meat extract and gelatin 
(derived from the collagen of skin and bones). During the 
course of development, finally agar replaced gelatin, as 
agar provides the requisite solid support for microbiological 
media, but it does not provide the nutrients necessary for 
the bacteria to grow. On the basis of the observation of the 
growth of bacteria on solid media, Koch coined the term 
‘colony’ to describe the pure and discrete growth.

Box 3 Petri dish

Julius Richard Petri in 1887 improved microbial 
culturing conditions by using a shallow, circular 
glass dish with a losse fitting cover termed Petri dish 
instead of the flat glass plates.

146 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Most of the media used during the 19th century was 
non-selective and was designed to grow a range of bacteria. 
In the beginning of the 20th century, further advances 
with in the culture media occurred which led to isolation of 
pure cuiture on media called selective media, such media 
contained compounds which felicitate the growth of only a 
specific type of micro organisms.

By the 1930s, the researchers started to consider the 
importance of growth factors upon bacterial nutrition. In 
the 1940s, with the invention of electron microscope, the 
study and culture methods for viruses were introduced, 
and the knowledge of viruses developed rapidly. By 1950s, 
the mechanisms of coenzymes in bacterial growth was 
found to be useful. Another important development was 
the use of antibiotics in media and by 1960s, antibiotics 
were used in culture media as selective agents. 

After World War II, further advancement of 
microbiology led to the discovery of antibiotics as 
medicine for various diseases, such as pneumonia, 
tuberculosis, meningitis, syphilis, etc. During the 
period of 1950s and 1960s, many vaccines against viral 
diseases, such as polio, measles, mumps, and rubella 
were developed.

Modern microbiology has application in various 
fields, such as development of pharmaceutical products, 
food and dairy products, the control of disease-causing 
microorganisms, and the industrial exploitation of 
microorganisms. Thus, microorganisms were used 
to produce vitamins, amino acids, enzymes, growth 
supplements as well as various foods, such as fermented 
dairy products (sour cream and buttermilk), pickles, 
breads and alcoholic beverages.

In biotechnology, applied microbiology has a dominant 
role as the microorganisms are used as living factories 
to produce pharmaceuticals, including human hormone 
insulin, antiviral protein interferon, numerous blood-clotting 
factors and clot-dissolving enzymes, including a number 
of vaccines. For rDNA technology, genetically engineered 
microorganisms are used as host vectors in order to develop 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs) with improved 
traits.

Microbial culture 147

Reprint 2025-26



Nutritional categories of microbes
Microorganisms can be categorised based on the means of 
obtaining their carbon and energy. Most microorganisms 
obtain their carbon in the form of organic molecules, 
derived directly or indirectly from other organisms, 
and are described as heterotrophs that include all the 
fungi and protozoans, as well as most types of bacteria. 
Microorganisms that obtain their carbon from carbon 
dioxide are called autotrophs that include a significant 
number of bacteria and about all of the algae.

Autotrophs may further be of two categories. 
Chemoautotrophs obtain their energy as well as their 
carbon from inorganic sources (by the oxidation of 
inorganic molecules, such as sulphur or nitrite), while 
photoautotrophs have photosynthetic pigments and use 
them to convert light energy into chemical energy. 

Majority of the heterotrophs obtain energy by chemical 
oxidation of organic nutrient molecules, and thus are called 
chemoheterotrophs. Although, some heterotrophs (such 
as the green and purple non-sulphur bacteria) obtain 
light energy from photosynthesis, they get carbon from 
organic nutrients, hence known as photoheterotrophs. A 
lithotroph is an organism that uses inorganic molecules, 
such as H O, H S or ammonia as a source of electrons, 

2 2

while an organotroph uses organic molecules for the same 
purpose.

6.2 NutritioNal requiremeNts aNd culture 
media

Microorganisms require nutrients that are essential 
for energy production as well as their growth and 
multiplication.Carbon, oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur, 
phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium and iron are 
called macronutrients and they are required in relatively 
large amounts. Among them, C, O, H, N, S and P are the 
components of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins and nucleic 
acids, and K, Ca, Mg, Fe play a variety of roles being involved 
as cofactor of various enzymes. Besides macronutrients, 
some micronutrients or trace elements, such as Mn, Zn, 

148 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Co, Mo, Ni, and Cu are also required for microbial growth 
in a small amounts. These micronutrients are ubiquitous 
in nature and already exist with various regular media 
components, so they are not usually supplied separately. 
The essential nutrients have to be supplied in the form of 
nutrient media. The major components required for the 
medium are as follows:

(a) Carbon source: Carbon is required for the skeleton 
or backbone of all organic molecules, and the carbon 
sources usually also provide oxygen and hydrogen 
atoms. In the microbial culture media, variety of a 
carbon sources are used. For example, glucose, lactose, 
sucrose, starch, glycogen, cellulose, a mixture of various 
carbohydrates, such as cereal grain powders and cane 
molasses etc.

(b) Nitrogen, phosphorous and sulphur sources: 
Nitrogen source is required for the biosynthesis of amino 
acids, nucleic acids and enzymes etc. The ammonium 
salts, urea, animal tissue extracts, amino acid mixtures 
and plant-tissue extracts are the main nitrogen sources 
that are used in culture media. Phosphorus is present 
in nucleic acids, phospholipids, nucleotides, several 
cofactors, and other cellular components. Almost all 
the microorganisms use inorganic phosphate as their 
phosphorus source. Sulfur is required for biosynthesis 
of various amino acids, such as cysteine and methionine, 
some carbohydrates, etc. Most of the microorganisms use 
sulfate as a source of sulfur.

(c) Growth factors: Growth factors are organic 
compounds (e.g., certain amino acids, purines pyrimidines 
and vitamins) that cannot be synthesised in the cells and 
are required for the growth and multiplication of cells. 

(d) Anti-foams: Anti-foams are not the nutritional 
component. However, the media having nutritional 
components including starch, protein, and other organic 
compounds as well as products formed during cell growth 
may have excessive foaming due to the agitation of culture 
media. To prevent this foam formation, some anti-foaming 
agents including olive oil, sunflower oil and silicones are 
included in the media.

Microbial culture 149

Reprint 2025-26



(e) Water: Water is an essential component/base of 
any culture media (liquid or solid). In solid culture media, 
the quantity of water used is comparatively less than the 
liquid media.

A culture media has all the nutrients, growth 
factor, energy source, etc., to support the growth of 
microorganisms.

Though all the microorganisms need sources of 
energy, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur and various 
minerals, the specific composition of a suitable medium 
will depend on the particular species, which is to be grown 
in the laboratory. Thus, for selecting an appropriate 
culture medium for the microorganism, prior knowledge 
of the habitat of the microorganism is useful, because 
its nutrient requirements are based on its natural 
surroundings.

Types of media

(A)  On the basis of chemical composition, the culture 
media are classified into two types:

(i) Synthetic or chemically defined media

Media in which all chemical components are known is 
called defined media or synthetic media. Some 
microorganisms, specifically photolithotrophic autotrophs 
(e.g., cyanobacteria) can be cultured on a media containing 
CO  as a carbon source, nitrate or ammonia as a nitrogen 

2

source, sulfate, phosphate, and a number of minerals. A 
variety of heterotrophs may be cultured in a media with 
glucose as a carbon source and an ammonium salt as a 
nitrogen source. Defined media are widely used in research 
and prepared by mixing  various components according 
to the requirements for experimental microorganism. M9

 

media is widely used for the cultivation and maintenance 
of Escherichia coli (E. coli) cultures, and BG11 media is 
used for the cultivation and maintenance of blue green 
algae (cyanobacteria).

(ii) Complex media

Media that contain some constituents with unknown 
chemical composition are called complex media. These 

150 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



types of media are useful, because even a single complex 
medium may have almost all the constituents to meet 
the nutritional requirements of a number of different 
microorganisms. The undefined components in the complex 
media are peptones, beef extract and yeast extract etc.
Peptones are protein hydrolysates prepared by the partial 
proteolysis of meat, casein, gelatin, and other protein 
sources and serve as a source of carbon, energy and 
nitrogen. The beef extract and yeast extract are aqueous 
extracts of beef and brewer’s yeast, respectively. The beef 
extracts have amino acids, peptides, nucleotides, organic 
acids, vitamins, and minerals, whereas yeast extract 
is a rich source of vitamin, nitrogen as well as carbon 
compounds. Examples are nutrient broth, tryptic soy broth, 
and MacConkey agar. Lysogeny broth (Luria-Bertini) is a 
commonly used medium for culturing bacteria, such as E. 
coli. The LB medium, first developed by Giuseppe Bertani 
(1951) consists of 10% tryptone/peptone, 5% yeast extract, 
and 10% sodium chloride. Potato dextrose agar (PDA) is 
used for the identification, cultivation and enumeration of 
various fungi including yeast and moulds.

(B)  On the basis of consistency, the culture media are 
of three types

(i) Liquid media or broth

In liquid media, agar is not added. After inoculation and 
later incubation, the growth of cells becomes visible in 
the broth.

(ii) Solid media

For the surface cultivation of microorganisms, solid culture 
media is required. For preparation of solid media, the liquid 
media is solidified with the addition of 1.0–2.0% agar. 
Agar is a sulphated polymer composed of D-galactose, 3, 
6-anhydro-L-galactose, and D-glucuronic acid, generally 
extracted from red algae. Solid media are used for making 
agar slants, slopes and agar stab. Agar is preferred as a 
solidifying agent as most of the microorganisms cannot 
degrade it. Although, other solidifying agents, such as 
silica gel can also be used. 

Microbial culture 151

Reprint 2025-26



(iii) Semi-solid agar media

The semi-solid media are prepared by adding 0.5% of agar 
in the media. This type of media may be selective as it 
promotes the growth of one organism and may retard the 
growth of the other organism. 

(C)  On the basis of their application(s) and functions, 
the culture media are classified into the following 
types

(i) Selective media 

The selective media favours the growth of a particular type 
of microorganism. They provide nutrients that increase 
the growth of a particular type of microorganism and 
suppresses all other microorganisms that are present 
in the culture. This medium is useful for isolating a 
specific microorganism from a mixed population. Thus, 
for the isolation of cellulose-digesting bacteria, a medium 
containing only cellulose as a carbon and energy source 
is used. Endo agar, eosin methylene blue agar, and 
MacConkey agar media are used for the growth of E. coli 
and similar bacteria. Certain media that contain bile salts 
or dyes, such as basic fuchsin and crystal violet are used 
to suppress the growth of Gram-positive bacteria but 
encourage the growth of Gram-negative bacteria. 

(ii) Differential media

Differential media are used to distinguish different groups 
of microorganisms based on the appearance on the medium 
as well as their biological characteristics, which permit the 
identification of microorganisms. For example, if a mixture 
of bacteria is inoculated on to a blood-containing agar 
medium (blood agar), some of the bacteria may hemolyze 
(destroy) the red blood cells, and others do not. Thus, 
this medium distinguishes between hemolytic and non-
hemolytic bacteria. Therefore, blood agar medium is both a 
differential medium and an enriched one. MacConkey agar 
is also kept under both differential and selective media. 
Certain indicators are present in this medium, which may 
allow such differentiation. For example, the MacConkey’s 
agar containing lactose and a dye (which changes colour 
when pH drops). The microorganisms that ferment lactose, 

152 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



produce an acid as the end product, which lowers the 
pH and produces a red colony. Microorganisms that fail 
to ferment lactose produce colourless colonies. The dye 
in MacConkey’s agar also inhibits the growth of Gram-
positive bacteria. This medium is, therefore, both selective 
and differential.

(iii) Enrichment media

In enrichment medium, the nutritional environment is 
adjusted in order to selectively enhance the growth of certain 
microorganisms within the mixed inoculum. For example, 
the addition of plant and animal tissue extract into nutrient 
broth and nutrient agar media provides additional nutrients, 
which enhance the growth of fastidious heterotrophic 
bacteria. Blood agar is also an enrichment media.

6.3 sterilisatioN metHods

In any microbial study, all media, working surface, 
glassware and plasticware should be free from 
contaminants by sterilisation.

Usually, sterilisation can be achieved by both physical 
and chemical methods. In physical methods, sterilisation can 
be done by heat, radiation and filtration, while in chemical 
methods, sterilisation can be achieved using chemicals.

Sterilisation by Heat
Sterilisation by heat is considered to be the most effective 
and rapid method for articles that can withstand heat. 
Heat acts by denaturation, coagulation of proteins, by 
exerting oxidative effect and interfering with the metabolic 
reactions that lead to the death of cells. The sterilisation by 
heat is performed by various methods: 

(a) Boiling: Sterilization can be done at 100°C for 30 min 
in boiling water bath. The syringes, rubber goods and 
surgical instruments may be sterilised by this method. 

(b) Autoclaving: Autoclaving is one of the most 
common methods for sterilisation in almost all the 
laboratories. In this method, sterilisation is done 
by steam at temperature higher than 100°C under 
pressure. At atmospheric pressure, water boils 

Microbial culture 153

Reprint 2025-26



(a) (b)

Fig. 6.1: (a) Vertical Autoclave (b) Horizontal Autoclave (Photo courtesy: Dr. Veda P. Pandey)

at 100°C but if the pressure is raised, the boiling 
temperature also increases. In an autoclave, the 
water is boiled in a closed air-tight chamber. At a 
pressure of 15 lb per square inch (psi) inside the 
autoclave, the temperature is raised to 121°C. In 
an autoclave,  the articles are exposed to the steam 
released at this temperature and sterilisation is 
achieved. Autoclaves are of vertical or horizontal 
design and they may be jacketed and non-jacketed 
(Fig. 6.1). In the jacketed autoclave, the steam flows 
surrounding the jacket in which the articles/media 
are kept and they are not directly exposed to steam, 
while in non-jacketed autoclave, the articles/media 
are directly exposed to the steam. The holding 
time in the autoclaving is the time for which the 
entire load in the autoclave is exposed and actual 
sterilisation takes place. The holding time depends 
on the size and types of the load and generally 
exceeds 30 min.

(c) Pasteurisation: This process is used in food and 
dairy industry. Actually, pasteurisation is the 
heating of milk to a temperature for a period of time 
to kill the pathogenic microorganisms that may be 
present in milk. It does not fully sterilise the milk, 
so many living organisms including spores are not 
destroyed. There are two methods of pasteurisation, 

154 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



the holder method (low temperature long time, 
LTLT, heated at 63°C for 30 min) and flash method 
(high temperature short time, HTST, heated at 
72°C for 15 sec) followed by quick cooling. Other 
pasteurisation methods are also available, such as 
Ultra-High Temperature (UHT) at 140–150°C for 
1–3 seconds.

(d) Heating and flaming: Many objects are sterilised in 
the absence of water by dry heat sterilisation.  The 
articles, such as inoculation loops, straight wires, 
tips of forceps and searing spatulas are sterilised 
by holding them in Bunsen flame till they become 
red hot. While, some articles, such as mouth of test 
tubes, flasks, glass slides, etc., are passed through 
the flame for a few times without allowing it to 
become red hot. Hot air oven is also used to sterilise 
glassware.

Sterilisation by Radiation
Two types of radiations, namely, ionizing and non-ionizing 
radiations are used for sterilisation. As radiation does not 
generate heat, so sterilisation by radiation is termed as 
‘cold sterilisation’. Non-ionizing radiations, such as UV 
rays have the germicidal activity in the wavelength range of 
200–280 nm, with 260 nm being the most effective. UV rays 
induce the formation of thymine—thymine dimers, which 
ultimately inhibits DNA replication and induces mutation 
in cells. UV radiation is useful for surface disinfection, i.e., 
to disinfect culture lab, laminar hood, operation theatres, 
virus laboratories and etc. The disadvantages of UV rays 
include their harmful effect on skin and eyes, and reversal 
action of damage due to DNA repair bacterial enzymes. 
Ionizing radiations are of two types, particulate (electron 
beams) and electromagnetic rays (gamma rays). Electron 
beams are used to sterilise syringes, gloves, dressing 
packs, foods and pharmaceuticals, etc. Electromagnetic 
rays have more penetrative power than electron beam, but 
require longer time of exposure. These radiations damage 
the nucleic acid of the microorganism. Electromagnetic 
radiations are used to sterilise disposable Petri dishes, 
plastic syringes, antibiotics, vitamins, hormones, glassware 
and fabrics.

Microbial culture 155

Reprint 2025-26



Sterilisation by Filtration
Filtration is used to sterilise the heat labile substances in 
solutions, such as serum, antibiotics, sugars, urea, etc. 
Filtration does not kill microbes but it separates them 
out based on the size. Membrane filters with pore sizes 
between 0.2–0.45 μm are commonly used to remove 
microbes from solutions. Air can be filtered using High 
Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filters. HEPA filters 
are 99.97 percent efficient for removing particles >0.3 µm 
in diameter. They are usually used in biological safety 
cabinets.

Sterilisation by Chemicals 
Sterilisation/disinfection can also be achieved by 
certain chemicals, such as alcohols, aldehydes, 
heavy metals, etc. Alcohols sterilise the surface 
through cell dehydration, membrane disruption and 
protein coagulation. 70 percent ethyl alcohol is used 
as antiseptic on skin. Isopropyl alcohol can be used 
to disinfect surfaces and clinical thermometers. 
Aldehydes such as 40 percent formaldehyde (formalin) 
is used for surface disinfection and fumigation of 
rooms, chambers, operation theatres, biological safety 
cabinets, etc. Heavy  metals such as mercury, silver, 
arsenic, zinc, and copper are used as germicides. They 
cause precipitation of proteins. Hydrogen peroxide 
solution is used for skin disinfection of wounds and 
ulcers and deodorising wound dressings.

6.4 Pure culture tecHNiques

Bacteria may be cultured using either liquid or solid 
media. Solid media are particularly useful in the isolation 
of bacteria and are also used for their long-term storage, 
while liquid (broth) cultures are used for rapid and large-
scale production of bacteria. 

As you know, the microorganisms in the natural 
habitat, exist as a part of complex ecosystems comprising 
a numerous other microorganisms. Obtaining a pure 

156 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



culture, is important for studying a particular microbe. 
A culture consisting of entirely one strain of organism is 
called pure culture. 

The standard method of obtaining a pure bacterial 
culture is the streak plate method (Fig. 6.2). An 
inoculating loop is used to streak out a drop of bacterial 
suspension or bacterial colony on a solid agar plate in 
such a way that it becomes progressively more dilute. 
After proper incubation at an appropriate temperature, 
due to cell divisions, visible bacterial colonies are 
developed. Colonies are formed because all the progeny 
stay in the same place and the movement of daughter 
cells is not possible on the solid surface. In other 
words, a clump of cells, deposited together, gives rise 
to a colony. Near the end of streak, isolated colonies are 
obtained. 

Streak Streak
Pick up a
bacterial
colony on
sterili s ed loop

Petri dish
containing agar

Loop sterilisation Streak
by ame

Single
colonies Streak

after incubation

Fig. 6.2: The streak plate method

Microbial culture 157

Reprint 2025-26



An alternative method for the isolation of pure cultures 
is the pour-plate method (Fig. 6.3). In this method, the 
original microbial sample is diluted several times to dilute 
the population sufficiently in order to obtain separate 
colonies upon plating. The small volumes (1 mL) of each 
dilution is then poured on the bottom of a Petri plate/dish. 
After that, the melted medium with agar is poured on to the 
Petri plates and mixed gently with a circular motion. After 
incubation at an appropriate temperature, the isolated 
cells grow into colonies, which can be used to establish 
pure cultures. 

1 mL 1 mL 1 mL

Tube 1 Tube 2 Tube 3

Mixed broth 9 ml saline 9 ml saline 9 ml saline
culture

1 mL 1 mL 1 mL
Agar pouring

After pouring
mix with circular
motion

Colonies after
incubation

Plate 1 Plate 2 Plate 3
colonies colonies colonies

Fig. 6.3: The Pour-Plate method

The spread-plate technique is another easy and 
direct way of achieving a pure culture (Fig. 6.4). In this 
technique, a small volume of the diluted bacterial mixture 
is transferred to the centre of a solidified agar plate and 
spread evenly over the surface with a sterile, L-shaped 

158 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Glass spreader

0.1 ml

Spreading

Glass spreader
on flame

Dilute bacterial Isolated colonies
suspension after incubation

Fig. 6.4: The spread-plate technique

glass spreader. The glass rod is usually sterilised by 
dipping in alcohol and flamed to burn off the alcohol. After 
proper incubation at an appropriate temperature, some of 
the dispersed cells develop into isolated colonies. 

6.5 Factors aFFectiNg microbial growtH

Microbial growth may be affected by a number of factors. 
The major factors are described below:

Temperature
Microorganisms are able to grow over a wide range of 
temperatures. The minimum and maximum growth 
temperatures for a microorganism is typically about 
25–45°C. The growth rate increases with temperature until 
the optimum temperature is achieved, and beyond that the 
growth rate declines again due to loss of enzymatic activity. 
The majority of microorganisms achieve optimal growth in 
the range of about 20–45°C and are called mesophiles. 
Some microorganisms would be capable of growing within 
a range of about 40–80°C, with an optimum temperature 
around 50–65°C and are called thermophiles. In addition, 
some are extreme thermophiles that can tolerate 
temperatures above 100°C. 

pH
The growth of microorganisms is strongly influenced 
by the variation in pH of their surroundings. Fungi can 
tolerate a wide range of pH variation when compared to 
bacteria. Most of the microorganisms grow best around 

Microbial culture 159

Reprint 2025-26



neutrality (pH 7). A number of bacteria prefer slightly 
alkaline conditions, but a few are tolerant to acidic 
conditions. On the contrary, fungi generally prefer slightly 
acidic conditions and therefore tend to dominate bacteria 
when these prevail together. The pH of growth media is 
adjusted to the desired value depending upon the type of 
microorganisms by the addition of acid or alkali during 
its preparation. 

Oxygen
Oxygen is present as one of the major constituents (21%) 
of our atmosphere, and the microorganisms that are 
dependent on oxygen for survival, are called aerobes. 
Some microbes are also able to survive in the absence of 
oxygen and called anaerobes. During the culture of aerobic 
organisms, oxygen must be provided. For a shallow layer 
of medium such as that in a Petri dish, sufficient oxygen 
is available as dissolved in surface moisture. But in a flask 
of broth, aerobes will only grow on the surface layers, 
therefore, additional oxygen is provided by shaking or 
mechanical stirring to facilitate uniform growth. Obligate 
anaerobes cannot tolerate oxygen and they are cultured 
in special anaerobic chambers, where oxygen is excluded 
from all liquid and solid media. The facultative anaerobes 
can survive like aerobes in the presence of oxygen, and are 
also able to survive in anaerobic condition. Aerotolerant 
anaerobes are the organisms that are generally anaerobic, 
but they are not inhibited by the atmospheric oxygen as 
they do not utilise it. 

Carbon dioxide
The autotrophic organisms are able to use carbon dioxide 
as a carbon source and when they are grown in culture, 
CO  is provided as bicarbonate in their growth medium or 

2

incubated in a CO  enriched atmosphere.
2

Light
Phototrophic microorganisms require light in order to carry 
out photosynthesis. In the laboratory, during culturing of 
microorganism, one should ensure that light of the correct 
wavelength is used. 

160 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



6.6 tHe growtH curve

When single cell microorganisms are grown in a suitable 
nutrient media with initial limited amount of nutrients, 
cells start growing in number and size at their maximum. 
The growth of cells in an artificial media depends on various 
factors including nutritional factors, environmental 
factors, etc. The growth of cells in nutrient media depends 
on cell concentration and the outcome of this process is 
cellular reproduction. Unicellular organisms divide by 
binary fission, replicate their genetic material, then divide 
into two identical cells, which then divide into four, four 
into eight and so on, leading to an exponential increase 
in the number of cells. This growth of the cultured 
microorganisms can be analysed by plotting the logarithm 
of the number of viable cells versus the incubation time, 
which results in a curve with four distinct phases as lag 
phase, exponential phase, stationary phase and decline 
phase (Fig. 6.5).

Stationary phase

Exponential
(log) phase

Decline/death
phase

Lag
Phase

Time

Fig. 6.5: Microbial growth curve

Lag Phase
Initially, when microorganisms are introduced into fresh 
culture medium, usually increase in cell number is not 
observed immediately, and therefore, this period is called 
lag phase. Due to the lack of cell division, during lag phase, 
there is no net increase in mass, the cell is synthesising 
new components required for cell division. The duration 

Microbial culture 161

Reprint 2025-26

Log number of viable cells



of lag phase varies with the condition of the inoculated 
microorganisms and the nature of the medium. This phase 
may be long if the inoculum is taken from an old culture 
or refrigerated culture. On the contrary, when a young or 
growing microbial culture is inoculated to fresh medium, 
the lag phase may be short or even absent.

Exponential Phase
During the exponential or log phase, the microorganisms 
are growing and dividing at the maximal rate. The 
microorganisms are doubling in number at regular 
intervals during the exponential phase and the growth 
rate is constant. In this phase, the population will double 
in number during a specific time period, which is called 
the generation time or doubling time. For example, the 
doubling time for E. coli is 20 minutes. During exponential 
growth, the doubling time can be expressed as: 

0.693
t =

d


 (logX − logX )
t

m =


µ	 = Specific growth rate 2.303 0

 
t 

X = Cell concentration at time t
t 

X = Initial cell concentration
o 

t = Time taken
t = Doubling time

d 

During this phase, the population is most uniform 
in terms of chemical and physiological properties, and 
therefore, the microorganisms of this phase are usually 
used for biochemical and physiological studies.

Stationary Phase
After a certain time of log phase, the population growth 
ceases and the growth curve becomes horizontal. This 
depends on the overall nutrient availability and other 
factors, as well as the type of microorganism being cultured. 
During the stationary phase, the total number of viable 
microorganisms remains constant due to the development 
of a balance between cell division and cell death. There 
are several factors for the microbial populations to enter 
into stationary phase. One important factor is the nutrient 

162 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



limitation; if any essential nutrient is severely depleted, 
then the population growth will be slow. 

Death Phase
The unfavourable environmental conditions, such as 
nutrient deprivation, accumulation of toxic wastes, etc., 
lead to further decline in the number of viable cells, which 
is the characteristic of decline/death phase. During this 
phase, the death of a microbial population is usually 

Box 2

Measurement of microbial growth
A microbial cell culture undergoing balanced growth is like a chemical reaction where 
substrates present in media are converted to cell mass.

 The parameter that characterises microbial growth is the doubling time, also called 
generation time t . It is time (t ) required in minutes/hours for cell mass or cell number 

d

to double its original value during balanced growth.

  t  = t/n    (n = number of generations)
d

 Specific growth rates µ, is an index of growth of microbes in a particular environment. 
It is defined as the rate of increase of biomass of a cell population per unit of biomass 
concentration. Value of µ is characteristic for each microbe. It depends upon the 
temperature, pH, media composition and O  dissolved in the media.

2

 As the value of µ increases, the microbial culture having specific growth rate has less 
doubling time.

On the basis of value of µ and t  of an organism, the media composition and fermentation 
d

batch time is decided to optimise the production in commercial fermenters.

Example 
If a culture contains 104 cells/mL at t  and 108 cells/ml after 2 h, calculate the specific 

o

growth rate and generation time of the culture.

Solution:

X  = 104 cells/mL
0

X  = 108 cells/mL
t

t = 2 h

(log108 - log104 )
(i) = 2.303

2
(8 - 4)

= 2.303
2

(4)
= 2.303 = 4.606 - 1

hr
2

0.693 0.693
(ii) t = = = 0.15 h

d
4.606

Microbial culture 163

Reprint 2025-26



logarithmic (as it is growth during the exponential phase). 
The accumulation of metabolic waste products may often 
become a factor for the decline of population growth. For 
example, Streptococci can produce lactic acid and other 
organic acids from sugar fermentation, which results in 
the medium becoming acidic and growth is inhibited.

SUMMARY

• Microbiology is the study about small life forms, i.e. 
microorganisms.

• The microorganisms require a source of energy, carbon, 
nitrogen, oxygen, iron, other minerals, micronutrients, and 
water for growth and multiplication.

• Selection of appropriate culture medium for the 
microorganisms depends on the prior knowledge of the 
habitat of the microorganisms.

• Culture media can be categorised based on the chemical 
composition. Media are classified into two types: synthetic 
and complex media. While on the basis of consistency, the 
culture media may be solid, liquid, and semi-solid. Whereas, 
on the basis of their application and functions, the media 
may be divided into selective, differential, and enrichment 
media.

• Sterilisation is of prime importance for any microbial study 
and it is the process, where all the living microorganisms, 
including bacterial spores are killed or removed.

• Sterilisation can be achieved by physical (heat, radiation and 
filtration) and chemical methods. 

• The microbial growth may be affected by a number of 
physical factors, such as temperature, pH, oxygen, etc.

• The growth of the cultured microorganisms can be analysed 
by plotting the logarithm of the number of viable cells versus 
the incubation time, which results in a curve with four 
distinct phases, namely lag, exponential, stationary, and 
death phase.

EXERCISES

 1. Describe the nutritional requirements of microorganisms.

 2. What is culture media? Classify the culture media.

 3. Write an account of the growth curve analysis of a 
microorganism.

 4. Discuss any two methods to isolate a pure culture.

 5. Define sterilisation, disinfection, and sanitisation.

164 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



 6. Give a detailed account on the various methods of 
sterilisation. 

 7. Bacterial strains that do not require any organic 
supplement are called:

 (a) Auxotroph

 (b) Prototroph

 (c) Heterotroph

 (d) Chemotroph

 8. Who was the first to develop the process of colony 
purification on solid media? 

 (a) Louis Pasteur

 (b) Robert Koch

 (c) Fannie Hesse

 (d) Richard Petri

 9. HTST and UHT methods belong to:

 (a) Pasteurisation

 (b) Isolation of pure culture

 (c) Staining of bacteria

 (d) Culture of bacteria

 10. Spontaneous generation was suggested by:

 (a) Francesco Redi

 (b) Lazzaro Spallanzani

 (c) Robert Koch

 (d) Louis Pasteur

 11. Germ theory of disease was suggested by: 

 (a) Francesco Redi

 (b) Lazzaro Spallanzani

 (c) Robert Koch

 (d) Louis Pasteur

 12. Calculate the specific growth rate and generation time of 
a bacterial population in which the number of bacteria 
increases from 104 cells/mL to 107 cells/mL, during 4 
hours of exponentail growth.

(Ans: µ	= 1.72 hrs-1, t = 0.4 h or 24 min)
d 

 13. Assertion: Alcohol production by a batch culture of 
Saccharomyces starts declining steadily even though 
conditions like temperature are optimum.

Reason: Alcohol concentration of around 13% is toxic for 
yeast cells.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but reason is not 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

Microbial culture 165

Reprint 2025-26



 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 14. Assertion: A selection medium containing Ampicillin is 
sterilised by autoclaving. Both ampS and ampR microbes 
show growth on the medium.

Reason: To inhibit the growth of ampS microbe ampicillin 
should not have been autoclaved but sterilised by using 
micro-filters before adding to the medium.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and reason is 
correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but reason is not 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 15. Assertion: Microorganisms are able to grow and multiply 
over a wide range of temperatures.

Reason: Extreme thermophiles can tolerate temperatures 
of above 100°C.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but reason is not 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

166 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26

##7##

Chapter 7 Plant Tissue Culture

Plant tissue culture (PTC) refers to the cultivation of 7.1 Historical 
undifferentiated plant cells, tissues or organs on synthetic Perspective

media under aseptic environment and suitable controlled 7.2 Cell and Tissue 
physical conditions. It is an important tool for both basic Culture Techniques

research as well as commercial applications. Plant tissue 7.3 Nutrient Media
culture is based upon the unique characteristic of a plant 7.4 Culture Types
cell, i.e., totipotency. Totipotency is the ability of a vegetative 

7.5 Applications of 
cell to divide and differentiate into any type of specialised Plant Cell and 
cell or to regenerate into a whole plant. Tissue Culture  

7.1 Historical PersPective

In 19th century, German scientists Theodor Schwann 
and Matthias Schleiden, drew attention to the fact that a 
cell is the basic unit of life and has the capacity to divide 
and grow. During 1890’s, Gottlieb Haberlandt (German 
Botanist), pioneered the field of PTC with his idea to achieve 
continuous cell divisions in plant cells on nutrient media. 
He attempted to culture fully differentiated plant cells on 
simple nutrient media. He laid down several principles of 
plant tissue culture in 1902, like plant cells are capable 
of resuming uninterrupted growth, or it is possible to 

Reprint 2025-26



regenerate embryos from vegetative cells. Later, all of the 

predictions made by him were found to be true as they 

were confirmed experimentally by other researchers. This 
is the reason he is regarded as the ‘Father of Plant Tissue 

Culture’. 

During 1902–1930s, several attempts were made 

to culture the isolated plant tissues, like root or shoot 

tips, and continuously growing plant cell cultures were 

established. The discovery that vitamins and natural 

auxins are necessary for the growth of plant tissues on 
synthetic media gave a significant boost to PTC. During 
1940s –70s, extensive studies were performed to improve 
the existing techniques for developing new methods to 
optimise the nutrient media components for culturing 

plant tissues. Coconut water stimulated the development 

of young embryos and was used with nutrient media for 

in vitro cultures. Later, other natural supplements, like 

corn milk, orange juice, etc., were used for developing 

callus culture of several species, like woody plants and 

herbaceous dicot plants. During 1950s, adenine, kinetin 

and high levels of phosphate were used in nutrient media 

that resulted in the successful initiation of cultures 

from non-meristematic tissues and production of shoots 

or roots. It was also established during this time that the 

morphogenic fate of cultured cells was directly influenced 
by the exogenous balance of auxins and kinetin. It was 
suggested that a relatively high level of auxin to kinetin 
causes rooting, while the reverse led to shooting and 

intermediate levels were responsible for the proliferation of 

callus. This led to the regeneration of new plants through 

tissue culture using various plant tissues or organs as 

starting material in several commercial applications. An 

artificial culture medium developed by Murashige and 
Skoog (MS) was successful for culturing plants and resulted 

in the initiation of tissue culture from a large number of 

plant species. MS media composition is the most widely 

used nutrient media in plant tissue cultures.

168 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Box 1

Major landmark discoveries in plant tissue culture and its applications

Gottlieb Haberlandt proposed that plant cells can be cultured on artificial 
1902

media and developed the concept of in vitro cell culture.

Hanning initiated work on excised embryo culture and later cultured 
1904

embryos from several cruciferous species.

Kotte and Robbins suggested root and stem tips as possible explants to 
1922

initiate in vitro tissue culture.

1926 Went discovered the first plant growth hormone, i.e., Indole Acetic Acid (IAA).

The role of vitamin B as growth supplement in plant tissue culture was 
1934 reported by White. He could successfully establish continuous growing 

cultures from tomato root tips.

1937 White formulated the first synthetic plant tissue culture medium (WM).

Johannes Van Overbeek introduced coconut water as a media component 
1941 and demonstrated its beneficial effects on in vitro tissue culture.

1946 Ball raised whole plants from shoot tips of Lupinus.

1954 Muir successfully induced cell division in mechanically isolated single cells.

Skoog and Miller reported the discovery of Kinetin, which is a type of 
1955

cytokinin and promotes cell division.

Skoog and Miller described chemical control hypothesis of root and shoot 
1957 differentiation by manipulating the ratio of concentrations of auxin and 

kinetin.

Murashige and Skoog formulated MS medium with higher salt 
1962

concentrations.

Guha and Maheshwari produced the first androgenic haploid Datura plant 
1964

by anther culture.

Protoplasts were subcultured in vitro, and plants were regenerated from 
1971

their culture.

Protoplast from two different species of Nicotiana were isolated, fused 
1972

together and somatic hybrids were generated successfully.

Gynogenic haploid plants were successfully cultured from unfertilised 
1976

ovaries of barley by San Noeum.

Melchers and colleagues produced ‘Pomato’, which was a hybrid of potato 
1978

and tomato, and was produced through somatic hybridisation. 

Plant Tissue Culture 169

Reprint 2025-26



The term ‘Somaclonal Variations’ was introduced by Larkin and Scowcroft, 
1981

for the genetic variations introduced during the plant tissue culture. 

Horsh and colleagues produced transgenic tobacco plants. Leaf discs were 
used as explants and were cultured with Agrobacterium tumefaciens.

Klien and colleagues developed high-velocity microprojectile-based DNA 
delivery ‘biolistic gene transfer’ method for plant transformation.

Y. Fujita and Mamoru Tabata established Lithospermum erythrorhizon cell 
1987

cultures for the shikonin production and commercialised it.

Transgenic Bt-cotton was produced by Monsanto and in 2000, it was 
approved by the Government of India for commercial production in India.

1993 Kranz and Lorz produced fertile maize plants through in vitro fertilisation.

Plant tissue culture free plant transformation method ‘Arabidopsis 
Floral-dip’ was developed.

Transgenic rice engineered for the production of provitamin A (beta-carotene) 
in rice endosperm was developed and is called ‘Golden Rice’. 

The first plant produced enzyme was approved for human use. It is used to 
treat a rare lysosomal storage disease called Gaucher’s Disease. 

Somatic embryogenesis was introduced in plant transformation through the 
embryonic genes. 

7.2 Plant cell and tissue culture tecHniques

Virtually any part of the plant like leaf, apical meristem, 
embryo, cotyledon, hypocotyl, etc., can be used as a 
starting material called explant. These explants are 
transferred on to the nutrient media and whole plants 
can be regenerated through in vitro culture. It has been 
observed in various research experiments that different 
plant organs of different plant species respond in 
different ways as per their nutritional requirement and 
physical conditions under in vitro culture conditions. 
However, the response of different plant organs varies 
for in vitro culture. For example, immature embryos 
are more responsive than apical meristem, which are 
generally more responsive than leaf explants on a 
particular tissue culture media and culture conditions. 

170 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Plant regeneration in cultures can mostly be achieved 
by two morphogenetic pathways—organogenesis and 
somatic embryogenesis. Inducing  the formation of various 
vegetative organs from cells or tissues in plant tissue 
culture is called organogenesis. First, the specialised 
cells of explants start dividing under certain specific 
conditions and form a mass of undifferentiated cells. 
This process is called dedifferentiation. This is followed 
by the formation of organ primordia, like shoot or root, 
and is called redifferentiation. Relative concentration of 
growth hormones (especially auxins and cytokinins) play 
an important role in organogenesis.

The process of formation of an embryo from somatic 
cells is called somatic embryogenesis. Resulting embryos 
are called somatic embryos. Somatic embryogenesis follows 
embryogenic pathways of zygotic embryogenesis. Somatic 
embryos are very similar to zygotic embryos, except in their 
place of origin and being larger in size.

Following is the step-by-step procedure that explains 
the in vitro plant tissue cultures using tomato cotyledons 
as explants (Fig. 7.1).
Some of the basic requirements for plant tissue culture are: 

(i) Washing area—the place to wash glassware, 
plasticware and other labware used in PTC. Washed 
labware need to be stored at a clean and dry place.

(ii) Various media components for the preparation of 
Nutrient Media.

(iii) Facility to sterilise nutrient media and store media 
at low temperatures.

(iv) Facilities for maintenance of cultured tissues in 
aseptic conditions under controlled environment, 
i.e., light, temperature and humidity.

Steps of plant tissue culture

 (i) Selection of a suitable nutrient media and its 
sterilisation by autoclaving or passing through 
micropore filters to avoid microbial contamination. 

 (ii) Selection of a starting desired material for tissue 
culture, i.e., explants. Any plant tissue , organ 
or part, which is used in plant tissue culture to 
regenerate mass of dedifferentiated cells, tissues, 
organ or whole plant, is called explant. Most 

Plant Tissue Culture 171

Reprint 2025-26



commonly used explants are root or shoot apical 
meristems, leaves, cotyledons, hypocotyls and 
immature embryos. Fig. 7.1 (a) shows the aseptically 
grown tomato seedlings, which can be used for 
preparing explants.

 (iii) Surface sterilisation of the explant is done using 
suitable disinfectants followed by washing with 
sterile distilled water. Sodium hypochlorite is the 
most commonly used disinfectant for sterilisation of 
explants. Explants harvested from seedlings grown 
in sterile conditions [Fig. 7.1 (a)] need not to be 
sterilised again.

 (iv) Inoculation of explants takes place onto the 
nutrient media (Fig. 7.1 (b)).

Fig. 7.1: Various stages of regeneration of  tomato tissue culture plant: (Photo Courtesy: Dr. Manoj Sharma)

(a) Germination of seeds on the culture medium in a culture bottle.

(b) Explant preparation from germinated seedlings.
(c) Regenerating callus (calli with shoot buds) from inoculated explants.
(d) Regenerating shoots ready to be transferred to rooting media.

(e) Rooting in the inoculated Shoots.

(f) A plantlet transferred to the soil in pot. 

172 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



 (v) Growing the cultures in the plant tissue culture 
room under suitable physical conditions like light, 
temperature and humidity [Fig. 7.1 (c)], small calli 
are regenerated on cotyledon explant on suitable 
tissue culture media.

 (vi) Transfer of growing cultures on to suitable media to 
regenerate shoots, and their elongation.[Fig. 7.1 (d)],

 (vii) Excision of regenerated shoots and transfer onto 
the rooting medium [Fig. 7.1 (e)].

 (viii) Transfer of plantlets to sterilised soil in pots for 
hardening in green house or growth room [Fig. 7.1 (f )] 
followed by their transfer to the field conditions.

7.3 nutrient Media

A variety of nutrients and suitable environmental conditions 
are required for optimal growth and development of an 
explant. Depending upon the type of plant species, like 
monocot or dicot; domesticated or wild, etc., composition 
of the culture media varies. Even different tissues from the 
same plant may have different nutritional requirements 
for optimal growth. Therefore, success of in vitro culture 
of plants mainly depends upon the selection of the right 
composition of culture medium. 
Culture media used for in vitro plant cultures broadly 
contain the following components:

1. Inorganic components
2. Organic supplements
3. Carbon source
4. Plant growth hormones
5. Gelling agents
6. Antibiotics

Many inorganic components are required in large 
amounts (milli molar concentrations) and are categorised 
as macronutrients. These include carbon (C), calcium (Ca), 
hydrogen (H), potassium (K), magnesium (Mg), nitrogen 
(N), oxygen (O), phosphorus (P) and sulphur (S). Several 
other essential inorganic components are required in small 
amounts (micro molar concentrations) and are categorised 
as micronutrients. These include boron (B), cobalt (Co), 
copper (Cu), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), molybdenum (Mo) 

Plant Tissue Culture 173

Reprint 2025-26



and zinc (Zn). Amino acids and vitamins are common 
organic supplements that are used in culture media.

Amino acids serve as nitrogen source and commonly 
used amino acids are arginine, asparagine, glycine or 
proline. Vitamins added in the culture medium are 
thiamine (Vitamin B1), nicotinic acid (Vitamin B3) and 
pyridoxin. For in vitro cultures, sucrose is considered as 
the best carbon source and is used at concentration of 
about 2–5 percent. Other sources for carbon are glucose, 
fructose and mannose.

Plant growth hormones play a vital role in plant’s 
growth and development, and are critical components 
of media. These are required in minute quantities in the 
nutrient media. There are five main categories of growth 
hormones i.e., Auxin, Cytokinin, Gibberellin, Abscisic 
acid and Ethylene. However, auxins and cytokinin are 
most commonly used in plant tissue culture. Ratio of their 
concentrations determines the type of organs produced 
from the cultured cell or tissues. For example, higher 
concentration of cytokinin results in shoot regeneration 
in general. Further, different plant tissues need different 
amount of hormones for their growth and therefore, 
depending upon the type of explant, their concentration 
may vary in the nutrient media. Gelling agent is required 
for solid culture media. Agar is the most commonly used 
gelling agent and is ideal for routine applications. 

Further, pH of the nutrient media is usually adjusted 
to about 5.8 to 6.0. Increase in the pH increases the 
hardness of the medium and decrease in pH leads to 
poor solidification of the media. pH of the nutrient media 
also affects the uptake of the nutrients by plant cells and 
solubility of the media salts. Antibiotics can be used to 
suppress the bacteria and antifungal agents for mould 
infections in cultures. The recipe of plant tissue culture 
media is usually directed by plant species, however (MS) / 
media is the most commonly used media composition in 
plant tissue culture.

7.4 culture tyPes

Plant Tissue Culture may be categorised as organ culture, 
callus culture, cell suspension culture, protoplast 

174 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Box 2

Composition of commonly used Plant tissue culture media  
(White’s and MS Media)

Components White’s Murashige and Skoog (MS)

Amount (mg l-1)

Macronutrients

MgSO ·7H O 750 370
4 2

KH PO - 170
2 4

NaH PO ·H O 19 -
2 4 2

KNO 80 1900
3

NH NO - 1650
4 3

CaCl ·2H O - 440
2 2

Micronutrients

H BO 1.5 6.2
3 3

MnSO ·4H O 5 22.3
4 2

ZnSO ·7H O 3 8.6
4 2

Na MoO ·2H O - 0.025
2 4 2

CuSO ·5H O 0.01 0.025
4 2

CoCl ·6H O - 0.025
2 2

Kl 0.75 0.83

FeSO ·7H O - 27.8
4 2

Na EDTA·2H O - 37.3
2 2

Sucrose 20 30

Organic supplements

Vitamins

Thiamine HCl 0.01 0.5

Pyridoxine (HCl) 0.01 0.5

Nicotinic acid 0.05 0.5

Others

Myoinositol - 100

Glycine 3 2

Plant Tissue Culture 175

Reprint 2025-26



culture, etc. Cultivation of plant organs like roots, anther, 
ovary, embryo, endosperm, seeds, etc., under laboratory 
conditions is called organ culture. Depending upon the 
type of organ, the culture is called root culture, anther 
culture, embryo culture and so on. Various plant parts 
may induce dedifferentiation and form unorganised mass 
of cells called callus. This culture is called callus culture 
and is commonly used for plant regeneration and genetic 
transformation studies.

Single cells can be isolated either from callus or other 
plant parts by mechanical or enzymatic methods. These 
single cells can be cultured in the liquid medium and 
therefore referred to as cell suspension culture. Single 
cells from the cell suspension culture can be used for 
genetic transformation studies, production of secondary 
metabolites or induction of somatic embryos and plants. 

7.5  aPPlications of Plant cell and  
tissue culture

Plant cell and tissue culture are routinely used for several 
applications in plant science. Fig. 7.2 lists some of the 
major commercial applications of plant tissue culture.

Synthetic Seeds Secondary
Metabolites

Genetic
Cryopreservation Transformation

Plant

Tissue Haploid/Triploid
Somatic Embryogenesis

Production
Culture

Somaclonal
Micropropagation

Variations

Virus Free Plants Protoplast Culture

Fig. 7.2: Various  applications of plant tissue culture 

176 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Micropropagation
It is a tissue culture technique that is used to multiply 
plants without sexual reproduction or seed formation. Each 
of the new plant is genetically identical to its parent and can 
be called clone. Traditionally, it is done by using cuttings, 
budding, grafting, corms, tubers or other vegetative 
propagules. However, these traditional procedures are 
laborious, dependent on environmental conditions and  the 
success rate is also low. Micropropagation can be used to 
address the above mentioned problems. It results in rapid 
multiplication of plants within a short period of time in a small 
space. Since it is performed under controlled environmental 
conditions, micropropagation is not season dependent. 
This method is useful for the multiplication of non-fertile 
plants, rare plants, endangered plants or other plants for 
which the character of choice cannot be maintained by 
sexual reproduction (elite plants). Micropropagation has 
been employed successfully in agriculture, horticulture and 
forestry like potato, banana, carnation, chrysanthemum, 
etc. Banana tissue culture technology is very popular for 
the supply of disease-free quality planting materials and 
has been proven to be profitable to the farmers. Banana is 
one of the major tissue culture-raised crops in India. More 
than 400 million plantlets are regenerated annually through 
tissue culture.

Artificial (synthetic) seed production
Artificial seeds are also called synthetic seeds or somatic 
seeds. Using nutrient media with suitable hormones, 
somatic embryos are produced on the callus tissue. They 
are produced by artificial encapsulation of the somatic 
embryos with a protective coating of suitable matrix, like 
calcium alginate. In addition, nutritional components 
and growth regulators are also added, which provide 
nutrition for the embryos and mimic the structure of the 
conventional seed (Fig. 7.3). Suitable explants are selected 
for establishing callus culture.

Artificial seeds can be stored for a long time in suitable 
conditions and can be utilised for the rapid and mass 
propagation of elite plants species, as well as hybrid 
varieties. Artificial seed production is also helpful for 
asexually propagating plants. For example, artificial seed 
production has been successfully used in carrot, grapes, 
sandalwood, etc. 

Plant Tissue Culture 177

Reprint 2025-26



Antibiotic and anti-fungal agents

Articial seed coat

Gelling agent
Nutrient elements

Somatic embryo
Growth regulators

Fig. 7.3: Schematic representation of an artificial seed

Haploids or triploid productions
Unlike diploid plants, which have two sets of chromosomes 
(2n), haploid plants have only one set of chromosomes, 
like the number of chromosomes in the gametes of a 
diploid plant. Haploids are used to produce genetically 
homozygous diploid plants by doubling the chromosome 
number through the colchicine application. These haploid 
plants, after doubling their chromosome number, are 
called double haploids. This enables the recessive traits 
to express too. These homozygous diploid plants are 
frequently used in cross breeding. They can be produced 
through anther culture, pollen culture or ovary culture. 
Many varieties of broccoli, brassica, sorghum, rice and 
tobacco are a few examples.

Somatic hybrids
Sexual reproduction involves the fusion of haploid gametes 
to produce zygote, which develops into a new individual. 
However, it is limited to similar individuals as inter-specific 
or inter-generic crosses do not occur because of species 
barrier. Therefore, good characters from one species 
cannot be transferred to another species through sexual 
reproduction. Somatic hybridization provides an excellent 
alternative for obtaining hybrids from distantly related 
species. 

Essentially, the plant cell wall is digested with enzymes 
like cellulases and pectinases, and protoplasts are isolated. 
When brought in close contact, these protoplasts tend to 
fuse with each other with help of poly ethylene glycol (PEG) 

178 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



irrespective of the source of protoplasts. This Protoplast A Protoplast B

method of fusion of protoplasts from somatic 
cells is called somatic hybridisation. Resulting 

+
fusion products are regenerated to form hybrid 
plants and called somatic or parasexual hybrids 
(Fig. 7.4). Inter-specific somatic hybrids were PEG

generated for the first time in 1972 by Carlson 
and his associates. Since then, several somatic 
hybrids have been produced in a number of 
crops like potato, rice and brassica. Fused Protoplasts

Several traits are controlled by genes located 
in the cytoplasmic organelles, like cytoplasmic 
male sterility is controlled by mitochondrial Fusion of Loss of Nuclei B

genome whereas, chloroplast  encodes many key Nuclei A and B

proteins involved in photosynthesis. In sexual 
reproduction, cytoplasmic genomes are mostly 
contributed by the female parent. However, 
protoplast fusion provides an opportunity to Hybrid Cybrid
combine nuclear genome of one parent with 
mitochondrial or plastid genome of another 
parent. This process of combining cytoplasmic 
genomes of one parent with nuclear genome 
of the other parent is called cybridisation and 
resulting hybrids are called Cybrids (Fig. 7.4).

Somatic Somatic 

Production of virus-free plants Hybrid Plant Cybrid Plant

Most of the crop plants are infested with 
Fig. 7.4: Schematic representation 

viruses that result in huge losses in terms 
of protoplast fusion and 

of productivity and yield. For vegetatively development of somatic hybrid 

propagated plants, virus infection is a serious or somatic cybrid plants. 
Protoplast A and B are from two 

problem, as the entire clonal population raised 
different plant species

from infected stocks will also be infected with 
viruses. Therefore, production of virus free plants is 
important to maintain the yield and quality of vegetatively 
propagated plants. Interestingly, these virus particles have 
uneven distributions throughout the plant body. Generally 
apical or axillary meristems are free from virus particles. 
Therefore, very small part of apical meristems (less than 1 
mm long) can be used as explant to initiate cultures for the 
production of virus free plants. This method is important 
and has been successfully used for clonally propagated 
crops, like sugarcane, banana and potato.

Plant Tissue Culture 179

Reprint 2025-26



Somaclonal variations (Genetic variability)
Terminally differentiated somatic cells in plants 
accumulate genetic variations. As these are not associated 
with germline cells, these variations are not transferred 
to next generations. However, when these somatic tissues 
having genetic variations are used as explant for tissue 
culture, these variations are passed to and are expressed 
in newly regenerated plants. In addition, long-term in vitro 
callus and cell suspension cultures may introduce genetic 
variations, which are also expressed in newly regenerated 
plants. Therefore, the genetic variations observed in plants 
regenerated from cultured somatic tissues are called 
somaclonal variations and such regenerated plants are 
known as somaclones. These variations can be used 
to engineer novel traits and have been utilised for crop 
improvement.

The somaclonal variations can be both, a boon and a 
bane. If the objective of in vitro tissue culture is clonal 
multiplication of the plant with a specific trait, these 
variations can result in unwanted traits and compromise 
the commercial value of the clones. However, somaclones 
may be screened for novel phenotypes of agronomic 
or commercial advantages. Agronomically important 
somaclones have been identified in several crops and have 
been released as new cultivars. Some of the examples are 
disease resistant sugarcane, banana and tomato, and 
improved yield in wheat.

Production of secondary metabolites
Plants produce thousands of specialised compounds that 
are not necessary for its survival, but are important for 
plant’s interaction with its environment. These compounds 
(alkaloids, flavonoids, tannins, steroids, latex, resins, etc.) 
are called secondary metabolites, and are often involved in 
plants, defense against biotic and abiotic stress conditions. 
These compounds are economically valuable products 
and have several industrial applications, such as drugs, 
flavours, dyes, insecticides, fragrances, etc. Plant cell or 
tissue-based cultures can be a potential source of specific 
secondary metabolite and are routinely used to synthesise 
metabolite of interest. Hairy root system produces 
high-quality secondary metabolites and is routinely 
used in the industry. As tissue cultures are maintained 

180 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



under controlled conditions, metabolite can be produced 
independent of variations caused by environment, season 
or disease. 

Many of the metabolites like alkaloids are of immense 
use in medicine. These compounds are produced in very 
small amounts in plants and therefore, overharvesting of 
these plants has brought them to near extinction. Further, 
these compounds are very expensive. It is also known that 
cultured cells or tissues can accumulate phytochemicals at 
levels, which are higher than their parent plants. Therefore, 
cell or tissue culture-based production of secondary 
metabolites of industrial importance can be a possible 
solution and can make it affordable for common man too. 
Many such compounds have been produced in cell or tissue 
culture-based systems and a few are listed in Box 3.

Box 3

Examples of industrially important secondary plant metabolites produced through 
cell and tissue cultures

S. 
Product Name Plant Source Uses

No.

1. Artemisin Artemisia sp. Antimalarial

2. Azadirachtin Azadirachta indica (Neem) Insecticidal

 3. Berberine Coptis japonica Antibacterial, anti-inflammatory

4. Capsaicin Capsicum annum (Chilli) Rheumatic pain treatment

5. Codeine Papaver sp. Analgesic

6. Digoxin Digitalix lanata Cardiac tonic

7. Diosgenin Dioscorea deltoidei Antifertility

8. Scopolamine Datura stramonium Antihypertensive

9. Quinine Cinchona officinalis Antimalarial

10. Shikonin Lithospermum erythrorhizon Antimicrobial

11. Taxol Taxus sp. Anticarcinogenic

12. Vincristine Cathranthus roseus Anticarcinogenic

Plant Tissue Culture 181

Reprint 2025-26



SUMMARY

• Plant tissue culture (PTC) refers to the cultivation of 
undifferentiated mass of plant cells, tissues or organs on 
artificial media under aseptic and controlled environmental 
conditions.

• Any plant organ like leaf, apical meristem, embryo, cotyledon, 
hypocotyl, etc., can be used as an explant and whole plants 
can be regenerated in vitro.

• Plant tissue culture media used for in vitro cultures is mainly 
composed of inorganic and organic supplements, carbon 
source, plant growth hormones, vitamins, gelling agents, 
antibiotics, etc.

• Tissue culture can be categorised as organ culture, explant 
culture, callus culture, cell suspension culture, protoplast 
culture or single cell culture.

• Plant tissue culture is routinely used for several applications 
in plant science, such as in micropropagation, synthetic 
seed formation, protoplast culture, haploid or triploid 
culture, virus free plants production, secondary metabolites 
production, etc.

• Plant growth hormones play a vital role in plant tissue 
culture especially, different ratios of auxin and cytokinin are 
employed for either root or shoot regeneration depending 
upon the need or objective.

• Somatic hybridisation in plant tissue culture can be exploited 
to produce distantly related plants as well.

• Cultured cells or tissues may accumulate a higher 
concentration of secondary metabolites than its parents, 
under optimum environmental and nutritional conditions.

• Several compounds of industrial importance have been 
successfully produced in tissue culture, like taxol, 
azadirachtin, shikonin.

EXERCISES

 1. What is plant tissue culture?

 2. Describe the various components of plant tissue culture 
media.

 3. What are the general steps of plant tissue culture?

 4. Describe various applications of plant tissue culture.

 5. How are somatic hybrids developed?

 6. What are somaclonal variations?

182 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



 7. Define explant and list five most commonly used explants 
for plant tissue culture. 

 8. Describe somatic embryogenesis and their application for 
the development of synthetic seeds. 

 9. Describe briefly the role of pH in nutrient media. 
 10. Describe the method of somatic hybridization and its 

advantages.

 11. What are somaclonal variations and discuss their role for 
improving crops. 

Multiple Choice Questions

 12. Which of the following tissues can be used as explant for 
regenerating complete plant through tissue culture?

 (a) Shoot apical meristem

 (b) Embryo
 (c) Leaf segments

 (d) All of the above

 13. Which of the following explants are suitable for the 
production of virus free plants?

 (a) Leaf segments

 (b) Seeds

 (c) Apical meristem

 (d) Stem cuttings

 14. The process of combining the nuclear genomes of one 
parent with the cytoplasmic genome of the other parent 
is called as:

 (a) Cybridization

 (b) Micropropagation

 (c) Regeneration

 (d) None of them

 15. Which of the following components is not essential for 
Murashige and Skoog media?

 (a) Inorganic nutrients

 (b) Carbon source

 (c) Antibiotics

 (d) Organic Nutrients

 16. Decrease in the pH of the media may result in: 

 (a) Increase in hardness of the solidified medium.
 (b) May interfere with the solubility of media salts. 

 (c) Interfere with solidification of the medium and 
results in poor solidification.

 (d) All of the above. 

Plant Tissue Culture 183

Reprint 2025-26



 17. Somatic clonal variation can be present in which of the 
following plants? 

 (a) Plants regenerated through tissue culture

 (b) Plant generated through seeds 

 (c) Plant generated through sexual reproduction that 
includes fertilisation of egg with pollen nuclei.

 (d) None of the above.

 18. In vitro tissue culture can be used for the generation of:

 (a) Virus free plants

 (b) Somatic hybrid plants

 (c) Synthetic seeds

 (d) None of the above.

 19. Assertion: Somatic seeds are encapsulated by a layer 
called seed coat.

Reason: Seed coat is the protective layer that prevents 
water desiccation.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 20. Assertion: Virus free plants can be produced by growing 
apical/axillary meristem of virus infected plants.
Reason: Apical/axillary meristems lack vascular bundle 
that is required by the virus to replicate.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

184 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26


##8##
Chapter 8 Animal Cell Culture

8.1 Historical 
Animal cell culture is described as the in vitro maintenance 

Perspective 
and proliferation of animal cells that will continue to grow 

8.2 Culture Media
outside the living organism if supplied with appropriate 
nutrients and growth conditions. The process of growing 8.3 Physical 

Environment for 
cells under laboratory conditions is termed as Cell Culture. 

Culturing Animal 
It is carried out in vitro as opposed to in vivo (within the Cells 
living). It deals with the isolation of cells from animal 

8.4 Equipment Used 
tissue, surgical intervention for removal of tissues or for Cell Culture
organs from an animal and their placement into an 8.5 Types of Animal 
environment (media) in order to enhance their survival Cell Cultures and 
and proliferation. Cell Lines

A homogenous population of cells is termed as a clone, 8.6 Cell Viability 

when it is derived from a single parental cell. Therefore, all Determination

cells within a clonal population are genetically identical. 8.7 Advantages 

The growth rate of animal cells is relatively slow and usually of Animal Cell 
Culture

requires 18 to 24 hours to divide. This makes animal cell 
culture vulnerable to contamination, as a small number of 8.8 Applications 

of Animal Cell 
bacteria would soon outgrow a larger population of animal Culture 
cells.

Reprint 2025-26



Box 1

Immortal cells of Henrietta Lacks

An African–American woman named Henrietta Lacks was diagnosed with terminal 

cervical cancer in 1951. She was treated at John Hopkins University by a doctor named 

George Gey who snipped cells from her cervix without her permission. Gey discovered 

that Lacks’ cells could not only be kept alive, but also could be grown indefinitely.
For the past many years, ‘Lacks’ cells have been cultured and used in various 

experiments ranging from determining the long-term effects of radiation to testing the 

live polio vaccine. Her cells were commercialised and have generated millions of dollars 

in profit for the medical researchers who patented her tissue.

Essential requirements for optimal growth of cells are 
regulated temperature, proper substrate for an attachment 
of cells on appropriate growth medium and an incubator 
that maintains the correct pH and defined osmolality. 
Cell culture helps to study the basis of regulation of cell 
proliferation, differentiation, and product formation in 
controlled conditions and therefore, has gained a dominant 
position in many branches of the life science research. 
This technology has now emerged as a tool in the area 
of molecular genetics, immunological analysis, surgery, 
bioengineering, and pharmaceutical industry. 

8.1 Historical PersPective

The animal cell culture became a routine laboratory 
technique in 1950s after George Gey established the first 
human cell line (HeLa) from cervix cancer of the patient, 
Henrietta Lacks, that led to several important discoveries 
in medical sciences. The need for cell culture, especially at 
large scale, became apparent with the need for viral vaccines. 

The cell culture technologies have been used in 
various areas, including the assessment of the efficacy 
and toxicity of new drugs, manufacture of vaccines and 
biopharmaceuticals, etc. With the development of cell 
culture technology, a variety of culture media have been 
designed. The culture medium supports cell survival and 
proliferation, as well as cellular functions.

Growth factors, such as nerve growth factor, epidermal 
growth factor, insulin-like growth factor, fibroblast 

186 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



growth factor (FGF), platelet-derived growth factor, and 
transforming growth factor (TGF) were discovered one 
after another and their addition led to increased cellular 
proliferation. In 1976, the development of serum-free 
media was accelerated. 

8.2 culture Media

The most significant and critical stage in cell culture is 
the selection of a suitable growth medium for their proper 
in vitro culture. Appropriate media selection will depend on 
the kind of cells to be cultured and on the requirement for 
culture, such as growth, differentiation and production of 
desired products like pharmaceutical compounds. A typical 
culture medium contains a complement of vitamins, amino 
acids, glucose, inorganic salts, serum (as a source of growth 
factors) and hormones. Additionally, medium helps to 
maintain the pH and the osmolality. Media can be natural 
consisting of natural biological substances, like plasma, 
serum and tissue extract or artificial/synthetic composed 
of a basal medium with supplements such as hormones, 
growth factors, serum etc.

Media supplements
As you know, the culture media contains a combination of 
amino acids, salts, glucose, vitamins and supplemented with 
other nutrients. The requirements for these components is 
based on the cell lines that are to be cultured and thus, 
there are extensive number of media formulations available. 

Some additional components (hormones, growth 
factors, and signaling substances), which are not present 
in the basal media and serum, are required that help in 
the proliferation and maintaining normal cell metabolism.

Serum is one of the most important components of cell 
culture media. Serum is considered a good source for amino 
acids, proteins, vitamins, carbohydrates, lipids, hormones, 
growth factors, etc. Serum provides several binding proteins, 
like albumin, transferrin, which can carry other molecules 
into the cell. In addition, serum also supplements adhesion 
factors that help the cells to adhere to substratum before 
they begin to divide. Fetal bovine serum is commonly used 
to support the growth of cells in culture.

Animal Cell Culture 187

Reprint 2025-26



Box 2 Historical perspective of animal tissue culture

Name Year Breakthrough

Balanced salt solution with a composition similar to that of 
Sydney Ringer 1882 body fluids and kept frog hearts after dissection and removal 

from the body

Roux 1885 Medullary plate of chick embryo in warm saline

Jolly 1903 In vitro cell survival and cell division of salamander leucocytes

Published experiments showing frog embryo nerve fibre growth 
Ross Harrison 1907

in vitro 

• Cultured connective tissue cells for extended periods and 
showed heart muscle tissue contractility over 2–3 months

Lewis and Lewis 1911
• The first liquid media consisted of sea water, serum, embryo 
extracts, salts and peptides

Aseptic techniques to tissue culture. Use of trypsin, embryo 
Alexis Carrel 1912 extracts/animal serum
Rous and Jones 1913 Use of antibiotics: penicillin/streptomycin

1916 Use of laminar air-flow cabinets
Trypsinization was used to produce homogenous cell types; 

1940
tissue culture media

Were the first to clone mouse L-cells. Tumor cells could give 
Katherine 1940s– 

rise to continuous cell lines. Used non-malignant rodent cell 
Sanford, et al. 50s culture to study the effects of carcinogens/viruses.
Margaret Gey Observed contact inhibition among fibroblasts — the beginning 

1948
and George Gey of quantitative cell culture experimentation

Abercrombie and 
1952 Polio virus in human E-cells; production of polio vaccine

Heaysma

Human cell lines for the production of vaccines — human and 
Enders, et al. 1954

veterinary

Hayflick and 
1955 Described the finite lifespan of normal human diploid cells.

Moorhead

Published the methods for maintaining differentiated cells (of 
1961

tumor origin)

Harry Eagle 1962 Developed defined media
1970 Described attachment factors and feeder layers

Buonassisi, et al. 1962 Studied the differentiation of normal myoblasts in vitro

Littlefield 1964 HAT selection

David Yaffe 1968 Human foetal lung fibroblasts
Kohler and 

1975 First hybridoma capable of screening a monoclonal antibody
Milstein 

188 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Box 3 Various types of media

Category Definition Type Description Disadvantages/
Advantages 

Natural Consisting Coagulant Plasma separated from The greatest 
media of natural or clots heparinised blood, serum disadvantage of 

biological and fibrinogen natural media is poor 
substances, Tissue Extracts of chicken reproducibility and 
such as extracts embryos, liver, spleen, reduced uniformity 
plasma, serum, and bone marrow because the exact 
and embryo composition of these 

Biological Plasma, serum, lymph, 
extract

fluids amniotic fluid, and natural media are not 

pleural fluid known.

Synthetic Composed Serum- Human, bovine, equine, The quality of serum 
media or of a basal containing or other serum is used varies from batch to 
Artificial medium and media as a supplement batch and deteriorates 
media supplements, within one year. 

such as serum, Therefore, every batch 
growth factors, of serum needs fresh 
and hormones testing. 

Serum-free Crude protein fractions, It has the ability 
media such as bovine serum to make a medium 

albumin or α- or selective for a 
β-globulin, are used as particular cell type, 
supplements since each cell type 

appears to require a 
different recipe. 

Xeno-free Human-source 
media components, such as 

human serum albumin, 
are used as supplements 
but animal components 
are not allowed as 
supplements

Protein- Undefined components, 
free media such as peptide fractions 

(protein hydrolysates), 
are used as supplements

Chemically Basal media Balanced salt solution 
defined Phosphate buffered (BSS) is composed 
media saline (PBS), Dulbecco’s of inorganic salts 

phosphate buffered that maintain the 

saline (DPBS), Hank’s physiological pH and 

balanced salt solution osmotic pressure. 

(HBSS), Earle’s balanced The physiological role 

salt solution (EBSS) played by the inorganic 
ions is to maintain the 
membrane potential. 

Animal Cell Culture 189

Reprint 2025-26



Complex media They also work as 

• Eagle’s Minimum cofactors in enzyme 
Essential Medium reaction and in cell 
(EMEM)  attachment. Na+, 
• Dulbecco’s Minimal K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, Cl−, 
Essential Medium, S0 4−, SO −2 PO −3 

2 4 4

• Roswell Park Memorial and HCO − are the 
3

Institute (RPMI-1640), inorganic molecules 
• Ham’s Nutrient Mixtures involved. To maintain 
(Hams’s F-12) the osmolality, 

concentration of NaCl 
is generally adjusted.

However, there are certain disadvantages of serum 
in media:

• Serum contains insufficient amount of cell specific 
growth factors and thus, cannot be used as stand alone 
for culture.

• It may also contain cytotoxic compounds and some 
growth inhibiting factors that will cause the inhibition 
of the cultured cell growth and proliferation.

• Serum may contain high risk of contaminants, like 
various virus, fungi and mycoplasma.

• The serum in the culture media may interfere with 
the purification and isolation of cell culture products 
including pharmaceutical compounds and thus, some 
additional approaches are applied for the isolation of 
cell culture products.

Even though not essential for the growth of cells, use of 
antibiotics such as penicillin and streptomycin, is common 
in culture medium to control the growth of contaminants 
such as bacteria and fungus.

8.3 PHysical environMent for culturing 
aniMal cells

Animal cell culturing under in vitro conditions involves 
simulating suitable micro-environments, nutritional, 
physical, and hormonal conditions to enable optimal 
growth of cells. Therefore, controlling the temperature, 
osmolality, pH, gaseous requirements, a supporting 
surface and giving protection to the cells from physical, 
chemical and mechanical stresses are needed.

190 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Temperature

CO  incubators are used to grow mammalian cells at 
2

37°C, as this temperature simulates the body temperature 
of Homo sapiens. Moreover, most of the cells have been 
derived from the warm-blooded animals that will grow 
optimally at this temperature.

Osmolality

Osmolality of the medium has substantial effect on cell 
growth and function. It maintains the integrity of the cell 
membranes. If the outside osmotic pressure becomes lower 
or higher than the pressure that is maintained inside the 
cell, it will swell or shrink accordingly. The osmolality 
of the medium used is determined by the formulation of 
media. Both, glucose and salt are the major donors to the 
osmolality of the medium, even though amino acids also 
contribute significantly. Generally, all the commercial 
media are formulated so as to have a final osmolality of 
approximately 300 mOsmol. Osmolality can be measured 
by an osmometer.

Buffering systems

For optimum culture conditions, the regulation of pH is 
critical and is achieved by one of the following buffering 
systems:

(A) Natural buffering system

In a natural buffering system, gaseous CO  balances 
2

with the CO /HCO-
2 3 content of the culture medium. The 

concentrations of CO , HCO-, and pH are interrelated. By 
2 3

increasing the external/exogenous CO , the pH will be 
2

reduced making the medium acidic.
The culture media with a natural buffering system need 

to be maintained in air with 5 –10 percent CO , which is 
2

usually maintained by a CO  incubator. Natural buffering 
2

system is low cost and non-toxic. The presence of pyruvate 
in the medium results in the increased endogenous 
production of CO  by the cells. Thus, the use of pyruvate 

2

is advantageous because of  less dependency on the 
exogenous supply of CO .

2

Animal Cell Culture 191

Reprint 2025-26



Box 4

Bicarbonate buffering follows Le Chatelier’s principle. Increased acidity in the medium is 
established by an increase in Hydrogen (H+) ions; free bicarbonate ions then react with the 
extra H+ ions to form carbonic acid ‘shifting the reaction to the left’, stabilising pH. Similarly, 
a decrease in H+ ions will result in a ‘shift to the right’. 

(B) Chemical buffering system

In the chemical buffering system, a zwitter ion, 
4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), 
is used that has a superior buffering capacity in the pH 
range 7.2–7.4, and with HEPES, a controlled gaseous 
atmosphere is not required. It is relatively expensive and 
toxic at a higher concentration for some cell types.

Phenol red

Phenol red is generally used in commercial media as a pH 
indicator. This is effectively used to monitor the pH change 
owing to the metabolic activities during cell growth. Due to 
the presence of phenol red, the medium changes its colour 
as pH changes. At acidic pH levels, phenol red turns the 
medium yellow, while at alkaline pH levels, the medium 
turns pink. Medium is bright red at optimal pH—7.4. 
(Fig. 8.1) 

HO OH+ pH indicator - Phenol Red (C H O S)
19 14 5

Optimum cell growth approx. pH 7.4 (Bright red)

Below pH 6.8 Above pH 8.2
SO-

3

6.8 8.2

(yellow) (pink)
(a) (b)

Fig. 8.1: (a) Structure of phenol red, (b) Phenol red as pH indicator

192 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



8.4 equiPMent used for cell culture

Cultures should be maintained and examined daily for the 
colour of the medium to understand their morphology and 
density of cells that are grown in culture flasks, Petri dishes 
or multi-well plates of several sizes and shapes (Fig. 8.2) at 
an appropriate temperature, humidity and gas mixture 
(typically, 37°C, 95% and 5% CO  for mammalian cells) in 

2

an incubator respectively. Culture conditions differ 
extensively for each cell type, and these variations in 
conditions for any particular cell type may result in the 
expression of altered phenotypes.

(a) (b)

Fig. 8.2: (a) Culture flask, microplates and Petri dishes, (b) Cells scraper

An ideal animal cell culture laboratory should have 
equipment like laminar hood, CO  incubator, an inverted 

2

microscope, autoclave, centrifuge, etc. They are discussed 
in the following sections.

Laminar Flow Hood or biosafety cabinets
The entire work of animal tissue or cell culture should 
be done aseptically in the laminar hood. A laminar flow 
cabinet provides controlled filtered air in which the levels 
of particulates, microbes and contamination of all kinds 
are regulated and kept to a minimum by constant air 
filtration with industrial-grade HEPA (High Efficiency 
Particulate Air) filters. Laminar hoods operate by drawing 
air under negative pressure, into the top of the unit. This 
air initially passes through a pre-filter, which traps fungi, 
bacteria and dust particles. Air passed through this pre-
filter is continuously fed by fans/ blowers through HEPA 

Animal Cell Culture 193

Reprint 2025-26



filters into the enclosed cabinet, creating a sterile work 
area for the operator. The laminar flow chamber is usually 
enclosed on both sides and kept under constant positive 
pressure to prevent the inflow of contaminated room air.

In Vertical laminar flow Fig. 8.3(b), the sterilised air is 
passed vertically down on the work area - vertical (down 
flow). This is considered to be safer as the air does not 
blow the directly towards the person carrying out the 
experiments. In the horizontal flow hood, air is directed 
towards the person doing the experiments [Fig. 8.3(a)]. 
Hence, hence horizontal (crossflow) are not popular as 

Exhaust
Intake of room air

Primary filter

Valves prevent 
back flow of air 
HEPA filter

Exhaust fan Exhaust fan

Re-circulating fan

HEPA Re-circulating

HEPA filter
Recycling air

Air from work 
area falls directly Fiber glass screen
on the worker

Work area Work area

Stand

Shelf for pump

(a) Horizontal laminar flow (b) Vertical laminar flow

Fig.8.3: Laminar Flow Hoods  (a) Horizontal (b) Vertical

194 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



they offer no protection to the operator from the potential 
hazards of some of the cultured cells.

CO  Incubators
2

Incubators for cell culture work depend on an external 
supply of CO  so as to maintain a fixed level of CO  in 

2 2

the incubator. To 
maintain sterile 
handling area and Fan
cleanliness, the 
CO  cylinder should Control

2 Perforated shelves panel
be kept outside 
the laboratory and 

Door locking system
the gas should be 

Door
piped through. The 

Asbestos door gasket
essential functions 
of the incubator Cabinet
are to maintain— 
the sterility of the 
chamber, a constant 
temperature, an 
atmosphere with a 

Fig. 8.4: CO  incubator
5–10% level of CO , 2

2

and high relative humidity (~95%) (Fig. 8.4). The medium 
is further buffered with sodium bicarbonate/carbonic acid 
and the pH must be strictly maintained.

Inverted microscope
A cell culture laboratory essentially requires a good quality 
inverted microscope with phase-contrast optics and 
preferably a photographic facility (Fig. 8.5). The morphology 
of cell, granularity, degree of spreading, membrane 
blebbing, the proportion of multi-nucleates, vacuolation, 
and so on, can be regularly monitored for understanding 
the  signs of stress in cells. Cell morphology is sensitive 
to the alterations in culture conditions hence, problems 
can be easily detected. Early indications of a microbial 
contamination can also be spotted with a good phase-
contrast microscope. Regular checking of cultures under 
the microscope can help to avoid the loss of irreplaceable 
material by allowing a problem to be noticed at an early 
stage. Also, experiments done on unhealthy cells may give 

Animal Cell Culture 195

Reprint 2025-26



variable or erroneous results. When choosing a microscope, 
select the long or extra-long working distance condenser 
so that the flasks and even roller bottles can be viewed. 
Normally a 20x magnification objective is sufficient; their 
depth of field is often too low to obtain a sharp image of 
all but the most flattened. A good, low-power, wide-field 
objective is extremely useful for scanning culture colonies.

Light source

Field aperture

Ocular lens (Eye piece)
Condenser f ocus

Diopter adjustment Condenser

Interpupillary adjustment

Stage

Objective lens
Beam splitter lever

Coarse and ne
adjustment

TL lamp brightness

Fig: 8.5: Inverted microscope

8.5 tyPes of aniMal cell cultures and 
cell lines

The animal cell cultures and cell lines are broadly classified 
as primary and secondary cell cultures and cell lines. 

(i) Primary cell cultures

Primary cell culture is obtained directly from the host 

tissue. The cells dissociated from the parental or host 
tissues are grown in a suitable culture media in a container 
and thus, obtained culture is called primary cell culture. 

196 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



This type of culture contains mostly heterogeneous cells 
and these cells are similar to their parents and is called 
primary cell lines. For the preparation of primary cultures 
and cell lines, a tissue is dissected in sterile conditions 
followed by mechanical or enzymatic disaggregation. The 
tissue can simply be chopped and the pieces attached to a 
dish. Now cells will grow out from the fragment and may be 
used directly for culture. The fragment of tissue is called 
explant that may be transferred to a fresh dish. Primary 
cultures can also be made by disaggregating tissue with 
the help of enzymes, such as trypsin or collagenase, etc., 
and the cell suspension are allowed to adhere, and spread 
out on the substrate. Cells may grow as adherent cultures 
or may remain in suspension.

(ii) Secondary cell culture
When a primary culture is sub-cultured or passaged, the 
resulting culture is called secondary cell culture. During 
sub-culturing, a portion of cells are transferred to a new 
vessel having fresh growth medium for continual growth of 
cells. Sub-culturing of primary cells leads to the generation 
of secondary cell lines. During the passage, the cells with 
highest growth capacity predominate, leading to genotypic 
and phenotypic uniformity in the population. As the cells 
are sub-cultured at regular intervals, they may become 
different from the original cell.

On the basis of the culture life span, the cell lines are 
categorised into two types:

(a) Finite cell lines 

The cell lines with a limited number of cell division and 
having a limited life span are called finite cell lines. As the 
cells pass several times, they lose their ability to proliferate 
(i.e., senescence). Cell lines derived from primary cultures 
of normal cells are finite cell lines.
(b) Continuous cell lines

Some cells of the finite cell line undergo transformation 
and resume the ability to divide indefinitely, and become 
a continuous cell line. This type of transformation or 
mutation can occur spontaneously or can be chemically or 
virally induced. Cell cultures prepared in this way can be 
sub-cultured and grown indefinitely as permanent cell lines 

Animal Cell Culture 197

Reprint 2025-26



and are immortal and tumorigenic. The continnous cell 
lines are less adherent and can also grow in suspension; 
they become fast growing, less demanding for nutrients 
and are able to grow up to higher cell density. 

Adherent cells

These cells are anchorage dependent and proliferate as a 
monolayer and they require the attachment to a solid or 
semi-solid substrate for proliferation. These cells adhere 
to the culture vessel with the help of extracellular matrix, 
usually derived from tissues that are immobile and present 
in the network of connective tissue, (e.g., fibroblasts and 
epithelial cell types). As the bottom of the culture vessel 
is covered with a continuous layer of cells with one cell 
in thickness, known as monolayer cultures. A majority 
of continuous cell lines grow as monolayers. As they are 
single layers, such cells can be transferred directly to a 
coverslip to be examined under microscope.

Suspension cells

Suspension cells, also called anchorage-independent 
or non-adherent cells, are not attached to the surface 
of the culture vessels and float in the culture medium. 
Hematopoietic stem cells (derived from blood, spleen 
and bone marrow) and tumor cells are the examples of 
suspension cells. These cells grow faster, as they do not 
require frequent replacement of the culture medium and 
are homogeneous in nature.

Subculture

After the isolation of cells and subsequent culture, the cells 
can proliferate under appropriate conditions and these 
adhere to the available substrate to reach confluence. 
After a few days, the cells form a monolayer and overgrow 
becoming crowded, and this can be unfavourable to their 
growth, leading to cell death. At this point, the cells need 
sub-culturing or passaging, which is the process of using 
enzyme, e.g. trypsin, to enable the cells to detach from the 
old medium. It is then removed and the cells are transferred 
to a fresh flask after centrifugation and addition of fresh 
media. This is commonly termed as ‘splitting’ as the cells 
of one flask are equally split into two flasks for culturing. 

198 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



A passage number refers specifically to the number of 
times a cell line has been sub-cultured. For the passaging 
of adherent cells, first all the cells are detached/dissociated 
from the surface of the culture vessel by enzymatic activity 
(trypsin, trypsin + EDTA, etc.) or mechanical means (using 
cell scraper, shaking, vigorous pipetting, etc.) and after 
that they are transferred into fresh media.

Fig: 8.6: Step involved in Subculture/Passage

Cryopreservation

Very low temperatures (–180 to –196°C) are required to 
store cells. Liquid nitrogen is used for freezing cells at low 
temperatures as the formation of ice crystals is reduced 
below –130°C. Freezing can cause cell mortality due to the 
damage caused by the formation of ice crystals, alterations 
in electrolyte concentration, dehydration, and pH changes. 
To nullify the effects of freezing, glycerol or Dimethyl 

Animal Cell Culture 199

Reprint 2025-26



sulfoxide (DMSO) as cryoprotective agents are added. 
Typically, the freezing medium contains 90% serum and 
10 percent DMSO. Preferably, healthy cells growing in log 
phase should be used and the medium should be replaced 
24 h before freezing. Also, the cells should be slowly cooled 
from room temperature to –80°C to allow the water to move 
out of the cells before they freeze. Frozen cells should be 
thawed as rapidly as possible by placing the vial containing 
them into a 37°C water bath with moderate shaking. This is 
to minimise ice and crystal formation, which may damage 
cells. After thawing, the cells can be transferred directly 
into a tissue culture vessel containing suitable media for 
further growth.

8.6 cell viability deterMination

The measurement of cell viability, i.e., the determination 
of living, plays a vital role in cell culture. The cell viability 
measurements can be applied to evaluate the live 
status of culture cells. This is required to determine the 
effectiveness of a pesticide or insecticide, to evaluate the 
damage due to toxins as well as to evaluate the potential 
of a drug, etc. Usually, the cell viability assay or test 
should be performed at regular intervals to check whether 
the cells are alive or dead. Following are the two types of 
viability assay:

(a) Dye exclusion viability assays
In this process, a dye or stain is used that enters the cell 
and usually intercalates with the DNA in the nucleus. The 
internalisation of the dye into the cell indicates loss of 
cell membrane integrity that causes cell death. In other 
words, live cells exclude the dye, while dead cells allow 
the dye to enter hence, it is called dye-exclusion assay. 
Some examples of dye or stains are trypan blue (Fig. 8.7), 
propidium iodide, 7-aminoactinomycin D (7-AAD), acridine 
orange, etc.

200 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



dead cell

live cell

Fig.8.7: Cell viability by trypan blue exclusion assay (20X magnification)

(b) Metabolic viability assays
Metabolic viability assays rely on the ability of cells to execute 
a specific biochemical reaction that can be measured 
by various means including absorbance, fluorescene 
or luminescence methods (Fig. 8.8). These methods are 
developed to estimate the  cell number based on the cellular 
content of enzyme or substrate and subsequent extraction 
of the dye one such method is MTT assay in which a 
yellow-coloured water-soluble salt 
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl)-2,5-
diphenyltetrazolium bromide [MTT] 
reacts with the mitochondrial 
dehydrogenase enzymes of live 
cells, which reduces them to 
purple-coloured insoluble formazan 
crystals, which are precipitated and 
dissolved in DMSO. Dehydrogenase 
content is consistent among the cells Increasing number of cells per well

of a specific type and the amount of 
formazan reduced is proportional to Fig. 8.8: Result of metabolic viability assays. Colour 

is directly proportional to the number of cells
the cell number.

Animal Cell Culture 201

Reprint 2025-26

Replicates



8.7 advantages of aniMal cell culture

The advantages of animal cell culture are:

• Can be grown under controlled physico-chemical 
environment.

• Can proliferate into a homogenous genetic population. 

• Available in adequate numbers to conduct chemical 
studies.

• Easy production of biopharmaceuticals.

• Ethical clearance not required.

However, there are a few limitations that are as follows:

• It is a highly sensitive technique, and even small 
changes can reduce the productivity.

• May not be a holistic representation of in vivo 
phenotype/genotype.

8.8 aPPlications of aniMal cell culture

Animal cell culture has diverse applications in various 
areas. Some are listed below:

• As a model system for the study of interactions 
between cells and diseases causing agents as well as 
their drugs.

• As a convenient and economic tool to study virus 
research

• As a useful technique for vaccine production on a large 
scale

• As a production house for various medically important 
protein pharmacueticals. The important ones are listed 
in Table 8.3.

Table 8.3: Pharmaceutical proteins and their therapeutic use 

Proteins Animal cells used Applications

Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH) CHO cells Infertility

Human Growth Hormone (HGH) CHO cells GH deficiency
Erythropoietin (EPO) CHO cells Anemia

Factor VIII CHO cells Hemophilia A

Factor IX CHO cells Hemophilia B

Interleukin 2 (L-2) CHO cells Cancer therapy

Tissue Plasminogen Activator (tPA) CHO cells Stroke

Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) Hybridoma cells Cancer therapy & 
Autoimmune diseases

* CHO — Chinese Hamster Ovary

202 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Erythropoietin (EPO) is a glycoprotein hormone 
secreted by kidney under hypoxic (shortage of oxygen) 
or anoxia (lack of oxygen) conditions caused by anaemia 
that induces RBC production (erythropoiesis) and wound 
healing. EPO stimulates the bone marrow to produce 
more red cells and thereby increase the oxygen-carrying 
capacity of the blood. EPO is used for treating certain types 
of anaemia caused by chemotherapy in cancer patients, 
treatment of AIDS, and even in chronic renal failure. 
Recombinant human EPO (r-HuEPO) has been produced 
using Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cell line. The use of 
r-HuEPO is advantageous over blood transfusion as it does 
not require donors or transfusion facilities, and the risk of 
transfusion-associated disease is minimised. 

Factor VIII for Haemophilia A, is a common inherited 
genetic disorder in which Factor VIII required for blood 
clotting is not produced in the body. Like EPO, Factor VIII 
is also a glycoprotein and may be produced in CHO cells.

Factor IX for Hemophilia B or Christmas disease is a 
bleeding disorder caused due to the deficiency of factor IX. 
Recombinant Factor IX produced in CHO cells is used to 
treat haemophilia B.

Tissue Plasminogen Activator (tPA) is a serine 
protease that catalyses the conversion of plasminogen to 
plasmin which is responsible for dissolving blood clots. It 
is approved for use in 
certain patients having 
a heart attack or stroke. Introduce into

tPA was the first drug mammalian cells

to be produced through Plasmid tPA gene
insert Mammalian cells

mammalian cell culture. Plasmid containing in Petri plate

Production and mode of tPA gene insert

action of tPA is given in 
Fig. 8.9.

Scale up

Transfer in fermenter

Mammalian cells
secreting tPA

tPA
Plasminogen               Plasmin Fibrin               Dissolution of blood
(Inactive precursor enzyme)                   (clot) (clot)

Fig. 8.9: Production and mechanism of action of tPA

Animal Cell Culture 203

Reprint 2025-26



Therapeutic MAB – OKT3
Muromonab-CD3 (OKT-3) is a murine monoclonal 
antibody directed against CD3 receptor. It is used as an 
immunosuppressant drug that is given intravenously to 
reverse acute rejection of transplanted organs, such as 
kidney, heart  and liver. When OKT–3 is bound to CD3, the 
T-cell receptor (TCR) undergoes endocytosis resulting in 
an inert T-cell and acts by blocking the function of T cells 
which play a major role in acute graft rejection (Fig. 8.10). 
This prevents subsequent recognition. T cells are then 
eliminated by phagocytosis. After OKT–3 therapy is over, 
T cell function usually returns to normal within a week. 
OKT–3 was the first monoclonal antibody to be approved 
for the treatment of acute rejection in clinics.

DONOR RECIPIENT

Kidney
transplant

Kidney
graft

Intravenous (IV)
infusion of OKT –3
in peripheral vein for
kidney transplant

Fig. 8.10: Use of OKT–3 during kidney transplantation (KT)

Trastuzumab (brand name is Herception) is a 
monoclonal antibody approved for therapy of early-stage 
breast cancer that is Human Epidermal growth factor 
Receptor 2-positive (HER2+). Normal cells also express 
HER2 but cancer cells overexpress HER2+ along with 
dysregulation of receptor activation. These cell surface 
receptors receive signals that stimulate the cells to 

204 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



proliferate. Trastuzumab works by attaching itself to HER2 
receptors and blocking them from receiving growth signals. 
The result is impaired growth of breast cancer.

SUMMARY

• Animal cell culture is in vitro maintenance and proliferation 
of animal cells using an appropriate nutrient media.

• The basic requirement for optimal growth of animal cells 
include temperature, pH and appropriate growth medium.

• Animal cell media can be categorised into two major 
categories, namely natural media and artificial or synthetic 
media.

• Natural media consists of naturally occurring biological 
fluids, such as plasma, tissue extract, etc., and it is suitable 
for the culture of a wide range of animal cells.

• Artificial or synthetic media is made up of various nutrients 
(both organic and inorganic), vitamins, salts, O  and CO , 

2 2

serum, carbohydrates, cofactors, etc., and it can be modified 
according to purpose and it is divided into four categories 
namely, serum containing, serum free, chemically defined, 
and protein-free media.

• The cell culture can be classified as primary cell culture and 
secondary cell culture (cell line).

• Primary cells can grow either as an adherent monolayer or 
in a suspension.

• Secondary cell lines are derived from primary cells after 
sub culturing.

• On the basis of the life span of culture, the cell lines are 
categorised into finite and continuous cell lines.

• The cell viability measurement, i.e., the determination of 
living or dead cells, is very significant in cell culture and 
is done via dye exclusion or viability assays and metabolic 
viability assays.

• Cell culture technology has applications in various areas, 
such as molecular genetics, immunological analyses, gene 
therapy, bioengineering, pharmaceutical industry, etc. 

• Animal cell culture plays an important role in research and 
development of drug and also helps to improve the health 
and quality of life of patients suffering from various diseases, 
such as cancer, genetic disorders, etc.

Animal Cell Culture 205

Reprint 2025-26



EXERCISES

 1. What is animal cell culture?

 2. Describe animal cell culture media and their types.

 3. Write the advantages and disadvantages of serum in the 
culture media.

 4. Describe any two chemically synthesised media.

 5. What is primary cell culture? Also discuss as to how it is 
developed.

 6. What is subculture or passaging of cells?

 7. Differentiate between finite and continuous cell lines.

 8. How is cell viability measurement performed?

 9. Write a detailed account of application of cell culture.

 10. The example of animal cell culture media is: 

 (a) DMEM

 (b) MS media

 (c) LB Media

 (d) All of the above

 11. Name the type of culture that is prepared by inoculating 
directly from the tissue of an organism to culture media.

 (a) Primary cell culture

 (b) Secondary cell culture

 (c) Cell lines

 (d) Transformed cell culture

 12. Sodium bicarbonate is added to animal cell culture 
media to 

 (a) keep cells stuck to the plastic

 (b) promote the uptake of CO  into animal cells
2

 (c) maintain the correct pH when CO  is present
2

 (d) keep iron soluble

 13. Which of the following is NOT present in growth medium 
for animal cell culture?

 (a) Inorganic salts

 (b) Bicarbonate 

 (c) Carbon source

 (d) Starch

 14. Disaggregating of cells can be performed by:

 (a) Physical disruption

 (b) Enzymatic digestion

206 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



 (c) Treating with chelating agents

 (d) All of the above

 15. The approach in which genes are transferred into animals 
to obtain a large scale production of the proteins encoded 
by these genes in the milk, blood, etc., is called 

 (a) In situ culture

 (b) Molecular pharming

 (c) Gene therapy

 (d) Hybridoma technology

 16. Which of the following is a protein-free animal cell culture 
media? 

 (a) RPMI-1640 Media

 (b) MS media

 (c) LB media

 (d) None of the above

 17. MTT assay is used for

 (a) Cell viability test

 (b) Monitoring of variation in pH of culture media 

 (c) Transformation screening

 (d) Cell dissociation from substratum 

 18. Passaging of animal cells in animal cell culture is 

 (a) Sub-culturing of the cells

 (b) Isolation of cells

 (c) Passing the cells from culture tube to Petri dishes

 (d) Counting of cells 

 19. Which of the following is NOT the major function of 
serum?

 (a) Enhance cell attachment 

 (b) Stimulate cell growth

 (c) Promotion of tuber and bulb formation

 (d) Provide transport proteins 

 20. Assertion: Serum is the most important component of 
culture media.

Reason: Serum is a good source of nutrients and also 
helps in cell proliferation and cell-matrix attachment.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

Animal Cell Culture 207

Reprint 2025-26



 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 21. Assertion: Cell lines derived from the primary culture of 
normal cells are finite cell line.
Reason: Some cells of the finite cell line undergoes 
transformation and retain the ability to divide indefinitely.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

208 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26


##9##
Chapter 9 Stem Cell Culture and
Organ Culture

Stem cell study forms an exciting and attractive area of 9.1 Stem Cell Culture
contemporary biomedical research that has enormous 9.2 Organ Culture
potential for both basic and translational research. Stem 
cells can be used for alleviating suffering from many 
diseases that currently have no effective therapy. The field 
has progressed to the clinic and it is very important that 
the basics of stem cells be reinforced by excellent science 
and rigorous standards of clinical research. Besides this, 
organ culture is another modern approach that involves 
developing a part or the whole organ using tissue culture 
techniques. In this chapter, we are going to study in detail 
about stem cell culture and organ culture along with their 
applications.

9.1 Stem Cell Culture

Life forms are characterised by the ability to reproduce 
itself. One of the key features of sexual reproduction is 
the formation of zygote through the process of fertilisation 
resulting from the fusion of the male gamete (sperm) and 
female gamete (oocyte). Formation of embryo from the zygote 
involves cell division resulting into the formation of two 

Reprint 2025-26



celled, four celled, eight celled organism so on. Ultimately, 
these daughter cells differentiate into a variety of cells, 
such as muscle cells, skin cells, liver cells, cardiovascular 
cells, epithelial cells, etc. However, during the process of 
differentiation, cells vary in their potential to make final 
cells such that some cells become ‘mature’ while some 
remain ‘immature’. Such ‘immature’ cells which have the 
potential to differentiate into a wide range of specialised 
cell type, are called stem cells. These stem cells have the 
potential for self-renewal via mitotic cell division and then 
differentiate into a wide range of specialised cell types.

Historical perspective

Stem cells have been known to procreate more interest, 
inspection and debate than any other area of scientific 
study. The first stem cells were isolated from blood cells. 
At present, scientists all around the world are working 
on various types of stem cells to revolutionise the area of 
regenerative medicine by using the potential of stem cells 
to regenerate the tissue or organ. The story of this amazing 
journey has been detailed in the form of a flow chart to 
reveal its most salient moments through the voice of some 
of the pioneers in this exciting field (Box 1).

Stem cells are non-specialised cells with an inherent 
property of self-renewal and potency, i.e., they have the 
potential for self-renewal via mitotic cell division and then 
differentiate into a wide range of specialised cell types. Stem 
cells are present in most of the multi-cellular organisms 
and are able to endure adverse conditions for long-time 
periods. In humans, stem cells are found in umbilical cord, 
placenta, inner cell mass of the early embryo, few tissues 
of foetus and in some adult organs. 

Due to the virtue of differentiation, stem cells can be 
useful for treating and understanding the diseases and 
can be used to:

• develop new cells in vitro to replace the damaged 
tissues or organs. 

• study the cause of genetic defects in cells as well as to 
study the cause of diseases and their treatments.

• test new lead molecules as drugs.

210 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Box 1

2017

Clinical trials with hESCs
2015

Clinical trial with hESCs continued
CRISPR/cas9 gene editing in hESCs

CRISPR/cas9 technology applied
to hESC gene editing

Organoids from hESCs
Generation of organoids

from hESCs for modeling fetal organ 2014
morphogenesis

Clinical trials with hESCs
First clinical trial with hESCs was initiated

2013

Derivation of SCNT-hESCs
First derivation of hESCs by 2012

therapeutic cloning
Nobel Prize
Nobel Prize awarded to Dr. Shinya Yamanaka
and Sir John Gurdon for the discovery that

2010 mature cells can be reprogrammed to
become pluripotent

Naive state hESCs
First report of naive state

2009
hESCs

Clinical trials with hiPSCs
First clinical trial with hiPSCs

2007 was initiated
Generation of hiPSCs

Generation of human iPSCs
2006

Xeno-free culture conditions for hESCs
First conditions developed to completely

2004 eliminate the use of animal products for
Germ cell potential hESC culture

Human ESCs can not only differentiate
into ecto- endo-and mesoderm, but also 1998

towards the germ cell lineage
Derivation of hESCs
Derivation of the

Historical Timeline of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). [human Induced pluripotent stem 
cells (hiPSCs); Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer (SCNT)]

9.1.1 Stem cell classification

Stem cells may be classified depending upon the source 
and potency (Fig. 9.1).

Classification based on source

On the basis of the source, stem cells have been categorised 
into three major groups— the embryonic stem cells, the 

Stem cell culture and Organ Culture 211

Reprint 2025-26

H I S T O R I C A L T I M E L I N E O F h E S C s



Brain subventricular
zone of lateral ventricle
hippocampus

Inner cell
mass

Midbrain Blood Bone
Retina marrow

Umbilical
Blastocyst Expand and Cortex cord

manipulated stem Skin
cell in vitro

(a) Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) (b) Fetal stem cells (c) Adult stem cell

(a). Based on source

Zygote
Pluripotent

Totipotent

Totipotent 4-Stage Cell Morula

Fetus

Multipotent

Adult

Multipotent
and unipotent

(b). Based on differentiation potency

Fig 9.1: Various type of stem cells

fetel stem cell and adult stem cells. There is one more group 
called fetal stem cells. Embryonic stem cells are also known 
as early stem cells and are present in the inner cell mass 
of blastocyst after around five days of development. Adult 
stem cells or mature stem cells are present in the umbilical 
cord, placenta after birth and in mature body tissues.  As 
the embryonic stem cells have the property to differentiate 
into any tissue of the body, they are more promising for 
clinical applications than adult stem cells. However, the 
use of embryonic stem cells in humans is limited because 
of technical safety and some ethical dilemma. On the 

212 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



contrary, there are no controversies regarding the safety 
and ethical issues associated with adult stem cells. Adult 
stem cells were thought to be irreversible, dedicated to 
a specific lineage. However, now they have been shown 
to exhibit plasticity, i.e., stem cells from one tissue can 
differentiate and produce cells of a completely different 
tissue.

(a) Embryonic stem cells

Embryonic stem cells are classified as self-reproducing 
pluripotent cells and are possibly immortal. The human 
embryonic stem cells are derived from the embryo that is 
blastocyst. The distinctive features of embryonic stem cells 
are as follows:

1. These cells can be isolated from the inner cell mass 
or epiblast of  the blastocyst.

2. These cells are pluripotent in nature and have the 
ability to give rise to all the three germ layers, i.e., 
ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm. 

3. They have the capability of self-renewal and exhibit 
stable diploid chromosome. 

4. They retain the characteristics of embryo founder 
cells even after extensive manipulation. 

5. Depending on the conditions of the in vitro environ-
ment, they can self-renew or differentiate into 
multiple tissue types.

(b) Fetal stem cells

Cells derived from a fetus that retains the ability to 
divide, proliferate and provide progenitor cells and can 
differentiate into specialized are called fetal stem cell. The 
embryo is referred to as a fetus after the eighth week of 
development. Once a fetal stem cell has been harvested, 
it has the potential to live indefinitely in the laboratory. 
Fetal stem cells can be isolated from fetal blood and bone 
marrow as well as from other fetal tissues, including liver 
and kidney. Fetal blood is a rich source of haemopoietic 
stem cells (HSGs), which proliferate more rapidly than 
those in cord blood or adult bone marrow.

Stem cell culture and Organ Culture 213

Reprint 2025-26



(c) Adult stem cells

Adult stem cells are precisely called somatic stem cells, 
because they can come from children or umbilical cord and 
not from adults only. They are undifferentiated multipotent 
or totipotent stem cells. The adult stem cells are present 
all over the body after embryonic development and replace 
and regenerate the damaged tissues or dying cells by cell 
division. These cells have two basic characteristics: ability 
to self-renewal without compromising with stemness and 
ability to differentiate into mature morphologically and 
functionally dissimilar tissue specific cells. The main role 
of adult stem cells in an organism is to preserve and repair 
the tissue in which they reside. Therefore, these cells 
maintain cellular homeostasis throughout the lifetime of 
mammals. The highest frequency of adult stem cells is 
present in the bone marrow.

The embryonic stem cells are defined by their origin 
but the origin of adult stem cells in some tissues is still 
under examination. The adult stem cells can either be 
hematopoietic or mesodermal in origin.

(i) Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)

Hematopoiesis, the process of formation of the different 
types of blood cells occur in bone marrow. Bone marrow 
contains hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic stem cells. 
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) give rise to different types 
of blood cells - RBCs, monocytes, neutrophils, acidophils, 
basophils, lymphocytes and platelets. Non-hematopoietic 
stem cells are originated from common mesodermal 
precursor cells.

(ii) Mesenchymal stem cells

MSCs have the ability to self-renew, exhibit multi-lineage 
differentiation and are extremely proliferative. These cells 
can be isolated from a variety of tissues, such as bone 
marrow, adipose tissue, umbilical cord etc. The major 
advantages of MSCs include their genetic stability, avoid 
allo-rejection, compatible in tissue engineering applications 
and are capable of repairing many vital tissues. They are 
thought to be responsible for wound healing, growth and 
replacing cells that are lost through daily wear and tear and 
pathological conditions. MSCs are important for making 

214 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



and repairing skeletal tissues, such as cartilage, bone and 
fat found in  the bone marrow. Because of these functions, 
they have been shown to be effective in the treatment of 
tissue injury and degenerative diseases.

Classification based on differentiation 
potency of stem cells
On the basis of the ability of self-replication and 
differentiation into various tissues, stem cells have been 
categorised into totipotent, pluripotent, multipotent and 
unipotent. Each of them has been described in the following 
sections.

Totipotent stem cells
Totipotent (toti = whole, potent = able to) stem cells are 
the most versatile form and have the utmost potential 
for differentiation that permits the cells to produce both 
embryo and extra-embryonic membranes, and all the 
post-embryonic tissues and organs that form an entire 
functional organism. For example, zygote has the potential 
to develop into a complete organism.

All cells of the early embryo are totipotent until the 
eight-cell stage, after that they begin to specialise and form 
blastocyst. After nearly four days, the inner cell mass of 
blastocyst becomes pluripotent.

Pluripotent stem cells
Pluripotent (pluri = several, potent = able to) stem cells have 
the potential to differentiate into almost all cell types of 
the embryo except the cells of the extra embryonic support 
tissues, (placenta and yolk sac). These cells can give rise to 
all the germ layers but are not able to form extra-embryonic 
tissues, such as placenta, as a consequence, they cannot 
give rise to a complete organism like totipotent stem cells. 
The inner cell mass of blastocyst gives rise to tissues of the 
adult organism while the outer layer trophectoderm forms 
the placenta. The pluripotent stem cells go on dividing, 
until they begin to specialise in the gastrulation stage. 
Examples comprise embryonic stem cells and cells that 
are derived from the ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm 
germ layers that are formed in the beginning stages of 
embryonic stem cell differentiation.

Stem cell culture and Organ Culture 215

Reprint 2025-26



Multipotent stem cells

The multipotent cells (multi = many, potent = able to) have 
the ability to differentiate into a closely related family of 
cells. These are the plastic and more differentiated stem 
cells. These multipotent stem cells can specialise into 
various types of cells within the specific cell lineage. For 
example, multipotent hematopoietic (adult) stem cells can 
develop into various types of blood cells, such as red blood 
cells, white blood cells and platelets. Similarly, neural 
stem cells can give rise to neurons, oligodendrocytes and 
astrocytes. After differentiation, the abilities of these cells 
are restricted to the cells of its specific lineage.

Unipotent stem cells

It is an undifferentiated cell present in the differentiated 
tissue with the property of dividing repeatedly. Unipotent 
stem cells have the ability to only produce cells of their own 
type and also have the property of self-renewal needed to be 
labelled as stem cell. They can self-renew and differentiate 
into specialised cells of the tissue, such as epidermal stem 
cells, muscles and endothelial, etc. The repetitive division 
in unipotent stem cells make them a promising candidate 
for therapeutic use in regenerative medicine. 

It should be remembered that totipotent and pluripotent 
stem cells belong to the embryonic life of the organism, 
whereas multipotent and unipotent stem cells are found in 
the adult life. In general, multipotent and unipotent stem 
cells are termed as adult stem cells or somatic stem cells.

9.1.2 Characteristics of stem cells

Over the past several years, a great deal of attention 
has been paid on the differentiating ability of the adult 
stem cells. Plasticity of adult stem cells is the presumed 
ability of tissue specific stem cells to attain the fate of cell 
types distinct from the tissue of origin. Differentiation of 
one cell type against its fate into other cell type requires 
massive molecular rearrangement within the cells, 
for which the competence of the responding cells 
and micro-environmental cues are most important. 
For example, all the types of bone marrow cells are not 
competent for differentiating into neurons or hepatocytes. 
Similarly, the competent bone marrow cells do not 

216 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



undertake differentiation program against fate, unless 
they are exposed to inductive microenvironment. Some of 
the alternative fate changing pathways by somatic cells to 
switch lineages are trans-determination, trans-
differentiation, dedifferentiation, heterogeneity, versus 
gene level pleiotropy and fusion. The first is trans-
determination, in which a stem cell that is programmed 
to produce certain lineages, switches to another stem 
cell and gives rise to the cell types of that precursor, 
i.e., its potential is redirected. The second pathway is 
trans-differentiation, in this process a differentiated 
cell can achieve the phenotype of another differentiated 
cell. Dedifferentiation is common in lower vertebrates 
but rare in mammals. By dedifferentiation process, 
adult stem cells revert back to master cells from which 
they originate and the master cells can differentiate into 
other cell types. Heterogeneity is the most acceptable 
explanation for the plastic nature of adult stem cells. One 
of the gold standards for plasticity of adult stem cells is 
its clonal level purity. Normally, the purity of stem cells 
is determined by the presence and absence of the specific 
surface markers. When plasticity between two cells 
originated from the same germ layer can be explained by 
clonal level impurity, it is known as pleiotropic. Fusion 
is an alternative mechanism proposed for the plasticity in 
adult stem cells.

9.1.3 Applications of stem cells

The goal of any stem cell therapy is to repair a damaged 
tissue that cannot heal itself. Ongoing research on stem cell 
treatments give hope and confidence to the patients who 
would generally not get treatment to cure their diseases but 
just to improve the symptoms of their chronic illness. Stem 
cell therapies involve more than simply transplanting cells 
into the body and directing them to grow new, healthy tissue. 
It may also be possible to persuade the stem cells already 
in the body to work overtime and produce new tissue. There 
are a number of stem cell therapeutics developed, but most 
of them are at experimental stages and costly, with the 
notable exception of bone marrow transplantation. Many 
medical researchers predict that soon the embryonic and 
adult stem cells will be able to treat muscle damage, cancer, 
Huntington’s disease, Type 1 diabetes mellitus, Parkinson’s 

Stem cell culture and Organ Culture 217

Reprint 2025-26



disease, cardiac failure, celiac disease, neurological 
disorders and many more. Before the application of stem 
cell therapeutics in clinical medicine, further research 
is required to understand the stem cell behaviour upon 
transplantation and the mechanisms of stem cell interaction 
with the injured or diseased micro-environment. Some 
clinical applications of stem cell therapies are detailed as 
follows.

Box 2

Step  1 Step  2 Step  3

MEFs MEFs are transferred to Incubated for
are digested by 0.25% the 10cm dishes and adjusted to 2.0–3.0 hrs at 37°C

trypsin/EDTA to single cells 8×104–1.1 ×105 cells/cm2

Step  4 Step  5 Step  6

Added MMC (10 mg/mL) to Rapidly aspirated and discard Washed with PBS  5 times
medium and incubated the medium containg MMC
for 0.5–3.5 hrs at 37°C and non-adherent cells

Step  7 Step  8 Step  9

Adherent cells are digested Transfered the cells into a tube Cryopreservated
by 0.25% trypsin/EDTA and centrifuge for later use

Maintenance of cell culture (Mouse Embryonic Fibroblasts: MEFs, Phosphate Buffer Saline: PBS, 
Macromolecular Crowding: MMC, Ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid: EDTA)

218 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Neurological diseases

The stem cells may become a good alternative therapeutic 
candidate for the treatment of neurological diseases. 
For example, the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) 
disease is a progressive neuromuscular disease, which is 
characterised by the loss of motor neurons in the brain 
and spinal cord. The investigation for the treatment of ALS 
using bone marrow stem cells and induced pluripotent 
stem cells (iPS cell or iPSCs) is under clinical trials. 

During the spinal cord injury cases, the  nerve fiber bundles 
are damaged, which lead to paralysis. The investigation using 
adult stem cells to regenerate new nerve cells and trigger the 
growth of severed nerve fibers is being carried out.

Stem cells therapies are being used for the eye disease 
treatments. In one of such cases an improved vision was 
observed with the transplantation of retinal pigment 
epithelial cells derived from the embryonic stem cells and 
retinal stem cells. This observation brings a hope for new 
therapeutics for eye diseases.

Wound healing or skin replacement

The skin (keratinocyte) stem cells are present in the hair 
follicle and these stem cells are removed after plucking hair 
and are cultured. After culture of these cells, they can be 
used as equivalent to the patients, own skin which has less 
problem of rejection. Thus, the stem cell become a possibility 
to develop skin from a patient’s plucked hair. Stem cells are 
a better alternative for faster healing of the skin injuries, 
genetic disorders, and burnt wounds with lower inflammation 
levels as compared to the conventional skin grafts that fail to 
restore the complete composition of the dermis lost.

Cardiovascular Diseases

The cardiovascular diseases are basically characterised by 
ischemia and heart muscle injury leading to hypertrophy 
and congestive heart failures. The traditional and standard 
treatments for this are surgical procedures that repair the 
blocked arteries, medications that reduce fluid retention 
and lifestyle changes. With the advent of stem cells, a better 
therapy is under investigation that aim to re-establish the 
lost function of heart tissue and blood vessels.

Stem cell culture and Organ Culture 219

Reprint 2025-26



Auto-immune Disorders

An auto-immune disorder occurs when the immune system 
of the body becomes over reactive and considers its own 
healthy tissues as foreign and attacks them.

Type 1 Diabetes

Type I diabetes is caused by the degradation of insulin-
producing pancreatic beta cells by body’s own immune 
system. For treatment, insulin administration is an 
effective strategy but optimisation of doses of insulin is 
one of the major limitations, because the amount of insulin 
depends on the glucose level. Thus, its treatment with 
the cells derived from haematopoietic stem cells is being 
explored.

Multiple Sclerosis 

Multiple sclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease that 
occurs in brain or spinal cord. This disease is due to 
over-activation of body’s own immune system, in which 
the myelin sheath of the neurons get damaged. For the 
treatment, the bone marrow stem cells and neural stem 
cells are being investigated to regenerate the neurons with 
a proper myelin sheath.

Arthritis

In rheumatoid arthritis, the symptoms are chronic pain, 
inflammation of the joints, which are mainly due to the 
destruction of cartilage by the immune system. The 
currently used treatment strategies involve drugs that 
reduce the pain and inflammation. But the stem cells 
can be differentiated into cartilage making cells, mainly 
chondrocytes, thus the use of stem cells could be a better 
alternative.

In pharmaceutical industries, the stem cells have 
evolved as a suitable model to investigate the potential or 
mode of action of drugs and have become an improved 
alternative against the limitation of the ethical challenges 
of animal models. In the current scenario, pharmaceutical 
industries emphasise the use of stem cells for drug 
screening. Furthermore, the cardiomyocytes originated 
from the human embryonic stem cells are used as a 
model for cardiac diseases. The neuronal cells originated 

220 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



from stem cells are used as working model for neuronal 
disorders.

Stem Cell Research Challenges

In the current research scenario, the stem cell research 
is an emerging area with various applications, but it has 
some challenges yet to be resolved. One of the major 
challenges is immunological rejection, in which the stem cell 
transplants are rejected by the recipient’s immune system. 
Thus, to resolve it, immunosuppressive treatments are 
given to recipients, that make them prone to microbial 
infections. However, the use of inducing pluripotent stem 
cells (derived directly from the recipient’s own cells) may be 
one strategy to resolve the above limitation of rejection to 
some extent. The second major challenge is the behaviour 
of stem cells. The normal characteristics of a stem cell 
may have limitations for certain applications. For example, 
the embryonic stem cells, which divide indefinitely, might 
induce tumour growth. The safety of stem cells during 
application is also one of the challenges, as stem cells are 
prone to microbial infection that leads to various infectious 
diseases in the recipients. 

9.2 Organ Culture

So far, you have studied the different aspects of cell culture 
which deals with the in vitro maintenance and proliferation 
of isolated cells using appropriate nutrient media. In cell 
culture, although cell-to-cell interaction is possible, but 
the in vivo structural complexity is lacking which is the 
main limitation of cell culture. Conventional human cell 
cultures that are generally used to establish differences in 
species, are also constrained in their depiction of the in vivo 
responses owing to the lack of a suitable microenvironmental 
framework of the responding cell types. Preclinical trials on 
animals had partial success in predicting human pathology, 
physiology and therapeutics. Modern culture approaches, 
such as three-dimensional (3D) cultures, organs-on-a-
chip or organoids have attempted to partially mimic the 
tissue microenvironment. 

Development of a part of an organ or the whole organ 
itself from tissue culture techniques for research is termed 

Stem cell culture and Organ Culture 221

Reprint 2025-26



as organ culture. In this, the parts of an organ are explanted 
and grown in vitro such that the anatomical relationship 
and physiological functions of several tissue components 
are preserved in the culture on artificial medium, resulting 
in simulating its parent tissue.  

For success in any organ culture technique, it is crucial 
that the tissues must be handled with extreme care and 
should not be damaged or disrupted during handling. 
Tissues should be transported to the laboratory as fast as 
possible to minimise deterioration, ideally within minutes 
of collection. Further, analysis of the organ cultures can be 
done by immunochemistry, autoradiography and histology. 

9.2.1 Characteristics of organ culture

Primarily, the structural design has to be preserved in 
organ culture of the organ or tissue and direct it towards 
normal development. The important characteristics of organ 
culture are as follows. 

Structural integrity

A major limitation in organ culture is the lack of a vascular 
system in tissues, restricting the size (by diffusion) and 
possibly the polarity of the cells within the organ culture. 
Overall, in the whole organ culture, some proliferation may 
occur on the outer cell layers as in organs. These cells are 
unified as a single unit, while the isolated cells are discrete. 
Also, in organ culture, the cell-to-cell communication and 
association are greatly preserved. Therefore, owing to the 
retention of structural integrity of the native tissue, the 
associated cells can interchange signals via cell interaction 
or adhesion. 

Nutrient and gas exchange

Organ cultures are devoid of vascular system and this 
condition results in restricted gas exchange and nutrient 
supply to the cells. When the cells are cultured as a solid 
mass of tissue, nutrient exchange and diffusion of gases 
ensues from the periphery and this diffusion rate restricts 
the size of the tissue. As a result, at the central part of the 
tissue or organ, some amount of necrosis may happen. 

222 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Most of the time, organ cultures are exposed to high O  
2

concentration.  However, the use of high O  concentration 
2

is accompanied with the O  prompted toxicity risk in 
2

organs.
To deal with this difficulty in organ cultures, tissues are 

maintained at a gas–liquid phase to facilitate the exchange 
of gases, while maintaining the access to adequate 
nutrients. Anchorage of the tissue to a solid substrate can 
lead to the development of an outgrowth of cells from the 
tissue and resultant alterations in geometry, though this 
effect can be minimised by using a hydrophobic surface. 
The significance of maintaining organ cultures at the 
interface of gaseous and liquid phase is that if the liquid 
is retained at optimal level then the tissue maintains a 
spherical geometry. However, if the level of liquid is too 
superficial, then the tissue will outgrow and flatten as a 
result of surface tension, whereas, if the level is too deep, 
the exchange of gases is compromised. To enhance the 
permeation of oxygen in organ cultures, hyperbaric oxygen 
or enhanced pure oxygen content is used.

9.2.2 Growth and differentiation 
Growth refers to increase in the number of cells is a culture 
whereas, differentiation refers to change in the function 
of the differentiated cell. Growth and differentiation are 
related to each other such that the differentiated cells may 
not be able to proliferate further. There is a possibility 
that irrespective of cell density, termination of growth 
may promote the induction of differentiation. Most of the 
organ cultures do not grow, instead they proliferate only 
on the outer layers of cells as a consequence of physical 
limitations executed by the structure and shape. The organ 
culture is tolerant to the suitable cellular communications 
and differentiations and also to maintain the appropriate 
environment. Soluble growth factors are supplied to 

facilitate differentiation.

Whole embryo culture 

Spratt (1950s) explained the effect of metabolic 
inhibitors on the developing embryo in vitro. To culture 
the embryo, a suitable medium has to be prepared and 
poured onto a watchglass, which was then placed on 
a small piece of moist absorbent cotton wool pad in a 

Stem cell culture and Organ Culture 223

Reprint 2025-26



petridish. To observe the chick embryo in culture, the 
eggs were incubated at 38°C for 40–42 hours so that 
a dozen of embryos could be produced. The egg shell 
was sterilised with 70 percent ethanol, then broken 
into pieces and kept in 50 ml of balanced salt solution 
(BSS). The vitelline membrane covering the blastoderm 
was removed and kept in BSS. The adherent vitelline 
membrane was removed with the help of a forcep. The 
embryo was observed under a microscope to study the 
developmental stage of blastoderm. The blastoderm was 
then carefully placed on the sterile absorbent cotton 
wool pad in the watchglass in the petridish and the 
embryo culture of chick incubated at 37.5°C for further 
development.

9.2.3 Types of organ culture

Histotypic culture

When any characterised cell line is proliferated or cultured 
at a high density in the presence of suitable soluble factors 
and extracellular matrix, then such a culture is termed 
as histotypic. Vascular endothelial cells can form capillary 
tubules in the presence of appropriate soluble factors 
when grown in a collagen matrix. Cellulose sponges coated 
with extracellular matrix components such as collagen is 
another example. Alternatively, cells may infiltrate the 
sponge and form glandular structures.

Organotypic culture 

The limitation in a histotypic culture is the inability to 
evaluate the heterologous cell interactions. When cells of 
different lineages are co-cultured to create a tissue-like 
structure, then it is termed as organotypic culture, which 
is the easiest way to maintain a co-culture of two cell 
types. For instance, co-culture of fibroblast and epithelial 
cell clones derived from the mammary gland allows the 
epithelial cells to differentiate functionally. This has been 
demonstrated by their ability to produce milk proteins 
in optimal hormonal environment. The formation of 
characteristic structures is further validated by functional 
differentiation, such as the three-dimensional cords in 
which the fibroblast cells reorganise themselves into 

224 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Box 3: Histotypic and Organotypic Culture

HISTOTYPIC CULTURE

Perfused multilayer
from monolayer

(B)
Propagate and seed
on desired substrate.
Grow to high cell
density with medium
change, stirring or
perfusion

Spheroid or organoid
(C)

Heterogenous Isolate by cloning selective
primary culture media, and/or by cell sorting

(A)

Expand each puried line separately

Sponge or scaffold

(D)

Combine in lter Combine in
well inserts, transmembrane three-dimensional

with or without matrix array in concentric
capillaries

Perfused capillary bed
(E)

(G) (H) Filter well insert

(F)
ORGANOTYPIC CULTURE

Histotypic and organotypic culture. Heterogeneity of a primary culture (A), how to purify defined 
cell populations, that can be expanded and seeded into appropriate conditions can give high-
density cultures of one cell type in perfused multilayers (B), spheroids or organoids in stirred 
suspension (C), sponge or scaffold (D), three-dimensional multilayers in perfused capillaries 
(E), monolayers or multilayers in filter well inserts (F). Expansion of purified populations and 
recombination can generate organotypic cultures, in filter well inserts (G) or on concentric 
microcapillaries (H).

Stem cell culture and Organ Culture 225

Reprint 2025-26



bundles that are further enveloped by the epithelial cells. 
‘Organoids’ are self organised 3D tissue culture derived from 
stem cells. Thus the organoid is made from a combination 
of cells, growth factors, collagen etc. Example: artificial 
liver surgically implanted into the peritoneal cavity of a rat. 
These organoids have the potential to replace any diseased 
or non-functional organ, or deliver genetically altered cells 
into a patient’s body.

9.2.4 Applications of organ culture

Cultured organs can be used as a substitute for organs. 
This may be beneficial as the accessibility of transplantable 
organs is decreasing. One more significance of organ 
culture is that the organs are produced by using patient’s 
own stem cells, that would permit transplantation of organs 
without the use of immunosuppressive drugs by patients. 

The organ culture helps to study the actual behaviour 
of a tissue in an in vitro system as well as to understand 
the biochemical and functional characteristics of an organ 
or tissue and their comparison with that of the similar 
organs in vivo in an easier way. The organ culture is also 
suitable for the study of hormones and their effects as 
individual, or combinations with other hormones. For 
example, mammary gland is one of the most commonly 
cultured organ of the mouse.

9.2.5 Limitations of organ culture
There are some limitations of organ culture. Fundamentally, 
the organ cultures depend on histological techniques and 
not much on biochemical and molecular analyses. The 
biochemical analyses is based on the reproducibility that 
cannot be achieved in organ culture. Furthermore, the 
organ cultures exhibited more difficulty in the preparation 
of replicates than that of the cell culture.  The organ culture 
exhibited high variations and low reproducibility. Thus, in 
organ culture, a fresh organ from a donor is needed for 
each experiment. 
Various limitations of organ culture are as follows:

(a) Since the organ cultures cannot proliferate, therefore 
fresh organs are required for every experiment. 

(b) In organ culture, reproducibility is less and disparities 
are high. This can be because of a slight variation 

226 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



in geometry and handling, sampling difference in 
organising an organ culture and differences in the 
proportions of types of cell among cultures. 

(c) Organ cultures are very challenging to prepare and 
are also very expensive. 

(d) By this technique, the behaviour of integrated tissue 
only can be examined and not of isolated cells. 

9.2.6 Future Prospects 

One of the future challenges is to adapt the cell-based 
assay protocols developed for the analysis of 2D cell 
culture to the altered conditions of cells growing in 
3D structures. 3D cell cultures include multicellular 
spheroids, scaffold hydrogels, organoids, organs-on-
chips, hanging drop, microfluidics, magnetic levitation, 
microtissues and 3D bioprinting.

SUMMARY

• Stem cells are unspecialised cells and have the ability to 
renew themselves and differentiate into a diverse range of 
cell types. 

• On the basis of the potency, the stem cells can be classified 
into totipotent, pluripotent, multipotent or unipotent cells. 

• Totipotent stem cells have the ability to differentiate into all 
cell types of an organism.

• Pluripotent stem cells have the potential to differentiate into 
almost all cell types of the embryo except the cells of the 
extra embryonic support tissues.

• The multipotent cells have ability to differentiate into a 
closely related family of cells.

• On the basis of the sources, the stem cells are divided 
into early  (or embryonic) stem cells and mature (or adult) 
stem cells.

• The early stem cells (embryonic stem cells) are present in the 
inner cell mass of a blastocyst.

• Adult stem cells are undifferentiated totipotent or multipotent 
cells and are found in specific mature body tissues as well as 
the umbilical cord and placenta after birth.

• Stem cells have the potential to treat a number of diseases 
including cancer, Type 1 diabetes mellitus, Parkinson’s 
disease, cardiac diseases, neurological disorders, etc.

Stem cell culture and Organ Culture 227

Reprint 2025-26



• Development of a part of an organ or the whole organ itself 
from tissue culture techniques are termed as organ culture.

• The most important advantage of organ culture is that 
the whole three-dimensional structure of the organ can be 
recreated.

• The important characteristics of organ culture are —
structural integrity, nutrient and gas exchange, growth and 
differentiation. 

• The types of organ culture are — whole embryo culture, 
histotypic culture and organotypic culture.

• The organ culture helps to study the actual behaviour of 
a tissue in an in vitro system as well as to understand the 
biochemical and functional characteristics of an organ or 
tissue and their comparison with that of the similar organs, 
in vivo, in an easier way.

• Organ culture helps in understanding the developmental 
biology and interaction in tissues.

EXERCISES

 1. Briefly describe the stem cells and their properties.
 2. Differentiate totipotent, pluripotent and multipotent 

stem cells.

 3. What are embryonic stem cells and how do they differ 
from adult stem cells?

 4. Describe some applications of stem cells.

 5. What parameters should be monitored during stem cell 
culture? 

 6. What is organ culture?

 7. Describe the main characteristics of organ culture.

 8. Discuss the various types of organ culture.

 9. What are the advantages of organ culture over cell 
culture?

 10. Describe the applications of organ culture.
 11. Describe the various support systems used in organ 

culture.

 12. Stem cells are present in:
 (a) unicellular organisms

 (b) multicellular organisms

 (c) non-living things

 (d) viruses

228 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



 13. Differentiation potential of stem cells specifies:
 (a) Stochastic differentiation

 (b) Asymmetric replication

 (c) Potency

 (d) Self-renewal

 14. Which of the following cells is a multipotent cell?
 (a) T-cell

 (b) B-cell

 (c) HSC

 (d) Monocytes

 15. A stem cell is:
 (a) a cell out of which the stem of the tree is made up of

 (b) a part of the tissue that forms the outer layer of the 
skin in human beings.

 (c) it is a cell that can divide and give rise to specialised 
cells.

 (d) a type of specialised cell

 16. __________ can be cured with stem cells.
 (a) Spinal cord injuries 

 (b) Type 1 diabetes
 (c) Both (a) and (b)

 (d) None of these

 17. The stem cells may be obtained from sources such as:
 (a) Bone marrow

 (b) Umbilical cord blood

 (c) Adipose tissue

 (d) All of these

 18. Assertion: Embryonic stem cells can give rise to different 
cell types.

Reason: Embryonic stem cells are pluripotent.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 19. Assertion: Stem cells are undifferentiated and found in 
multicellular organisms, and undergo numerous mitotic 
cycles.

Stem cell culture and Organ Culture 229

Reprint 2025-26



Reason: Stem cells have ‘self-renewal’ feature and do not 
exhibit ‘cellular potency’.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

230 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Chapter Bioprocessing and
10 Biomanufacturing

Students are already aware that living organisms especially 10.1 Historical 

microbes and biological processes therein are used for Perspective

making various household products (curd/yoghurt, idli, 10.2 Instrumentation 

kinema, etc.) and industrial products (ethanol). We have in Bioprocessing: 
Bioreactor and 

already learnt in the previous class that living organisms 
Fermenter Design

are endowed with a variety of metabolic processes which 
10.3 Operational Stages 

lead to the formation of chemical compounds, called of Bioprocess
metabolites, that are broadly classified into primary 

10.4 Bioprocessing and 
and secondary metabolites. Primary metabolites are the Biomanufacturing 
compounds produced directly out of primary metabolic of Desired Product
pathways associated with essential cellular functions such 
as growth and development. On the contrary, secondary 
metabolites are intermediates or indirect products, 
elaborated by entirely different metabolic pathways called 
secondary metabolic pathways. Secondary metabolites take 
part in a variety of functions. For example, they are used in 
defence for protection against pathogens, phytoplanktons 
and herbivores, to improve tolerance to abiotic stresses; 
as attractants for insects and animals for fertilisation, 
seed dispersal in plants or to contribute in causing the 
displeasure to the unwanted feeders.

Reprint 2025-26



Nowadays, most of these secondary metabolites have 
a variety of applications in the form of pharmaceuticals, 
dyes, food additives, enzymes, vitamins, etc. In view of  the 
variety of applications, production of these compounds 
(biochemicals) at commercial level requires their production 
in bulk quantities, as quantities produced naturally are 
not sufficient. These compounds are usually produced at 
commercial level in a purified form through a series of steps 
covered under bioprocessing. For large scale production, 
where large volume (on an average 100–10,000 litres) of 
culture can be processed, the development of bioreactors 
was required.

10.1 Historical PersPective

After the breakthrough discovery of Penicillin and its 
role in killing bacteria by Alexander Fleming in 1928, 
the significance of products from biological systems was 
well understood. Now, the challenge before the scientific/
research community was to enhance the production 
of penicillin.  Production in larger amount for its use in 
treatment would obviously require a systematic process 
using the culture of biological entity in question, i.e., 
Penicillium species. The need of involvement of microbial 
physiologist and other life scientists and technologists 
was identified. This followed the identification of a number 
of products of living organisms and processes especially 
from microbes for application in bioprocessing. Many 
companies and government laboratories, assisted by 
different universities and institutions came together to 
take up this challenge and efforts were made to increase 
the production of penicillin. All this paved a way for  the 
emergence of a new area of biological applications, which 
is now known as bioprocessing. Thus, bioprocessing 
involves biological or living systems or their components 
(e.g., enzymes, chloroplasts, etc.) and chemical engineering 
processes to obtain the desired products at commercial 
level as depicted in Fig. 10.4.

At industrial or commercial stage, all bioprocesses are 
carried out in vessels called fermenter or bioreactor. We 
are also aware that after the advent of rDNA technology, 

232 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



microbes are extensively employed for the production of a 
number of biological material for the welfare of mankind.

Box 1

Discovery of Penicillin 
It was in 1928 when Alexander Fleming 
at St. Mary’s Hospital in London, while 
trying to isolate boils causing bacterium, 
Staphylococcus aureus, found that one of the 
Petridishes was contaminated inadvertently 
with a foreign entity. Instead of discarding 
the Petri plate for disinfection, Fleming made 
an important observation in the unwashed 

contaminated plate that no bacteria grew near the invading entity. The observation surprised 
Fleming’s intellect and he soon realised that this chance observation may be a meaningful 
arena of interest.
 Later this antibacterial foreign entity was identified as a common mould, the Penicillium 
notatum, and the metabolite secreted has powerful antibacterial properties called penicillin. 
Its full potential as an effective antibiotic was established by Ernest Chain and Howard 
Florey. This antibiotic was extensively used to treat the American soldiers wounded in World 
War II. Fleming, Chain and Florey were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1945 for this discovery.

10.2 instrumentation in BioProcessing: 

Bioreactor and Fermenter design

Bioreactor is an engineered vessel made up of glass or 
steel that supports a biologically active environment, 
where cells can be cultivated under aseptic conditions with 
appropriate nutritional and environmental requirements. 
In a bioreactor, the biochemical processes involve 
the cultivation of microbial, plant and animal cells 
or biochemically active substances derived from such 
cell cultures or organisms. Commonly, bioreactors are 
cylindrical and vary in size. The design and components of 
a typical bioreactor are shown in Fig. 10.1.

A bioreactor should fulfil the following requirements:
1. a sterile environment, so that a pure culture may be 

grown without contamination
2. adequate supply of air for cellular respiration in 

culture
3. uniform mixing of nutrients, cells and air throughout 

the bioreactor vessel without causing any shear stress 
to the cultured cells

Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing 233

Reprint 2025-26



4. a system for maintenance of optimum temperature 
conducive for the growth and product formation in a 
desired culture 

5. a system for monitoring the environmental process 
parameters, such as pH, dissolved oxygen, etc.

Motor
(a)

Temperature Probe

pH Probe

In In Antifoam
HCl NaoH

Inoculation Port

Outlet for air

Water
Outlet Digital controller

Agitator Shaft

Air Sparger
Bafe

Impeller
Water
Bath

Water
Inlet

Exhaust

(b)

Fig. 10.1: (a) Diagrammatic representation of the design and components of a typical bioreactor  
 (b) Photograph of a laboratory bio-reactor 

234 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Thus, in order to fulfil these requirements a typical 
bioreactor consists of the following:

•	 Agitator shaft: It helps in mixing contents of the 
bioreactor and keeps the cells in perfect homogenous 
conditions that provide better transport of nutrient 
and oxygen throughout the running bioprocess. An 
impeller is fixed at the bottom of an agitator shaft.

•	 Sparger: It helps in providing an adequate and 
continuous supply of sterilised air (oxygen) using 
microfilters for growing cells submerged in the liquid 
media inside the bioreactor system.

•	 Baffle: It helps in breaking the vortex formation, which 
is highly undesirable as it changes the centre of gravity 
of the system  making it consume extra power to run 
the system.

•	 Jacket: It provides area for the circulation of water 
at the given temperature for maintenance of optimum 
temperature inside the device required for the growth 
of cultivated cells and product formation.

•	 Sensitivity probe for temperature and pH: These 
are the probes to sense temperature and hydrogen ion 
concentration of a bioprocess. 

•	 Digital controller for controlling process 
parameters: Digital controller is connected to 
bioreactor through probes and its one separate unit is 
connected to a water bath that pumps water of desired 
temperature in and out of the jacket present around 
the bioreactor unit for the maintenance of temperature 
throughout. It is also connected to pH probes and 
bottles containing 1M NaOH and 1N HCl. As the 
probe senses acidity or alkalinity, digital controller 
commands any of the two bottles for addition of either 
dilute NaOH or HCl for the maintenance of the desired 
pH. All process parameters including temperature, 
pH, speed of stirring (rpm), etc., are exhibited over the 
display of the controller.

10.2.1 Types of bioreactors

On the basis of the design or configuration, important 
types of bioreactors are discussed below: 

•	 Stirred tank reactors are the most conventional 
bioreactors. In these reactors, agitator facilitates the 

Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing 235

Reprint 2025-26



mixing of nutrients, oxygen and growing cells. The 
reactor is characterised by the presence of agitator 
shaft. Design, shape and size of the impeller differ for 
various bioprocesses [Fig. 10.2(a)].

Motor

Agitator Gas
Headspace
Region

Downcomer
Sparger

Liquid
Media

Bafe Draft Tube

Impeller Air
Grooved Bubble Sparger
Nozzle Bank

(a) Stirred tank (b) Air-lift (c) Bubble column

Fig. 10.2: Various types of bioreactors 

• In Air-lift reactors, a motion of air is created using 
a draft tube. The mixing of nutrients and oxygen is 
maintained by creating the air current that lifts the 
fluid broth and cells up and down, inside-out or vice-
versa through a draft tube inside the reactor vessel 
[Fig. 10.2(b)].

• In Bubble column reactor, the mixing of nutrients 
and oxygen is maintained with the help of air bubbles 
produced through sparger jet. These reactors 
provide low shear environment, which may be a 
critical consideration for some cells and high oxygen 
transferred per unit of power input [Fig. 10.2(c)].

10.3 oPerational stages oF BioProcess

A bioprocess is composed mainly of two stages for converting 
raw material into the final product namely, upstream and 
downstream processing (Fig. 10.3).

236 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Stock Culture Raw Material

Nutrient Media
Shake Flask

Sterilisation
Upstream

Processing

Bioreactor/
Fermentor

Seed for
Inoculation

Controller

Bioprocess/Fermentation

Recovery

Downstream
Processing

Purication

Packaging

Fig. 10.3: Different stages of upstream and downstream processing

The upstream bioprocessing consists of four components 
as detailed below:

1. optimisation of nutritional conditions in artificial 
media and formulation for culturing the living 
organisms, cells or its components

2. sterilisation of media, bioreactor and other additional 
tools and equipment

3. production of pure, active and healthy inoculums in 
sufficient quantity

4. optimisation of environmental conditions for growth 
and product formation

On the contrary, downstream processing consists of two 
steps as detailed below:

1. extraction, recovery and purification of product
2. the disposal of effluents produced by the process

Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing 237

Reprint 2025-26



Upstream and downstream processing are described in 
detail in the following sections.

10.3.1 Upstream processing

A typical upstream bioprocess involves raw materials such 
as the biomass of microbial, plant or animal cells to be 
usually treated and mixed with other ingredients that are 
required for the cells to grow well. The raw material to 
be used in bioprocessing is first converted to a suitable 
fermentable form. Preparation of  liquid or solid nutrient 
medium, sterilisation, aeration, agitation and shear 
sensitivity besides many other preparatory operations and 
scaling up for high product formation are described in the 
following sections.

Nutrient media or culture media required for maximum 
growth and product formation of a particular culture is 
formulated using chemicals and nutrients, etc. Different 
media formulations are prescribed for microbial, plant and 
animal cell culture (Chapter 6–8).

Requirement of medium constituents varies with the 
species of an organism for biosynthesis and cell 
maintenance. The following equation based on 
stoichiometry may be considered for growth and product 
formation: 

Carbon and energy source + Nitrogen source Cell biomass + products +
+ other requirements Carbon dioxide + Water + heat

The equation is important for economical designing of 
the media by minimising wastage of media components. For 
example, under aerobic conditions, carbon requirement of 
a particular culture may be estimated by determining the 
cellular yield coefficient (Y) as:

Quantity of cell dry weight produced by the culture
Y = 

Quantity of carbon substrate utilised

Similarly, in a bioprocess other media components may 
also be determined for their minimal wastage and optimum 
productivity of the culture. Thus, media formulation is very 
important for a bioprocess.

Inoculum of viable, healthy, fast growing and high 
producing living cells, organ or organism is very much 
required for good growth and technologically viable and 

238 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Fig. 10.4: Bioprocess Development

economically efficient production. Inoculum may be 
developed on solid culture or liquid culture. Liquid culture 
may usually be developed in shake flask and called 
suspension culture. The culture to be used as inoculum 
must fulfil the following criteria:

1. inoculum should be healthy and in log or exponential 
phase of the growth cycle (i.e., actively dividing).

2. in subsequent transfer, inoculum should not exhibit 
long lag phase.

3. it should be available in sufficient amount to provide 
an inoculum of optimum size.

4. it should be available in a suitable morphological form.
5. it should be free of contamination.
6. it should retain its product forming capability.

Aeration is required to fulfil oxygen requirement 
of submerged suspension culture in shake flask and 
bioreactors. Ideally, maximum amount of dissolved oxygen 
in pure water is approximately 8 g/L, which is available for 

Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing 239

Reprint 2025-26



growing submerged culture in liquid media. In bioreactor, 
pure sterilised air is sent through sparger to maintain the 
oxygen levels in the media for growth of the culture.

A mild agitation is required for uniform distribution of 
oxygen and other nutrients. Some cells such as animal cells 
are more shear sensitive than plant cells. Plant cells are 
more sensitive to shear than microbial cells. Thus, in shake 
flask, shear stress or sensitivity of cells to shear can be 
controlled by increasing or decreasing the speed of shaker, 
i.e., revolution per minute (rpm) of the shaking condition. 
The same is maintained in bioreactors by increasing or 
decreasing the speed of agitator.

Temperature required for maximum growth and 
production  has to be maintained. Temperature requirement 
for different cultures is different. There may be an optimum 
temperature for the formation of a desired product. The 
optimum temperature may be similar or different for 
culture growth and product formation.

Hydrogen ion concentration (pH) is another 
parameter that affects growth and product formation. 
Optimum pH for growth and product formation has to be 
maintained for an efficient bioprocess.

Thus, before a bioprocess is run, all processing 
parameters, such as nutrient media formulations, 
temperature, hydrogen ion concentration, etc., are 
optimised separately.

Sterilisation is an essential requirement for a successful 
bioprocess. It requires sterilisation of tools, glassware, 
media, air or in-site sterilisation of bioreactor, etc., and even 
the maintenance of aseptic conditions to perform processes 
and scale up in the bioreactor. Thus, contamination in a 
bioprocess may be avoided by the following:

1. sterilisation of nutrient media
2. sterilising the bioreactor vessel
3. sterilising all the materials to be added to the 

bioreactor vessel during the process.
4. maintenance of aseptic conditions during the 

fermentation.
5. using a pure culture as inoculum.

• A typical bio process development stage are summarised 
in fig. 10.4

240 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Modes of Bioprocess Operation
One of the important decisions in the development of a 
bioprocess is that the mode of bioprocess operations is 
to be applied to a particular bioprocess. Mainly there are 
three different modes under which a bioprocess may be 
operated:

1. Batch
2. Fed-batch
3. Continuous
1. Batch mode: It is a closed culture system with an 

initial fixed amount of nutrients. An inoculated batch 
culture passes through a number of phases of growth 
cycle. When cells are grown in a nutrient medium, cells 
start growing in number and size to some extent. In a 
suitable nutrient medium, the cells utilise nutrients 
from the medium for growth and energy production and 
convert the material to be bioprocessed (fermented) into 
the product. Fig. 10.5(a) is showing cell biomass [X], rate of 
substrate consumption [Qs] and substrate concentration 
[S] in a batch culture.

[X] [X]
[S]

[Q ]
S [X]

[Q ] [S] [Q ]
S

S

[S]

Time Time Time

(a) Batch mode (b) Fed-batch mode (c) Continuous culture mode

S = Substrate conc, X = Microbial cells, Q = Rate of utilisation of substrate
S

Fig. 10.5: Graphical representation of growth of cell culture in (a) Batch mode (b) Fed batch mode and 
(c) Continous culture mode. 

2. Fed-batch mode: In a batch culture if the growth of 
cells become limited due to the concentration of one or more 
substrate components, the same are fed intermittently or 
continuously to the growing culture as per the requirement 
from time to time. In such culture, volume in the fermenter 
increases due to extra feed added and no removal of any 
volume of culture. This is known as fed-batch mode 
of culture, which is advantageous for maintaining the 
residual substrate concentration at very low levels and 

Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing 241

Reprint 2025-26



thereby avoiding their toxic effects. In this culture system, 
substrate concentration‘s’ and rate of substrate utilisation 
[Q ] remains constant and cell biomass/product keeps on 

s

increasing Fig. 10.5(b).
3. Continuous mode: In this mode, the design of the 

bioprocess (reactor) is such that the fresh lot of nutrient 
media is added and the used media is removed in such a 
way so that continous supply of the desired product is to 
be ensured. Similarly, a fresh lot of inoculum could also 
be added. Thus, in the continuous mode, a steady state is 
maintained that is, the formation of new biomass by the 
culture is balanced by the loss of cells from the reactors 
vessel Fig 10.5(c). Thus, during steady state rate of growth 
and product formation, substrate concentration and rate 
of substrate utilisation remains constant.

Downstream processing

In the process, the desired product is recovered in an 
efficient way which involves efficient separation and 
purification technique. Thus, the product of bioprocess 
may be cell biomass, extracellular component of liquid 
media (broth) or intracellular product of cell. The major 
process of downstream processing is shown in Fig. 10.6. 
The extraction and purification of product in the culture 
fluid may be difficult and costly. High quality efficient 
recovery requires the following considerations:

Discard

Cell as products Cell debris

(Intracellular
product)

Cell biomass Cell rupture Recovery Purification 

Solid liquid 
Separation

Fermenter Supernatant Recovery Purification 
(for extracellular product)

Fig. 10.6: Major steps in downstream processing

242 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



1. the process chosen must be quick.
2. the chosen process must have minimum investment 

and operated at minimum cost.
The downstream processing mainly consists of physical 

separation as well as purification operations, which 
includes the separation of particulate, dialysis, reverse 
osmosis, solid–liquid separations, adsorption, liquid-liquid 
extraction, distillation, drying, etc.

Solid–Liquid Separation: The first step in product 
recovery is separation of solids, such as biomass, insoluble 
particles and macromolecules from culture fluid or 
fermentation broth. In some cases, the culture broth or 
fermentation fluid needs pre-treatment, such as heating or 
pH adjustment or treating with coagulating and flocculating 
agents for the separation of insoluble products from the 
fluid or broth. Major methods used for the separation of 
cell biomass are filtration or centrifugation.

Filtration is the most common cost-effective method to 
be used for separation of large particles and cell biomass 
from the culture fluid. The conventional filtration involves 
the separation of large particles (pore diameter dp>10 
mm) by using canvas, synthetic fabrics or glass fibre as 
filter medium. Continuous rotary filters are most widely 
used filters in the industry. Ultra-filtration or microporous 
filtration is also used for the separation of cell biomass.

Centrifugation is used for the separation of particle 
size between 100 µ –  and 0.1 µ – from liquid in centrifuge 
and ultracentrifuge.

Cell disruption: if the product is intracellular, it may 
be recovered by cell rupture. Cell rupture techniques may 
be powerful but mild enough so that it should not damage 
the desired product. Disruption of cell may be achieved by 
physical, chemical and biological methods.

Physical methods include the mechanical means 
of cell disruption by milling in high-speed bead mills, 
homogenisation by creating very high shear rates using 
high pressure homogeniser and ultrasonic vibrations 
through sound waves in ultrasonicator. Cell disruption 
using ultrasonicator is very effective with most of the cell 
suspension culture.

Non-mechanical methods include the treatment of cells 
with either chemicals, such as surfactants, alkalis, organic 

Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing 243

Reprint 2025-26



solvents, or by osmotic shocks besides biological methods 
such as enzymatic degradation of the cell wall.

Recovery
After solid and liquid are separated, a dilute aqueous 
solution is obtained from which the product has to be 
recovered and purified. Extraction and adsorption are the 
processes that are exclusively categorised as techniques 
for recovery of the product.
Choice of recovery process is based on the following criteria:

1. intracellular or extracellular location of the product.
2. concentration of product in the culture fluid.
3. physical and chemical properties of the desired 

product.
4. minimal acceptable standard of purity.
5. impurities in the culture fluid.
The separation of a component from a liquid mixture by 

treatment with a solvent in which the desired component 
is preferentially soluble is known as liquid–liquid 
extraction. The specific requirement is obtaining  a high 
percentage extraction of product but concentrated in a 
smaller volume of solvent. Efficient extraction requires 
choosing a suitable solvent for extraction and optimising 
conditions of temperature, pH, light, etc. After complete 
extraction, the solute rich phase is called the extract and 
the residual liquid from which solute has been removed is 
called raffinate.

Purification: Purification techniques include 
precipitation, chromatography, electrophoresis, membrane 
separation, dialysis, reverse osmosis, ultra-filtration, etc., 
some of these technique are also used for the recovery 
of products. In Class XI, you have already learnt about 
chromatography and electrophoresis. Some of the other 
purification techniques are discussed below:

•	 Precipitation is a technique widely used for the 
recovery of proteins and antibiotics. It can be 
induced by the addition of salts, organic solvents and 
ultrafiltration.

Membrane Separation process can be classified 
into three categories: microfiltration, ultrafiltration and 
reverse osmosis. These are all pressure driven membrane 
separation processes in which separation is achieved 
through very small pore sizes. In microfiltration, the pore 

244 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



size from 0.1 to 10 µm, while in ultrafiltration, it ranges 
0.01 – 0.1 µm.

Table 10.1: Different types of filtration processes

Molecular Pressure 
Process Size Cutoff Material Retained

Wt. Cutoff Drop (psi)

Microfiltration Suspended material 
0.1–10 µm <1000,000 Da 10

(bacteria, etc.)

Ultrafiltration 300-300,000 Biological, colloids, 
0.01–0.1 µm 10–100

Da macromolecules

Reverse All suspended and 
<0.001 µm <300 Da 100–800

osmosis dissolved materials

Protein products are under the range of molecular 
cut-off for ultrafiltration.

If saline water is separated from pure water by a 
semipermeable membrane, osmosis occurs, i.e., water 
molecules move from pure water phase to saline water 
phase [Fig. 10.7(a)]. As the water moves to saline phase, 
its pressure increases. This pressure is called osmotic 
pressure [Fig. 10.7(b)]. In reverse osmosis (RO), pressure 
is applied onto a salt containing phase, which drives water 
molecules in reverse direction, that is, from salt containing 
phase to pure water phase [Fig. 10.7(c)]. The pressure 
required for  the movement of water in reverse direction 
is slightly larger than the osmotic pressure as the solvent 
flux takes place in the direction against the concentration 
gradient [Fig. 10.7(c)].

p
p p

Reverse
Osmosis

Osmotic 
Pressure

Pure Saline Pure Saline
Pure (a) Saline water (b) water water (c) water 
water water 

Fig. 10.7: Reverse Osmosis: Pressure driven membrane separation processes

Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing 245

Reprint 2025-26



Dialysis is an operation used for the removal of 
low-molecular weight (MW) solutes, such as organic acids 
(MW = 100–500 Da) and inorganic ions (molecular weight = 

10–100 Da) from a solution through 
a selectively permeable membrane. 
A well-known example is the use of 
dialysis membranes to remove urea 
(MW = 60) from urine in artificial 
kidney (dialysis) devices.

As depicted in Fig. 10.8, the 
dialysis membrane separates two 
phases containing low and high 
molecular weight solutions. Since, 
the cut-off size of pores of a dialysis 

Semi-permeable Membrane membrane is very small, only low 
molecular weight molecules move 

Fig. 10.8: Dialysis from a high to low concentration 
region. At equilibrium, the chemical 

potentials of diffusing compounds on both sides of a 
membrane are equal.

10.4 BioProcessing and BiomanuFacturing 

oF desired Products

These days bioprocessing industries have successfully 
provided a number of valuable products from primary 
(amino acids and organic acids) as well as secondary 
metabolites (antibiotics) using microorganisms, animal 
and plant cells as well as their constituents. Some of 
the examples are: production of alcohols, antibiotics, 
amino acids, organic acids, enzymes, vitamins, vaccines, 
recombinant proteins, pigments, plant alkaloids, etc., 
(Table 10.2). These products have now become an integral 
part of our day-to-day life. Some of these are described in 
Table 10.3.

Since time immemorial, yeasts have been used for 
the production of ethanol. A common species of yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, commonly called brewer’s or 
baker’s yeast, is used in the fermentation of malted cereals 
and fruit juices for ethanol production. Depending upon 
the type of raw material and the processes, a variety of 
alcoholic drinks are obtained. Wine and beer are produced 
without distillation, whereas whisky, brandy and rum are 
produced by distillation of the fermented broth.

246 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Table 10.2: Examples of variety of bioprocessing products

Types Products

Cell biomass Baker’s yeast, single cell protein

Extracellular Alcohols, organic acids, amino acids, enzymes, antibiotics 

Intracellular Recombinant DNA protein

Table 10.3: Some of the major products of bioprocesses at commercial level

Microorganisms or Plants or 
Products Category

Animals cells used

Ethanol Alcohol Saccharomyces cerevisiae

L-glutamic acid Amino acids Corynebacterium glutamicum

Lactic acid Organic acid Lactobacillus delbrueckii

Proteases Enzymes Bacillus spp.

Pectinase Enzymes Aspergillus niger

Penicillin Antibiotics Penicillium chrysogenum

Propionibacterium shermaniior, 
B Vitamins

12 Pseudomonas denitrificans

Diphtheria vaccine Vaccines Corynebacterium diphtheriae

Recombinant 
Insulin Recombinant Escherichia coli

Proteins

Pigments (quinone 
Shikonin derivatives or  Lithospermum erythrorhizon

naphthaquinone)

Taxol Plant alkaloids Taxus brevifolia

Antibiotics production is another significant 
contribution of bioprocessing and biomanufacturing 
towards the welfare of  human society. It has already  been 
discussed earlier in this chapter as to how the penicillin, 
the first antibiotic, was discovered which in fact was a 
chance discovery. After penicillin, other antibiotics were 
also purified from other microbes.

Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing 247

Reprint 2025-26



Amino acids, such as lysine and glutamic acid, are useful 
in food industry as nutritional supplements and flavour 
enhancing compounds, respectively. Production of amino 
acids is typically carried out by mutants that have reduced 
the capability to synthesise a specific amino acid or a key 
intermediate. Mutants of Corynebacterium glutamicum are 
used for the commercial production of glutamic acid and 
lysine. Certain chemicals, such as organic acids, enzymes 
and several other bioactive molecules, are produced 
commercially in industry through bioprocessing. Several 
species of microorganisms are used in the bioprocessing 
of a number of organic acids. A fungal species Aspergillus 
niger was used for citric acid production, and species of 
bacteria Acetobacter aceti was used for the production of 
acetic acid; Clostridium butylicum for the production of 
butyric acid and Lactobacillus sp. for the production of 
lactic acid.

Enzymes are also produced commercially through 
bioprocessing. Lipases are used in detergent formulations 
and are helpful in removing oily stains from the laundry. 
You must have noticed that bottled fruit juices bought 
from the market are clearer as compared to home-made 
ones. This is because the bottled juices are clarified by the 
use of pectinases and proteases. Proteases are also used 
in leather industry. Bioprocessing of these enzymes at 
commercial level uses a variety of fungal genera including 
the species of Aspergillus, Bacillus, Mucor, Trichoderma, etc. 
Streptokinase, produced using Streptococcus species and 
modified by genetic engineering, is used as a ‘clot buster’ 
for removing clots from the blood vessels of patients who 
have undergone myocardial infarction leading to heart 
attack. Another bioactive molecule cyclosporin A, used as 
an immunosuppressive agent in organ-transplant patients, 
is produced using the fungus Trichoderma polysporum. 
Statins produced by the yeast Monascus purpureus have 
been commercialised as blood-cholesterol lowering agents. 
It acts by competitively inhibiting the enzyme responsible 
for the synthesis of cholesterol.

Several vitamins specifically B  and riboflavin 
12

are commercially produced by fermentation using 
microorganisms. Vitamin B  was first obtained as a 

12

248 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



by-product in the production of various antibiotics— 
streptomycin, chloramphenicol, or neomycin, using the 
fermentation of bacterial genera Streptomyces. Later, 
high-yielding strains of Propionibacterium freudenreichii, 
Pseudomonas denitrificans, Bacillus megaterium and 
Streptomyces olivaceus were developed for the production 
of vitamin B .

12

Riboflavin is commercially produced through 
biotransformation as well as fermentation. In 
biotransformation, glucose is first converted to D-ribose 
by mutant strains of Bacillus pumilus. The D-ribose so 
produced is converted to riboflavin by chemical reactions. 
In acetone-butanol fermentation using Clostridium 
acetobutylicum and Clostridium butylicum, riboflavin is 
formed as a byproduct. Commercial production of riboflavin 
is predominantly carried out by direct fermentation using 
the ascomycetes. High-yielding strains of Ashbya 
gossypii is preferred due to its high producing capability 
of riboflavin.

Vaccines, the single most important health weapon, 
have also been produced through bioprocess using various 
cell or microbial cultures. Corynebacterium diphtheria 
is used in the process for the production of diphtheria 
toxin, which in turn is processed as diphtheria toxoid 
and then to diphtheria toxoid vaccine. The cell-based 
vaccine manufacturing process uses cells from mammals 
to culture the influenza virus for vaccine production. 
Various pharmaceutical companies use different sources 
of mammalian cell cultures for the vaccine manufacturing 
process.

Plant cell and tissue culture have long been used in 
bioprocess for commercial production of a variety of 
biochemicals, such as pigments, quinone derivatives, plant 
alkaloids, etc., which have been used in a variety of tasks, 
such as dying, clothes, food additives, pharmaceutics, 
etc. The bioprocess for the production of dye shikonin was 
commercially developed for the first time using cell culture 
of plant species Lithospermum erythrorhizon. Successful 
commercial production of berberine, ginseng, saponin and 
taxol are the examples of bioprocessing that uses plant cell 
and tissue culture of Coptis japonica, Panax ginseng and 
Taxus brevifolia.

Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing 249

Reprint 2025-26



After having cloned the gene of interest and having 
optimised the conditions to induce the expression of the 
target protein, one has to consider producing it on a large 
scale. A protein encoding gene expressed in a heterologous 
host leads to the synthesis of desired biological product, 
which is a recombinant protein. Cells harbouring 
cloned genes of interest may be grown on a small scale 
in a laboratory. The culture may be used for extracting 
the desired protein and then purifying it by using different 
separation techniques. The recombinant DNA method is 
used for large scale production of human insulin. Two-
phase cultivation process is followed for the production 
of human insulin; a glycerol batch and a continuous 
methanol fed-batch.

This way in industrial applications, a bioprocess is run 
with optimised process parameters for high production 
of desired compounds. Many compounds are in pipeline 
and the researches are going on all over the world for 
commercial production of the desired bioactive compounds 
from living organisms.

SUMMARY

• There are various metabolic processes in living systems, 
which are responsible for the synthesis of many metabolites, 
which can be classified into primary and secondary.

• Primary metabolites are essential for the growth and 
development of living organisms whereas, secondary 
metabolites have diverse functions in defense system, 
tolerance to abiotic stress, etc.

• Secondary metabolites are used in many industries, such 
as pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, drugs, food additives, etc. 
However, these compounds are synthesized in very small 
amounts in the natural system. Therefore, efforts are 
being made to scale up the production of these beneficial 
metabolites using bioprocess engineering.

• Bioreactor or fermenter is an engineered vessel, which may 
provide optimum conditions for the product formation and 
based on the requirement , different types of bioreactors may 
be configured in bioprocessing.

• Bioprocessing can be operated through two stages: upstream 
processing and downstream processing.

250 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



• In upstream processing, formulation and sterilisation of the 
media and equipment take place along with the production 
of pure, healthy and active culture for inoculation.

• The growth of organisms under optimum conditions for 
desired product formation takes place in a bioreactor or a 
fermenter.

• There are three modes of operations in bioprocessing: 
(i) batch (closed vessel system), (ii) (fed-batch) (growth 
limiting substrate is fed intermittently or continuously) and 
(iii) continuous (growth limiting substrate is fed 
continuously).

• In downstream processing, the product is recovered and 
purified using various techniques, such as reverse osmosis, 
distillation, drying, etc.

• Many desired products of animals, plants and microbial 
origin have been commercialised till date.

EXERCISES

 1. Differentiate between primary and secondary metabolites 
based on their functions with example.

 2. Explain the challenges encountered during the 
development of a bioprocess.

 3. Describe briefly the design and components of a typical 
bioreactor and their applications.

 4. Explain the basic operational stages of a bioprocess using 
concept map.

 5. Describe briefly the following:
 (a) upstream processing

 (b) downstream processing

 6. Explain the recovery and purification process of an 
intracellular product with the help of a flow diagram.

 7. Write short notes on the following:
 (a) reverse osmosis

 (b) dialysis

 8. Match the following:
  (a) Agitator (i) Breaking the vortex formation

  (b) Sparger (ii)  Provides area for circulation of 
water of desired temperature

  (c) Baffle (iii) Helps in mixing the contents
  (d) Jacket (iv)  Provides adequate and 

continuous supply of air

Bioprocessing and Biomanufacturing 251

Reprint 2025-26



 9. A culture in a closed vessel to which no additional 
medium is added is called ___________________ culture.

 (a) Continuous 

 (b) Batch

 (c) Fed-batch
 (d) Semi continuous

 10. Assertion: Secondary metabolites are used in defense 
against pathogens, phytoplanktons, improving tolerance 
to abiotic, etc.

Reason: Secondary metabolites are intermediate or 
indirect products.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

252 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26

##11##

UNIT IV
Bioremediation

Chapter 11: Bioremediation

Reprint 2025-26



Ananda Mohan Chakrabarty 
(4 April 1938 – 10 July 2020 )

Ananda M. Chakrabarty is an Indian American microbiologist, who 
is known for his work in developing genetically engineered organisms 
using plasmid transfer. In 1965, he earned his Ph.D. from the University 
of Calcutta and moved to the University of Illinois in United States for 
higher studies. He started to work with environmental microbiology 
with an aim to develop microbes for biodegradation. He specifically 
worked with Pseudomonas sp. and in 1971, developed a genetically 
engineered Pseudomonas strain that was capable of using oil as 
nutrient for its growth. He called these microbes as “multi-plasmid 
hydrocarbon-degrading Pseudomonas”, which could digest most of the 
hydrocarbons found in oil spills. He was the first to get a patent for a 
recombinant microbe. Patenting living organisms was not available at 
that time and his efforts to patent a recombinant microbe landed in the 
Supreme Court in 1980. This famous trial “Diamond v. Chakrabarty” 
made it possible to patent microbes or higher organisms. Later, his 
research group has done pioneer work with cupredoxin (proteins) from 
Pseudomonas and its role for cancer biology.
 Prof. Chakrabarty served as an expert on legal issues related 
to patents or intellectual property rights. In 2007, Indian government 
recognised his efforts and he was awarded with the Padma Shri.

Reprint 2025-26



Chapter 11 Bioremediation

Human activities at domestic, agricultural and industrial 11.1 Wastewater 
Treatment 

level have resulted in the entry of a large number of 
pollutants in air, water and soil resulting in an alarming 11.2 Solid Waste 

Management 
situation in many areas across the world. Many of these 
untreated chemical toxicants and excess of fertilisers and 11.3 Management and 

Disposal of Bio-
pesticides used in agriculture are drained to various water 

medical Waste
bodies and poses threat to the ecosystem and its flora and 

11.4 Bioremediation of 
fauna including human beings. It is very much desirable 

Pesticides
that such pollutants must be eliminated from the ecosystem. 
Recently, a good number of microorganisms have been 
reported to be capable of modifying and degrading such 
synthetic agrochemicals. In this chapter, we will discuss 
the management of wastes and pollutants by conventional 
approach as well as by using microorganisms and plants. 
Since living organisms (bios) are employed to remediate or 
solve the problem of damage caused by chemical toxicants, 
the process is often referred to as bioremediation.

11.1 Waste Water treatment

Waste water from a home, community or industry is 
collectively called sewage. Such wastes are very difficult 

Reprint 2025-26



to treat due to the presence of antiseptic, chemicals and 
its high oxygen demand. Almost all the industries (dairy, 
tannery, cannery, distillery, oil refinery, textile, coal and 
coke, synthetic rubber, steel, etc.) produce their own 
characteristic sewage. Some are readily treated while 
others are practically unamendable through biological 
treatment. An average individual in India produces 0.8 kg 
waste per day.

11.1.1 Composition of Sewage
Sewage consists of human excreta, wash waters, industrial 
waste, agricultural wastes and wastes from livestock, i.e., 
poultry, cattle, horse, etc. The bulk municipal sewage 
consists of approximately 99 percent water and 1% 
inorganic and organic matter in suspended and soluble 
forms. Lignocellulose, cellulose, proteins, fats and various 
inorganic particulate matter exist in suspended state, 
whereas sugars, fatty acids, alcohols, amino acids and 
inorganic ions constitute the soluble forms. The organic 
content of sewage is measured in terms of its oxygen 
equivalence by means of the biochemical or biological 
oxygen demand (BOD) test. BOD may be defined as the 
quantity of oxygen required during the stabilisation of 

Table 11.1: Composition of untreated and treated domestic sewage

Constituent Concentration (mg/L) Concentration (mg/L) 
before treatment after treatment

Suspended Solids (SS) 100–750 Upto 35

Total Nitrogen 20–80 Upto 15

Total Phosphorus 05–20 Upto 5

Chlorides 230–2700 <250

Grease and oil 50–100 <10

Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) 100–300 Upto 25

Chemical oxygen demand (COD) 600–900 75–100

pH 05–7.5 6.5–8.5

Total coliform 107–109 Not detectable

256 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



decomposable organic matter and oxidisable inorganic 
matter by aerobic (oxidative) biological action. The 
efficiency of mechanical, chemical and biological treatment 
of sewage is based on the amount of BOD reduction. Table 
11.1 shows the composition of an untreated and treated 
domestic sewage.

Box 1: Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)

Biochemical Oxygen Demand is a measure that signifies the amount of oxygen dissolved in 
water required by different microorganisms present in it. BOD is, in a way, measurement of 
the oxidisable organic matter present in sewage. Higher BOD value signifies higher amount of 
oxidisable organic matter present and such a sewage is called strong, whereas weak sewage 
has comparatively less oxidisable matter. Entry of strong sewage in a water body leads to a 
quick consumption of dissolved oxygen. Fishes and other aquatic fauna die due to very low 
level of dissolved oxygen, which ultimately decompose and increased level of organic matter 
ultimately makes water unsuitable for recreational purpose and unfit for drinking.
 Measurement of BOD is done by dilution of a measured amount of sewage with water 
already saturated with oxygen followed by incubation of sewage and water mixture at 20°C 
simultaneously with a control, which is diluted water. After five days of incubation, the 
residual oxygen present in both the sewage sample and the control is measured. Difference in 
the level of oxygen is the expression of the capacity to consume oxygen by the sewage, which 
is expressed in parts per million (ppm). However, for the purpose of estimation of BOD of a 
sewage sample (in which the organic load may be too high and dissolved oxygen is too low to be 
measured), the same is diluted with double distilled water. One litre of BOD free water (double 
distilled water) in a bottle is aerated for one hour by an aerator followed by adjusting the pH 
to 7.0 using buffer. BOD is calculated as follows:

D −D ×100
1 2

BOD (O  mg/L) =  or (D  – D ) × Dilution factor
2 % dilution 1 2

D  = Dissolved oxygen (DO) of sample before incubation
1

D  = Dissolved oxygen (DO) of sample after incubation
2

Calculation of Dilution factor

S.No. Volume of Sample (mL) Volume of Dilution Water added (mL) Dilution Factor

1 1000 NIL 1

2 500 500 2

3 200 800 5

4 100 900 10

5 50 950 20

6 20 980 50

Bioremediation 257

Reprint 2025-26



Wastes disposed from the industries consist of 
detergents, antibiotics, paints, biocides, etc. The pulp 
and paper industries discharge cellulosic and inorganic 
chemicals. Therefore, sewage composition differs with the 
type of industrial effluents discharged into sewage systems.

A variety of microorganisms are present in sewage, 
for example, bacteria, fungi, protozoa, algae, nematodes, 
amoebae and viruses. The microbial population per 
millilitre of sewage may vary from a few lakhs to several 
millions. Bacteria occurring in sewage are mainly intestinal 
and soil inhabiting and their common types are Coliforms, 
Streptococci, Clostridia, Micrococci, Broteus, Pseudomonas, 
and Lactobacilli. 

Box 2: Common pathogenic organisms found in water (domestic waste 
water) and the respective diseases

Organism Disease

Bacteria

  Escherichia coli Gastroenteritis

  Salmonella typhi Typhoid

  Vibrio cholerae Cholera

  Shigela sp. Shigellosis

Viruses

  Adenovirus Respiratory diseases

  Enteroviruses, Rotavirus Gastroenteritis

  Hepatitis A Infectious hepatitis

Protozoa

  Entamoeba histolytica Amoebic dysentery

  Giardia lamblia Giardiasis

  Balantidium coli Balantidiasis

Helminths

  Ascaris lumbricoides Ascariasis

  Schistosoma sp. Schistosomiasis

  Fasciola hepatica Fascioliasis

  Taenia saginata Taeniasis

258 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



11.1.2 Waste water Disposal Plant
Treatment of sewage water is essential before its disposal. 
If raw domestic or sanitary sewage is discharged without 
its biological and/or chemical treatment directly into water 
bodies, the water becomes a vector of diseases, available 
oxygen and other hydrogen acceptors in the water are soon 
used by the microorganisms living in the sewage and then 
foul smelling anaerobic processes start creating nuisance. 
Survival of fishes and other forms of higher aquatic life 
is also negatively affected leading to economic losses. 
Further, the water that receives the sewage becomes unfit 
for drinking or recreation purposes. The objective behind 
the sewage treatment is to kill pathogenic microorganisms, 
prevent anoxia, raise the pH to alkaline side, increase 
photosynthetic rate, reduce organic content, etc. For this, 
waste water is first routed to sewage disposal plants for 
treatment before it is discharged into the water bodies. 
The wastewater treatment plants are designed to carry out 
various steps namely, primary (physical or mechanical) 
treatment, secondary (biological) treatment, and tertiary 
(advanced) treatment. The steps involved in all types of 
treatments are shown in Fig. 11.1.

11.1.3 Primary or Physical Treatment
In primary treatment, sewage is first subjected to physical 
(or mechanical) methods such as screening, passage 
of wastewater into grit chamber and sedimentation to 
remove its coarse solid materials. In screening, bulky 
foreign matter such as bottles, paper, wooden boxes, etc., 
are removed. The sewage is passed through grit chamber 
having filters of graded openings and then allowed to flow 
through sedimentation tanks or sedimentation basins. 
The sewage is held in these tanks usually from 2 to 10 
hours. Coarse solid materials are concentrated in these 
tanks and collected from it. The particulate materials are 
now collectively called primary sludge, which is removed 
for further processing. At this point, treatment efficiency 
ranges from 30 to 40 percent BOD removal. Following 
sedimentation, the sludge and liquid effluent are processed 
separately during secondary treatment.

Bioremediation 259

Reprint 2025-26



Waste Water / Sewage

(a)   Primary Treatment Bar Screen comminutor
grit chamber

Settling /
Sedimentation Tank

(b) Secondary
     Treatment

ANAEROBIC PROCESS AEROBIC PROCESS

Anaerobic digestion of Sewage

solid sludge and breaking 
down of organic matter Sedimentation
into CH , CO , H , N

4 2 2 2

(Gas mixture may  Aerobic digestion of the 
be used as biogas) remaining sludge and 

breaking down organic matter 
into CO  and H O

2 2

Anaerobic Digestion Tank Activated Sludge Digester 
or Trickling Filter

Sedimentation Tank

(c) Tertiary Treatment

Chemical treatment of
nitrate and phosphate, etc.

Chlorination

Clean water

Fig. 11.1: Schematic representation of a modern municipal sewage treatment plant. (a) Primary 
(mechanical) treatment; (b) Secondary (biological) treatment; and (c) Tertiary (final) treatment

260 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



11.1.4 Secondary or Biological Treatment
The main function of secondary treatment is to remove 
much of the suspended organic material that remain in the 
effluent after primary treatment through the following steps. 
All biological waste treatment depends on microbiological 
degradation activities (hydrolysis, oxidation, reduction) 
on decomposable nutrients in sewage. Decomposition 
and stabilisation of wastes may be accomplished either 
anaerobically or aerobically, depending on the choice of the 
engineer, and both methods depend on the characteristics 
and amount of waste being treated.

The aerobic secondary treatment includes activated 
sludge process, aerobic digestion of sludge by various filters 
(e.g., trickling filters) and oxidation ponds, while anaerobic 
secondary treatment is represented by anaerobic digestion 
of sludge. However, regardless of the process being, waste 
stabilisation occurs in a series of more or less discrete 
stages. During activated sludge process a large volume 
of compressed air is passed through sewage to maintain 
aerobic condition. Aerobic microbes, during the activated 
sludge process, break down the organic carbon, nitrogen 
and phosphorus into minerals. In aerobic phase all of the 
complex, decomposable and organic matters in sewage 
are eventually changed largely into oxidised inorganic 
materials, such as sulphates, phosphates, nitrates, CO  

2

and H O, i.e., they are mineralised.
2

Activated sludge process
Figure 11.2 explains the sludge process in which there 
is an aeration tank and a settling tank. The sludge that 
settles at the bottom of the second settling tank is called 
activated sludge because it bears a high density of bacteria 
that have become conditioned to the unique environment 
of the system. A part of activated sludge is piped to the 
sludge digester. The remaining part is recycled back to 
the aeration tank and subsequently to the settling tank, 
where it in turn activates the inflowing deactivated effluent 
(Fig.11.2). In this process, plenty of oxygen is pumped into 
sewage tank and oxidation of sewage effluent is brought 
about by aerobic microorganisms, which break down 
organic matter to CO  and H O. Now, the effluent is passed 

2 2

Bioremediation 261

Reprint 2025-26



Air flow

Influent Effluent
Settling

Aeration tank
tank Sedimentation

tank

Recycle sludge
sludge

Waste sludge
digester

Fig. 11.2: Activated sludge process under aerobic conditions

through a sedimentation tank. Though about 90 percent 
of the organic matter of the effluent is digested via this 
process, the effluent still contains a considerable amount 
of nitrate and phosphate, etc. It is, therefore, not safe to 
discharge effluent at this stage into water bodies as both 
nitrate and phosphate can cause eutrophication. Now the 
effluent, which looks clear at this stage, is subjected to 
tertiary (final) treatment for further purification.

Trickling filter
Another form of secondary treatment is trickling filter 
process in which the sewage, after primary treatment, is 
sprayed by the arms of a rotating sprinkler into a filter 
bed of graded mixture of crushed stones, gravel, clinker 
and slag (Fig. 11.3). Spraying saturates the effluent with 
oxygen. The bed surface and stones are coated with slimy 
film of microbes (bacteria, fungi, protozoa and algae) 
that have accumulated during the operation of filter. As 
the effluent seeps over, the aerobic microbes degrade the 
organic matter. However, the treated effluent collected at 
the bottom of the tank is passed to sedimentation tank 
and, like activated sludge process, the effluent subjected 

262 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Box 3: Eutrophication

Excessive nutrients including nitrogenous and phosphorous compounds in water bodies due to 
sewage or run-off from agricultural fields favours the growth of photosynthetic microorganisms 
especially algae and phytoplankton. A rapid growth of algae in water bodies is called algal 
bloom. Such a phenomenon of excessive growth of photosynthetic microorganisms is referred 
to as Eutrophication. Eutrophication may occur either naturally or due to artificial means. 
Artificial or Anthropogenic eutrophication is caused by human activities, such as discharge of 
nitrate or phosphate containing industrial wastes, detergents, fertilisers, or sewage, into the 
water bodies. This excessive photosynthetic microorganisms growth on water surface prevents 
the entry of light and the submerged plants ultimately die. Algal population also releases toxins, 
which are harmful for the aquatic flora. In a situation of exhaustion of nutrients and due to 
the presence of toxic substances, algal growth is drastically stunted leading to decomposition 
of algal biomass by heterotrophic microbes. Dissolved oxygen also gets depleted leading to the 
death of aquatic fauna including fishes. 
 Natural eutrophication on the contrary, refers to excessive enrichment of water bodies 
as a result of merging of nitrogen and phosphorus rich streams into the lake. As explained 
above, organic debris and silt gradually pile up making the lake shallower and warmer. The 
warm-water organisms suppress the growth of those who thrive in a cooler environment. The 
shallower lake basin is overgrown by marshy plants, followed by the crowding of large masses 
of floating plants. Finally, the lake may convert into land. The natural eutrophication process 
is very slow, whereas eutrophication due to anthropogenic activities is faster.

to tertiary treatment. Primary treatment combined with 
secondary treatment can reduce BOD upto 90 percent, 
total nitrogen to about 50 per cent, total phosphorus to 30 
percent and suspended matter to 90 percent.

Rotating
arm

Influent
Spray

Gravel, rock,
clinker, etc.

Influent

Effluent

Underdrain
collection system

Fig. 11.3: Sketch of trickling filter process

Bioremediation 263

Reprint 2025-26



Box 4: Sewage Oxidation Ponds or Lagoons

Oxidation ponds (or lagoons) are up to 5 feet deep shallow ponds designated to allow direct 
wind action and algal growth on the sewage effluent. The lagoon treatment process is usually 
recommended for only small communities in rural areas, where large acreages of land are 
available. Oxygenation of the wastewater is accomplished by natural means (e.g., wind action 
and photosynthetic action of algae) or by mechanical aeration. Efficient and properly operated 
lagoons are capable of reducing BOD by 75 to 95 percent or greater. Oxygen supplied from 
air and produced as a result of algal photosynthesis fulfils the BOD of sewage effluent and 
thus helps in maintaining aerobic condition in sewage effluent. In such condition, the aerobic 
microbes grow rapidly and digest organic matter. In view of conservation of ground water 
for domestic, industrial, irrigation and recreational purposes, oxidation ponds are receiving 
considerable attention in many arid areas.

Anaerobic Sludge Digestion
Anaerobic waste treatment represents the use of anaerobic 
microorganisms to process waste material in the absence of 
oxygen. These microorganisms digest the complex organic 
material to grow and reproduce. The sludge collected after 
primary treatment of sewage is subjected to anaerobic (in 
absence of oxygen) digestion in a separate tank designed 
especially for the purpose. Since anaerobic condition 
prevails in this tank, the anaerobic microbes digest the 
organic matter by degrading them to soluble substances 
and gaseous products, such as methane (60–70%), CO  

2

(20–30%), H S and small amounts of H  and N . This gas 
2 2 2

mixture can be used for operating power for the sewage 
plant or as a fuel. Anaerobic sludge digestion requires 
30 to 40 days for complete digestion. Remaining sludge, 
after digestion, undergoes dewatering by air-drying on 
sand filter sludge beds, vacuum filtration, centrifugation 
and wet air oxidation prior to the final disposal. After 
dewatering, the sludge is pulverized, incinerated or sold as 
a fertiliser. The heating kills all pathogens. Milorganite is a 
good example of such fertiliser. Important constituents are 
various soluble compounds of nitrogen, phosphorus and 
potassium—essential for plant growth.

11.1.5 Tertiary or Advanced Treatment
Since the sewage-effluent treated during secondary 
treatment process still contains non-biodegradable organic 

264 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



pollutants (if the sewage contains industrial wastes) and 
mineral nutrients, particularly nitrogen and phosphorus 
salts, it is subjected to tertiary (or final) treatment for 
their removal. If not done, the sewage effluents containing 
nitrogen and phosphorus salts can cause serious 
eutrophication in aquatic ecosystems. Non-biodegradable 
organic pollutants are normally removed by using activated 
carbon filters, whereas phosphorus and nitrogen salts 
are removed by chemical treatment. Phosphorus salts 
are precipitated by liming. Lime reacts with phosphorus 
inorganic compounds in the effluent to form insoluble 
calcium phosphate (Ca (PO ) ), which then settles to the 

3 4 2

bottom of the settling tank and is removed. 
Nitrogen is present mainly as ammonia and it is 

removed by volatilisation (vigorous aeration at elevated 
temperature) at high pH. Ammonia containing waste water 
is directed into a metal tower. As this water slowly flows 
downwards over a series of small plastic baffle plates, air 
is forced upwards through the effluent and removes the 
ammonia gas from the water. Carbon absorption is done to 
remove the dissolved organic compounds from the effluent. 
This is done by passing water through a tower packed with 
small particles of carbon. Dissolved organic matter sticks 
to the carbon particle, a process called carbon polishing.

These treatments result in a high-quality effluent that 
does not cause eutrophication. The final step of tertiary 
treatment is chlorination by using either sodium or 
calcium hypochlorite (NaOCl or CaOCl ), respectively or 

2

chlorine to disinfect the effluent. Now the effluent is a clean 
water but still it cannot be used as drinking water.

11.2 solid Waste management

All non-liquid waste materials generated from households, 
streets, industrial, commercial and agricultural activities 
are called solid wastes.

Sources and types of solid wastes
Major sources of solid waste are households, agricultural 
fields, industries and mining, hotels and catering, roads 
and railways, hospitals and educational institutions, 
cultural centers and places of recreation and tourism, etc. 
(Table 11.2). 

Bioremediation 265

Reprint 2025-26



Table 11.2: Major sources and types of solid wastes

Source Typical waste generators Type of solid waste

Residential Single and multifamily dwellings Food waste, paper, cardboard, plastics, 
glass, leather, yard waste, wood, glass, 
metals, ashes, special waste (e.g., 
bulky items, consumer electronics, 
white good, batteries, oil, tires and 
household hazardous waste)

Industrial Light and heavy manufacturing, Housekeeping waste, packaging, 
fabrication, construction sites, food waste, construction and 
power and chemical plants demolition materials, hazardous 

waste, ashes, special waste

Commercial Stores, hotels, restaurants, Paper, cardboard, plastics, wood, 
markets, office, buildings, etc. food waste, glass, metals, special 

waste, hazardous waste

Industrial School, hospital, prisons, Same as commercial
government offices

Construction New construction site, road Wood, steel, concrete, dirt, etc.
and demolition repair, renovation site, 

demolition of buildings

Municipal Street cleaning, landscaping, Street sweeping landscape and 
services parks, beaches, other tree trimming, general wastes 

recreational areas, water and from park, beaches and other 
waste water treatment plant recreational areas, sludge.

Process Heavy and light manufacturing Industrial process wastes, scrap 
(manufacturing refineries, chemical plants, materials, off specification 
etc.) power plants, mineral products, slay, tailings

extraction and processing

Agriculture Crop, orchards, vineyards, Spoiled food wastes, agricultural waste, 
dairies, food lots, farm hazardous wastes (e.g., pesticides)

11.2.1 Risks of solid waste
Solid waste provides breeding sites for mosquitoes and 
flies which are carriers of many life-threatening diseases. 
For example, mosquitoes of Aedes genus spreads dengue 
and yellow fever; Anopheles genus  of mosquitoes transmits 
malaria; and mosquitoes of Culex genus transmit 
microfilariasis. 

Burning of some of these solid wastes produce 
carcinogens and other toxins. Poor management of collection 
and disposal of solid waste may lead to leachate pollution 
of surface and ground water. This may cause a significant 

266 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



problem if the waste contains toxic substances and disposed 
near the source of drinking supplies. Unhygienic and 
polluted environment affect the health of people. 

Box 5

1. Spread of plague episode in Surat (Gujarat) has been associated with the mishandling of 
solid waste disposal at city level.

2. Spread of dengue fever in Delhi is linked with the widespread stagnant water in different 
forms— water cooler, open sewage, badly kept drains, etc.

11.2.2 Solid waste management
Solid waste management refers to collecting, treating, Identification of the

types of waste
and disposing off solid material that is discarded 
or is no longer useful. Solid waste management is 
an important aspect of urban area management. 
Improper disposal of municipal solid waste can Identification of the

create unsanitary conditions, which can lead to sources of waste

environmental pollution and the outbreak of vector-
borne diseases. It is the discipline associated with 
the control of generation, collection, storage, transfer Determination of the

potential health hazards
and transport, processing and disposal of solid 

from waste
wastes in a manner that is in accord with the best 
principles of public health, economics, engineering, 
conservation, aesthetics and other environmental Determination of the
considerations. volume of the waste

The task of solid waste management presents 
complex technical challenges. They also pose various 
economic, administrative and social problems, which Identification of
need urgent attention. safe collection

Strategies for solid waste management
Strategies for solid waste management can be 
presented broadly as shown in Fig. 11.4. The Identification of

safe transportation
handling and managing of solid waste involves two 
approaches: (i) dumping the waste and (ii) recycling 
the waste. These two steps are of significance in 
managing the overall burden of the solid waste. Identification of

In order to establish effective solid waste safe disposal

management in the affected area, the given process 
should be used: Fig.11.4:  Stages of solid waste 

management

Bioremediation 267

Reprint 2025-26



Sorting and management of solid waste
To maximise the role of recycling of solid wastes, it is 
essential to sort the waste at the waste generating point 
in different categories to make recycling practice easy. 
Recycling of solid waste can be achieved under the following 
heads. Organic waste can be recycled through the process 
of composting. Fruits and vegetables waste, animal dung, 
fallen leaves from plants form excellent soil conditioner and 
fertiliser (compost). Implantation to make compost at home 
level can be achieved by using a suitable container. The 
contents of the container after a few weeks can be used as 
fertiliser. Vegetable waste and dried weeds can be chopped 
and compressed into small bricks and sun dried. Like dried 
cow dung, they can be used to replace charcoal or wood as 
cooking fuel. Glass and plastic waste can be reused in plastic 
and glass industries to reproduce wares for reuse. The task 
of collecting these waste items under different heads makes 
the recycling task more efficient and convenient.

Construction debris and other waste building material 
can also be reused. Often the construction of new house 
or building involves razing old structures. The debris 
produced in this manner can be very effectively used as 
filling material under floors.

Used tyres can be recycled by establishing appropriate 
recycling units. In the absence of this facility, it is advisable 
to bury them to avoid collection of water during rainy 
season, which encourages mosquito breeding. Burning of 
tyres has to be compulsorily avoided as the process leads 
to the emission of toxic fumes.

Solid waste management at community level
Some household items cannot be degraded at home level 
and their storage can cause space problem. Plastics, 
bones, metals, used batteries, broken glass, etc., falls in 
this class. A common facility made at community makes 
the subsequent processing easier, once the solid waste is 
sorted. 

Community refuse pit dug near the community dwelling 
units can be used to fill the refuse, which cannot be handled 
at home level. The site chosen to perform this function 
should be located away from water source to avoid any 
leaching of waste into the water. The surroundings of the 

268 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



pit should be fenced to prevent animals from intruding into 
the refuse pit. Collection of waste at community level can 
be organised by employing the service of trained persons 
who are aware to take adequate precautions while handling 
waste. The waste collected at community collection site 
should be taken to a designated city disposal site as and 
when the need is felt.

Managing special solid wastes
Some solid waste needs expert handling by using special 
equipment to protect the handler. Solid waste under this 
class falls in the following categories.

Medical solid waste
Healthcare solid waste is generated both at medical facilities 
and some routine activities at home and hospitals. The 
waste often contains infectious pathogens. Also, use of 
medical solid wastes (like masks, gloves, PPE kits, syringes 
and needles, etc.) increase significantly during pandemic/ 
epidemic. Therefore, high risk medical solid wastes must be 
separated as per guidelines and incinerated. The handler 
of the waste needs to take all precautions (wearing mask 
and gloves) while handling. In the absence of incinerator 
(such as at home), the waste should be treated with strong 
disinfectant. Sharp needles and glassware used at health 
facility should be disinfected. Used needles should be 
destroyed to prevent their reuse.

Slaughterhouse waste
Slaughterhouse waste consists of decaying animal 
carcasses, blood, fecal matter, hair and bones. Collection of 
such wastes should be handled by trained staff at specific 
sites meant to handle this kind of waste. The functioning 
and maintenance of the facility should comply with health 
standards and the community should ensure regular 
inspection of the sites by the authorities concerned for a 
proper disposal.

Industrial solid waste
Industrial solid waste can be of different kinds and the 
main concern associated with industrial waste is the 
proper disposal of chemical, biological and toxic metals. 
In general, the processing of waste from industrial units 
is handled by the respective industry itself as per the 
environmental rules and regulations.

Bioremediation 269

Reprint 2025-26



Disposal of toxic chemicals
Disposal of toxic chemicals should be done according 
to the manufacturer’s guidance, in case of doubt as to 
how to dispose specific toxic chemicals, local health and 
environment officials should be contacted.
Composting, vermiculture and methane 
production
Composting is the most powerful biological, chemical and 
physical activity, available in natural environment, where 
organisms under suitable conditions carry out biological 
degradation of material, considered waste from humans 
point of view. Organisms including microorganisms break 
down organic waste and produce carbon dioxide, water, 
heat and humus. The process stands out as the most 
powerful environmental tool by which a large variety of 
complex molecules, after degradation, can be recycled 
and reutilised. Composting concept has been successfully 
exploited by humans to degrade the toxic and persistent 
compounds present in water/soil.

Mechanism and procedure of composting
The waste material subsequent to its proper sorting of 
degradable material, after grinding, is mixed with water 
and sewage sludge containing organisms. To maintain the 
efficient digestion of waste material, suitable environment 
(such as optimum moisture content 45–65%) for optimum 
growth and activity of organisms is needed. Composting 
methods are either aerobic or anaerobic. Aerobic process 
requires enough oxygen availability within the compost 
heap or compost pit. The design and size of the composting 
pit ensures the maximum efficiency of degradation. Under 
optimal conditions, composting proceeds through three 
phases: (i) the mesophilic, or moderate-temperature phase, 
which lasts for a couple of days, (ii) the thermophilic, or 
high-temperature phase, which can last from a few days to 
several months, and finally (iii) a several-months cooling 
and maturation phase (Fig.11.5).

As composting proceeds, temperature changes, 
correspond to the dominance of specific communities of 
microorganisms at work. Mesophilic phase involves rapid 
breakdown of the soluble, readily degradable compounds 

270 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



60

50

40

30 Thermophilic
phase

20

10 Maturation phase

0

1 2 3 4

Time (months)

Fig. 11.5:  Temperature changes during composting

by mesophilic class of microorganisms. Degradation 
activity accompanies heat production and rapid rise in 
the compost temperature. As temperature rises above 
40ºC, the mesophilic microorganisms are competed out by 
thermophilic class of microorganisms, which are able to 
withstand higher temperature. At temperature of 55ºC and 
above, many pathogenic microorganisms are destroyed 
and this limits the rate of decomposition. To ensure 
aeration and lower temperature (<65ºC), the compost 
pit is designed to allow passage of air, which mixes the 
compost intermittently. During thermophilic phase, 
high temperature accelerates the degradation of protein, 
fats and complex carbohydrates, such as cellulose and 
hemicelluloses, the major structural components of plants. 
Once the supply of these compounds gets exhausted, the 
compost temperature gradually decreases and mesophilic 
phase again takes over for the final phase of ‘curing’ or 
maturation of the remaining organic matter.

Organisms involved in composting process
Diverse communities of microorganisms (both unicellular 
and multicellular) play their role at different stages of 
composting. Constant change in the microenvironment 
around the community of organisms provide selective 
advantage to those organisms who can survive best at a 
given time. Bacteria make up 80–90% of the billions of 
microorganisms found in a gram of compost. At highest 
compost temperature, bacteria of the genus Thermus are 
isolated. Actinomycetes are filamentous type of bacteria and 

Bioremediation 271

Reprint 2025-26

Temperature (oC)

mesophilic



play an important role in degrading lignin, cellulose, chitin 
and proteins. Special class of enzymes present in these 
bacteria are capable of degrading debris, such as woody 
stems, bark, or newspaper and cardboard boxes, etc.

Fungi represent a class of organisms that also consists 
of molds and yeast. It can decompose many complex 
polymer waste material present in the soil or compost. 
Most fungi live in the outer layer of the compost and are 
present during all phases of temperature change during 
the process of composting.

Protozoans are single-celled microscopic organisms 
found in water droplets trapped in compost matrix. Their 
role in composting is that of a secondary consumer and 
sustain on organic material, bacteria and fungi. In addition 
to above, compost also has the presence of a large variety 
of insects, mites, snow bugs, ants, earthworms and other 
types of worms. Vermiculture and methane emission are 
a part of the process of composting. Presence of worms in 
the compost or soil is an indication of the fertility of the 
soil in terms of the availability of nutrients essential for the 
growth of the plants. Composting, in essence, represents 
a natural way of regenerating soil fertility by utilising the 
waste produced in the environment by humans.

11.3  management and disposal of  

Biomedical Waste

‘Biomedical waste can be defined as any waste generated 
during the diagnosis, treatment or immunisation of 
human beings or animals or research activities pertaining 
thereto or in the production or testing of biologicals or 
in health camps’. Government has made guidelines for 
handling of biomedical waste, which are provided under 
Biomedical Waste Management Rules (BMWM), 2016, The 
Biomedical Waste Management Rules, 2016, categorises 
the biomedical waste into four major categories based on 
the segregation pathway and standard colour code that 
has been assigned for the containers in which these are 
to be segregated, these are yellow, red, white and blue 
(Table 11.3).

272 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Table 11.3: Details of colour code and types of waste

S. No. Category Type of Waste

1. Yellow (a) Anatomical Waste

• Human tissues, body parts and fetus below the viability period
• Animal carcasses, tissues, organs, body parts, animal houses

(b) Soiled waste, items contaminated with body fluids, blood, cotton swabs, 
discarded old and blood components.

(c) Discarded or expired medicines like antibiotics, cytotoxic drugs along 
with glass or plastic ampoules, vials, etc.

(d) Chemical waste like disinfectants, chemical used in the production 
of biologicals, insecticides, discarded solvents and reagents used for 
laboratory preparations, heavy metals (broken thermometer), batteries, 
etc.

(e) Beddings contaminated with blood or body fluids, discarded linen, 
mattresses, mask and gown.

(f) Microbiology, biotechnology and other clinical laboratory waste, like 
blood bags, specimens, human and animal cultures used in research, 
residual toxins, dishes and devices used for culture.

2. Red Contaminated plastic waste: waste generated from disposable items like 
intravenous tubes, bottles, catheters, syringes without needles, fixed 
needle syringes with their needles cut, urine bags, vaccutainers and gloves.

3. White Sharps including metals; used, discarded and contaminated metal sharps, 
needles, syringes with fixed needles, needles from needle tip cutter, blades, 
scalpels or any other contaminated sharp object that may cause puncture 
and cuts.

4. Blue Metallic body implants, broken or discarded and contaminated glass; 
medicine vials ampoules

Box 6

Biomedical wastes are also classified on the basis of risk factors involved as per WHO guidelines. 
These are:

• Risk Group 1 is comprised of no or low individual and community risk. For example, a 
microorganism that is unlikely to cause human or animal disease.

• Risk Group 2 categorises the condition of moderate individual risk and low community 
risk. Pathogen that causes human or animal disease and is likely to be a serious hazard 
to laboratory workers, the community, livestock or the environment. Laboratory exposures 
may cause serious infection, but effective treatment and preventive measures are available 
and the risk of spread of infection is limited.

Bioremediation 273

Reprint 2025-26



• Risk Group 3 classifies high individual risk and low community risk condition. A pathogen 
that usually causes serious human or animal disease but does not ordinarily spread 
from one infected individual to another. Effective treatment and preventive measures are 
available.

• Risk Group 4 is a group with high individual as well as community risk. In this group, 
the risk is due to pathogens that usually cause serious human or animal disease and that 
can be readily transmitted from one individual to another, directly or indirectly. Effective 
treatment and preventive measures are not usually available.

As we know, the biomedical wastes generated in—
healthcare facilities, diagnostic laboratories, biotechnology 
laboratories and institutions, medical research centres, 
veterinary institutes, mortuary and autopsy centres, and 
blood banks — are in large amount and highly infectious to 
human health, animals, living organisms and environment. 
It is the responsibility of the health care provider to 
segregate these biomedical wastes appropriately, and 
it is also important to segregate waste at the point of its 
generation from handling point of view. The containers, 
bins, bags, sharp boxes should be available in each health 
care facility, laboratories, medicals, etc. Trained staff 
is needed to segregate the waste. General information, 
posters, proper instructions regarding proper disposal of 
waste must be placed near dustbins, bags, containers, etc.

Box 7

WHO recommended segregation and collection scheme

Waste Colour of Container Type of Container Collection 
Categories and Markings Frequency

Infectious waste Yellow with biohazard Leak-proof strong      When three-
symbol, highly non-chlorinated plastic quarters filled or at 
infectious waste bag placed in a container least once a day.
should be additionally (bags for highly infectious 
marked ‘HIGHLY waste should be capable 
INFECTIOUS’ of being autoclaved)

Sharp waste Yellow, marked Puncture-proof container When filled to 
SHARPS with the line or three-
biohazard symbol. quarters filled.

Pathological Yellow with Leak-proof strong plastic When three-
waste biohazard symbol. bag placed in a container. quarters filled or at 

least once a day.

274 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Chemical and Brown, labeled Plastic bag or On demand
pharmaceutical with an appropriate rigid container 
waste hazard symbol

Radioactive Labeled with Lead box On demand
waste radiation symbol

General health Black Plastic bag inside When three-
care waste a container or quarters filled or at 

container which is least once a day.
disinfected after use.

Box 8

Mayapuri Radiological Accident

In April 2010, scrap market of Mayapuri area in Delhi was affected by a serious radiological 
accident in which public radiation exposure was reported. In this accident, the source of 
radioactive unit containing Gamma unit having Cobalt-60 pencils were sold at auction to 
a scrap metal dealer in Mayapuri on February 2010. It was dismantled by workers without 
knowing its consequences. The cobalt-60 source was cut into eleven pieces. Eight people were 
hospitalised in AIIMS as a result of radiation exposure, where one later died.

MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL OF 
RADIOACTIVE WASTE
The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) has 
been mandated by the Government of India to be the 
competent authority as per Atomic Energy (safe Disposal 
of Radioactive Wastes) Rules, 1987. The radioactive waste 
should be disposed according to guidelines issued as per 
the provisions of the said rules.

1. Atomic Energy (safe Disposal of Radioactive Wastes) 
Rules, 1987: https://www.aerb.gov.in/images/
PDF/AE(SDRW)Rules%201987.pdf

2. Radiation protection rule: https://dae.nic.in/
writereaddata/RPR2004.pdf

11.4 Bioremediation of pesticides

Pesticides are the categories of diverse chemicals that are 
used either for protecting the standing crop or stored food 
grains from different types of pests like insects, rodents, 
weeds, bacteria, larvae of worms and even fungi. Broadly, 
chemical pesticides can be categorised into organochlorine, 
organophosphorus, organometallic, synthetic pyrethroids, 
carbamates, etc., which vary in their properties.

Bioremediation 275

Reprint 2025-26



Box 9: Various types of pesticides along with their properties

Type of Chemical Effects on Example Persistency
pesticide Nature animals

Organochlorine Organic Nervous system DDT, Lindane, Very long
compound with disrupter, Toxic Endosulfan, 
chlorine atom, Aldrin, Dialdrin, 
Lipid soluble Atrazine 

(herbicide)

Organophosphate Organic Nervous system Parathion, Less persistent
compound disrupter (inhibits Malathion,
with phosphate cholinesterase Dimecron,
group as basic activity), Diazinon
structure highly toxic

Carbamates Derivate of Nervous system Carbaryl, Less persistent
Carbamic acid disrupter (inhibits Carbofuran, IPC

cholinesterase 
activity), 
highly toxic

Pyrethroids Synthetic Nervous system Cypermethrin, Usually 
analogues of disrupter Deltamethrin degraded by 
pyrethrum sunlight in a 
plant few days. Less 

persistent in 
soil (few days)

Organometallic Synthetic Can be absorbed Methylmercury Very long
organic through skin, GI 
compound with tract and through 
heavy metal respiration, toxic

Inorganic Metal or non- Coagulation of Arsenic, Very long
Pesticides metal and its protein, affect Mercury, 

compound the central Cadmium, 
nervous system Sulphur
and functioning 
of enzyme

Use of these agrochemicals was also one of the key 
contributors in the success of green revolution during late 
sixties, which made our country self-sufficient for food.

Let us briefly understand the nature of different types 
of pesticides. DDT (an organochlorinous pesticide) was 
initially found to be a miraculous solution to the spread 
of malaria as it proved to be highly effective and useful 
in the control of Anopheles mosquito. Later, resistance 

276 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Box 10: The first pesticide

Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) was the first ever pesticide synthesized in the 
laboratory, which is an organochlorine compound. Considering the efficacy in killing insects, 
including mosquitos, it was considered initially as a solution to the problem of insects and 
other categories of pests. Subsequently, a large number of other chemicals having the potential 
to kill insects and other pests quite efficiently were synthesized and its  usage in agricultural 
practices became quite prevalent.

to DDT pesticides was noted among target organism, 
rendering them ineffective on the one side, and their use 
was found to be harmful to non-target species. Owing 
to their hydrophobic nature and lipid solubility, these 
chlorinated organic compounds have also been found to 
be non-biodegradable.

Organophosphate pesticides have phosphate 
group and they are acutely toxic due to their ability to 
inhibit cholinesterase resulting into accumulation of 
neurotransmitter acetylcholine across synapse during 
neuronal transmission. Excess of such organophosphates 
in their residual forms may turn out to be more harmful 
than the original one and therefore their excessive usage 
may be harmful in the long run.

Carbamate and synthetic pyrethroids pesticides 
get easily hydrolysed and degraded. Organochlorine 
and organometallic pesticides may persist long in the 
environment and owing to their solubility in lipid, they 
may also remain present even in the body of non-target 
organisms, i.e., organisms other than insects and pests 
including human beings.

These excessive agrochemicals, either in their original or 
metabolised forms, may also enter into plants  and ultimately 
in different organisms of the trophic levels including human 
beings by the process called biomagnification. Quite 
significant levels of such agrochemicals have been found 
to be present in the tissues of many organisms besides 
being accumulated in soil and water.

Therefore, the removal of such a long-lasting toxic 
compounds from soil and water bodies is extremely crucial 
for ecosystem and the health of non-target organisms 
including human beings even if it is present in residual 
amount.

Bioremediation 277

Reprint 2025-26



Bioremediation of pesticides using 
microorganisms
Considering the persistency of pesticides or its residues, 
either the removal or altering the toxic nature is extremely 
crucial and essential in minimising its adverse effects in 
humans, other non-target organisms and the ecosystem. 
Bioremediation is thus a process through which such toxic 
pesticides can be removed completely or its chemical nature 
can be altered, so as to have no or less adverse impact on the 
environment. In the process of bioremediation, the ability 
of microorganisms to degrade or alter the toxic nature of 
chemical pesticides into non-toxic substances is exploited. 
There are quite a good number of microorganisms capable 
of wide spectrum metabolism. These may be bacteria, fungi, 
algae and other microbial strains. Many microorganisms 
are known to utilise chemicals to derive energy on one 
hand and possess enzymes capable of degrading such 
pesticides on the other hand. Enzymatic reaction that is 
important from the perspective of degrading pesticides or 
other toxic chemicals are mainly catalysed by cytochrome 
P450, esterases, oxidases, peroxidases, transferases, 
etc. Role of these enzymes in the process of degradation 
reaction has been given briefly in Table 11.5. The process 
of transformation or degradation of pesticides is complex 
and may involve enzymatic reactions like oxidation, 
reduction, hydrolysis, transfer of groups and formation of 
conjugate with sugar or amino acid making it less toxic 
and water soluble. 

Box 11: Enzymes and their role in Pesticide Bioremediation

Enzyme Function Role in Bioremediation

Cytochrome Oxidation and Oxidative breakdown of the pesticide or 
P450 reduction reaction any xenobiotic (synthetic) compound

Esterase Hydrolysis reaction Hydrolytic breakdown of 
organophosphate or carbamate pesticide

Oxidase Redox reactions Oxidation reduction reaction

Peroxidase Redox reaction Oxidative degradation of 
organometallic compounds

Transferase Transfer of glutathione Transfer of glutathione to some 
group, hydrolytic and electrophilic pesticides and also 
redox reaction its oxidative degradation

278 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Box 12

CH O S
3

CCl
3

P

Cl C Cl CH O
3 S CHCOOC H

2 5

H CH COOC H
2 2 5

p,p'- DDT Malathion

(a) Organochlorine Pesticides (b) Organophosphate Pesticides

Cl

O O
Cl O

NH C O CH(CH ) O
3 2

N
Isopropyl phenyl carbamate Cypermethrin

(c) Carbamate Pesticides (d) Synthetic pyrethroids Pesticides

Examples of (a) Organochlorine, (b) Organophosphate, (c) Carbamate and (d) Synthetic pyrethroids

A number of microorganisms have been identified with 
the potential to bioremediate a number of toxic substances, 
e.g., Pseudomonas, Aerobactor, Acinetobacter, Plesiomonas, 
Neisseria, Sphingomonas, Flavobacterium, etc. The whole 
process of bioremediation of any persistent chemical 
present in the system also depends on physicochemical 
conditions like pH, temperature, water, availability of 
oxygen and substrate, etc., of the environment on one hand 
and varieties of soil and water microflora present on the 
other hand. Simultaneous use of a conglomerate of such 
microorganisms for biodegradation or bioremediation of 
toxic chemicals has also been observed to yield a better 
result.

Strategies for bioremediation
Bioremediation of toxic substances may take place 
naturally or it may be maneuvered using specific type 
of microorganisms and other strategies. We have already 
understood earlier that microorganisms have either 
already present in the soil/water or introduced and has 
the potential to either degrade or remediate the toxic 
substances into non-toxic substances or elements. Such 
an onsite remediation strategy is referred to as in situ 

Bioremediation 279

Reprint 2025-26



280 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26

Box 13: Mechanism of Pesticide Bioremediation

After its release each pesticide undergoes a series of reactions for exhibiting its property in the target organism, i.e., pests. In 
case the same is not completely used up, then depending on the type of processes and reactions in which it enters, it is quite 
likely that the same will remain present in its original form or in other form, which may lead to various harmful consequences. 
Bioremediation of these agrochemicals present in soil or water is one of the best solutions. However, involving microorganisms 
in such a process of bioremediation of pesticides is dependent on a number of factors. Such factors include environmental 
conditions like temperature, humidity, pH, salinity, nutrition, presence of CO  and O , etc. Also, the microbial species present 

2 2

and its adaptability with the pesticide is crucial for its bioremediation. The structure of pesticide is yet another factor that affects 
the process of bioremediation. For example, a polymeric xenobiotic compound is comparatively less biodegradable than a lower 
molecular weight compound. The xenobiotic substances are subjected to enzymatic action present in the microorganisms during 
the bioremediation process. The most immediate enzyme action on the pesticides present in soil or water are oxidation–reduction 
reaction, hydrolysis and transferase activities of cytochrome, peroxidase esterase and transferase enzymes. Needless to mention, 
the conditions for the sustenance and emzymatic activity of microorganisms must be conducive. Also, a few microorganisms 
have been found to possess genes and the product of such genes have been found to be capable of degrading pesticides. A series 
of Atz genes (namely Atz A to Atz F) have been identified in Pseudomonas, which helps in utilising Atrazine pesticide as its 
carbon source for energy and completely degrade the pesticide through the following mechanism.

Cl OH OH OH

H O
2 H O H O

N N N N 2 N N 2 N N

AtzA AtzB AtzC

H C HN N NHCH (CH ) N NHCH (CH ) OH N NHCH (CH ) OH N OH
5 2 3 2 H C HN 3 2 3 2

5 2

Atrazine Hydroxyatrazine N-isopropylammelide Cyanuric acid

O O O O

AtzD AtzE AtzF
H N +

N +  2CO2 NH 2NH-O NH 42 N 2
2

H O H H O H H O2 CO 2 NH 2
2 3

Biuret Allophanate

Cyanuric acid

OH

N N

OH N OH



Box 14: Superbug and Bioremediation

The presence of hydrocarbon degrading genes on plasmids of four different strains Pseudomonas 
was successfully exploited by an India born US scientist Anand Mohan Chakrabarty (4 April 
1938 –10 July 2020) and these genes were inserted using rDNA technology into one strain 
of Pseudomonas putida which is capable of degrading camphor, naphthalene, octane and 
xylene. Creation of this superbug by rDNA technology is shown in the Figure below. This 
breakthrough was recognised by the award of a US patent.

CAM Plasmid

Chromosome OCT Plasmid XYL Plasmid NAH Plasmid

Strain A Strain B Strain C Strain D
degrades camphor degrades octane degrades xylol degrades naphthalene

Hybridization and
Hybridization

recombinantion of plasmid

Strain E
CAM/OCT Strain F

Plasmid

XYL Plasmid

Superbug NAH Plasmid

Strain G degrades camphor,
octane, xylol and naphthalene

bioremediation. There are many instances where in situ 
bioremediation strategies have been adopted to clean-
up petroleum spillage and for restoration of degraded 
ecosystem due to excessive mining or accumulation of 
toxic substances including pesticides. It is possible 
that some of the toxic substances are degraded or 
remediated into non-toxic ones by microorganisms 
naturally present in the system in the course of time. This 
situation is referred to as intrinsic in situ bioremediation. 
However, such an intrinsic mechanism of bioremediation 
is dependent on many factors, like type and population 
of microorganisms, soil type, availability of nutrients and 

Bioremediation 281

Reprint 2025-26



other substances that support growth. Undoubtedly, such 
an intrinsic pathway of in situ bioremediation mechanism 
involves very less disruption of the contaminated site with 
low public exposure and is cost effective. However, this 
process not only takes comparatively long time but it has 
also been found that complete bioremediation of the toxic 
substances is not achieved through this process. 

In order to address these difficulties in the in situ 
bioremediation process, it is possible to adopt a strategy 
to encourage microbial growth in an area selected for 
bioremediation. For this, oxygen, nitrogen and other growth-
promoting substances are circulated in the contaminated 
soil through injection and extraction wells created for the 
purpose (Fig. 11.6). Obviously, oxygen will serve the purpose 
of electron acceptor (which is produced during the process 
of being converted into water by the toxicant called electron 
donor). Such a process in which the microbial growth is 
promoted externally in the contaminated soil or water for in 
situ bioremediation of toxicants is referred to as engineered 
in situ bioremediation.

Fig. 11.6: In Situ bioremediation

For the purpose of bioremediation, another technique 
can also be adopted in which the contaminated soil is 
physically taken out and treated separately for the removal 
or biodegradation of toxicants present in it. This is normally 
done for a very heavily contaminated soil. There are various 
strategies adopted for the purpose as described below:

282 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Slurry bioreactors: In such bioreactors, the 
contaminated solid or soil is agitated vigorously in the 
presence of water and nutrients capable of enhancing the 
ability of microbes present in soil to degrade the toxicant 
under the optimum condition. Mobile slurry bioreactors are 

Box 15

Oilzapper: A solution for oil spills and treatment of oily sludge
Oil spill incidents are global phenomena posing a serious 
threat to the ecosystem and its flora and fauna. Exploration, 
production, transportation, storage and refining processes 
of petroleum may accidently lead to oil spill in soil or water 
bodies causing hydrocarbon pollution. Physical (storing of oil 
sludge and drill cutting in secured pits) and chemical methods 
of remediation of these hydrocarbons are expensive as well as 

Oilzapper packed in sterile 
non-environment friendly. The Energy and Resource Institute 

polybags 
(TERI) with the support of Department of Biotechnology, 
Government of India, came out with its invention called 
‘Oilzapper’, which can zap the spilled petroleum oil using a 
consortium of five non-pathogenic bacterial strains. These 
bacteria can biodegrade different fractions of oil like aliphatic, 
aromatic and asphalting compound of oil sludge or crude oil. 
In this cost effective technology, Oilzapper is immobilised 
onto a carrier material which is powdered corncob, for its 
application in oil contaminated environment. TERI has Bioreactors for 

developed fermentation facility of different capacities ranging production of Oilzapper    
(13kl,1.5kl,300L,30L,10L)

from 15000 litres, 1500 litres, 300 litres to 20 and 10 litres 
for large scale production of 
Oilzapper. ‘Oilzapper’ have 
been successfully used by 
various oil companies across 
India as well as abroad. 
Considering the wide scale 
implication of ‘Oilzapper’, 
TERI and ONGC (Oil and 
Natural Gas Company) 
developed a joint venture 
namely Ongc Teri Biotech 
Limited (OTBL), which takes 
care of its implementation. 
Till date, ‘Oilzapper’ has 
cleaned more than 750000 
metric tones of oil sludge and 
oil contaminated soil in India 
and in a few Middle-east countries.

Courtesy: The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI)

Bioremediation 283

Reprint 2025-26



also available so that the bioremediation of contaminated 
soil can be done very close to the contaminated site. 

Land Farming: In land farming nutrient, moisture and 
other conditions for an optimal microbial growth are applied 
to bed of the land farming site to facilitate bioremediation 
process.

Composting: In this process, the contaminated soil is 
mixed with agricultural wastes of organic substances like 
stray or corncobs to enable optimal supply of air and water 
for bioremediation process. Excavation and transport of 
contaminated soil for composting is a challenge from the 
point of view of exposure of contaminants to labourers. 

Biopiles: This is a process in which the contaminated 
soil is excavated and mixed with leachate materials capable of 
degrading and draining out the toxic substances present in it.

Phytoremediation
There are many examples in which whole plants do play 
an important role in either uptaking or remediating 
chemical nature of toxic substances present in soil or 
water. Students have studied about Brassica napus, 
Helianthus annus plants in Class XI (Chapter 1) which 
can accumulate mercury and lead from contaminated soil. 
Besides this, microorganisms found in the rhizosphere 
play an important role in the remediation process of toxic 
chemicals present in the environment (soil and/or water). 
Since most of the toxic substances present in soil are due 
to agricultural activity and therefore, microorganisms 
present in the rhizosphere (region of soil under the influence 
of secretions of root or microorganisms present in it) 
facilitates the phytoremediation process through a variety 
of biochemical processes, like chelation, methylation, 
changing pH of soil, altering redox reaction and many 
other actions. The process also includes the ability of a 
number of plants to accumulate toxicants (especially 
compounds with heavy metals), altering bioavailability of 
such toxicants. 

The role of nitrogen fixing bacteria, also known as 
diazotrophs, in increasing the soil fertility is well known, 
which can convert atmospheric nitrogen into the compound 
(ammonia and urea) that plants can easily uptake. Few 
of the common examples of microbes involved in the 
process of phytoremediation are given in Table 11.4. Also, 
these diazotrophs facilitate the production of a few plant 

284 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



hormones like indole acetic acid (IAA), and gibberellins 
that facilitates crop plant growth besides remediation of 
toxicants containing lead, zinc, nickel, etc. Also, there are a 
few aquatic plants like Hydrila verticilliata and Nymphaea 
alba which help in the reduction of chromium in polluted 
water and therefore used in phytoremediation.

Table 11.4: Microbes in Phytoremediation

Types of Plant Effect
microorganism

Azotobacter Maize, Mustard Reducing soil pH, production of plant hormones, 
chroococcum remediation of heavy metals like lead, zinc

Rhizobium Maize Reducing soil pH, production of plant hormones, 
leguminosarum remediation of heavy metals like lead, zinc

Rhizobium sp. Pea, Lentil Production of siderophore, release of 
hormones, remediation of nickel and zinc

SUMMARY

• Large population and various human activities lead to 
the drastic shortage of fresh water in India.

• A large part of the population is unaware of the treatment 
of sewage waste before discharge.

• Sewage water consists inorganic and organic matter 
suspended in soluble form, which can be detected by 
Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD).

• Sewage water contains the microflora of human 
intestinal tract as well as many soil and water species, 
some fungus and viruses.

• Sewage disposal plants are operated for treatment of 
waste water before its release into streams. The waste 
water treatment plants are designed based on their 
capability to provide primary, secondary (biological), 
and tertiary (advanced) treatment.

• Primary treatment removes large floating objects, 
secondary treatment removes suspended organic 
material through microbiological degradation, whereas 
tertiary treatment removes phosphorus and 
nitrogenous nutrients and all suspended organic 
matter from waste water.

Bioremediation 285

Reprint 2025-26



• All non-liquid waste materials generated from 
households, streets, industrial, commercial and 
agricultural activities are called solid wastes.

• Solid wastes can be categorised into two groups: 
(i) biodegradable waste and (ii) non-biodegradable 
waste.

• Decomposition of solid wastes are associated with 
various diseases, like malaria, dengue, SARS, plague; 
attract animals, flies, vermins and can play a major 
role in the transmission of diseases.

• Solid waste management refers to the process of 
collecting, treating, and disposing of solid material 
that is discarded or is no longer useful.

• The handling and managing of solid waste involves two 
approaches—dumping and recycling the waste.

• Organic waste can be recycled through the process of 
composting. Fruits and vegetables waste, animal dung 
and fallen leaves from plants form an excellent soil 
conditioner and fertiliser (compost).

• Health care solid waste contains many infectious 
pathogens, which needs incineration or safe burial 
immediately. The handler of the waste needs to take all 
precautions (wearing mask and gloves) while handling 
waste. 

• Industrial solid waste can be of different kinds and the 
main concern associated with industrial waste is the 
proper disposal of chemical, biological and toxic metals, 
which is handled by the respective industries.

• Composting is the most powerful biological, chemical 
and physical activity, available in natural environment, 
where organisms under suitable conditions carry out 
biological degradation of material.

• Biomedical Waste Management Rules 2016 (BMWM) 
categorises the biomedical waste into four major 
categories based on the segregation pathway and 
standard colour code assigned for containers.

• Yellow colour code is for anatomical waste, soiled 
waste, discarded or expired medicines, chemical waste, 
bedding, microbiology and biotechnology and other 
clinical laboratory waste.

• Red colour code is for contaminated plastic waste: 
waste generated from disposable items like intravenous 
tubes, bottles, catheters, syringes without needles, 
fixed needle syringes with their needles cut, urine bags, 
vaccutainers and gloves.

286 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



• White colour code for sharps including metals; used, 
discarded and contaminated metal sharps, needles, 
syringes with fixed needles, needles from needle tip 
cutter, blades, scalpel or any other contaminated sharp 
object that may cause puncture and cuts.

• Blue colour code is for metallic body implants, broken 
or discarded and contaminated vials, ampoules.

• As per WHO guidelines, the biomedical waste is also 
classified based on risk factors involved into four major 
groups.

• It is important to segregate waste at the point of its 
generation from handling point of view. 

• Common Biomedical waste Treatment Facility (CBWTF) 
is available within 75 km of travelling distance of a 
health care facility.

• A symbol indicating ‘Biohazard’ should be placed in all 
colour coding and labels. 

• The radioactive waste should be disposed of according 
to the guidelines issued and as per the provisions of the 
said rule.

EXERCISES

 1. Which microorganisms are used in sewage water 
treatment and what is their role?

 2. Explain as to how biological oxygen demand represents 
the condition of sewage water?

 3. How does any toxic substance get biomagnified among 
organisms? Explain in brief.

 4. What are xenobiotic compounds? How do these 
compounds affect the productivity of soil?

 5. Discuss the process of aerobic and anaerobic 
decomposition of sewage waste water treatment.

 6. What are the different types of solid wastes produced?

 7. Discuss the role of different microorganisms in the 
process of composting of solid waste.

 8. How are pesticides harmful for non-target organisms?

 9. Briefly explain as to how microorganisms can 
bioremediate toxic pesticides into harmless and 
non-toxic compounds.

 10. Which of the following compounds can be removed from 
waste water during treatment using lime?

 (a) Organic compound

Bioremediation 287

Reprint 2025-26



 (b) Phosphorous salts

 (c) Ammonia

 (d) Urea

 11. Maximum decomposition of water takes place during:

 (a) Primary treatment only

 (b) Primary and Secondary treatment both

 (c) Secondary treatment only

 (d) Secondary and tertiary treatment both

 12. Which enzyme is mainly responsible for hydrolytic 
breakdown of pesticides?

 (a) Peroxidase

 (b) Oxidare

 (c) Cytochrome P/450

 (d) Esterase

 13. Which of the following is not a strategy of bioremediation?

 (a) Sludge digestion

 (b) Composting

 (c) Slury bioreactor

 (d) Biopiles

 14. Assertion: Bioremediation is a process through which 
toxic pesticides can be completely removed.

Reason: Microorganisms can be used for bioremediation 
of toxic chemicals.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
correct explanation of assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 15. On the basis of the colour coding and type of container for 
disposal of health care waste, choose the correct match:

 (a) Yellow — recyclable plastic waste

 (b) Red — metallic body

 (c) White — sharp metals, needle, syringes

 (d) Blue — general health care waste

 16. What is the basis of classifying organisms into four risk 
groups?

288 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26

##12##

UNIT V
Recent Innovations in 
Biotechnology and 
Entrepreneurship 
Chapter 12: Recent Innovations in Biotechnology

Chapter 13: Entrepreneurship

Reprint 2025-26



John Bertrand Gurdon 
(2nd October 1933–Present )

Sir John Bertrand Gurdon (born on 2 October 1933) is an 
English Developmental Biologist. He is best known for his 
pioneering research in nuclear transplantation and cloning. 
In 1956, he joined a Ph.D. programme with Embryologist 
Michael Fischberg and started to work on nucleus transfer 
from differentiated cells to eggs cells. Later, he successfully 
replaced a nucleus of fertilised egg cell of frog with a nucleus 
of mature cell from the intestine of tadpole. This egg cell with 
the nucleus from intestinal cell grew successfully into a new 
frog. This experiment proved that mature cell also carries 
the required genetic information required to differentiate into 
every cell type. Gurdon’s work laid down the foundation for 
cloning, which later resulted in the first successful cloning 
of mammal “Dolly”. In 2012, Gurdon was awarded the 
Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, jointly with Shinya 
Yamanaka, who discovered the induced pluripotent stem 
cells. His Nobel Lecture was called “The Egg and the Nucleus: 
A Battle for Supremacy”.

Reprint 2025-26



Chapter 12 Recent Innovations in 
Biotechnology

Biotechnological innovations have grown steadily over 12.1 Environmental 

the past 10 years or so, and have benefited the human Biotechnology

lives in agriculture, medical science, environment and 12.2 Plant 

energy. These technological innovations include GM Biotechnology

crops, diagnostics, bacteria that can eat oil, growing 12.3 Regenerative 

human organs in labs for transplants, and advances in Medicine

biofuel, that can help reduce our nation’s carbon footprint. 12.4 Nanobiotechnology

Innovations could help improve cost effectiveness and 12.5 Synthetic Biology
resource efficiency of biogas energy technology in a 12.6 Future Prospects
sustainable manner. We now even have plants and meat 
grown in labs that can be genetically regulated to taste 
and look in a particular way reflecting on the importance 
of synthetic biology.

12.1 EnvironmEntal BiotEchnology

Ever since the industrial revolution started in the 1750s, 
the number of industries in different sectors increased 
exponentially. With this, came the unprecedented 
degradation of the environment, polluting the air, water 
and soil with various pollutants such as heavy metals, 
pesticides, dyes, carbon dioxide and other greenhouse and 
poisonous gases, micro-pollutants, etc. 

Reprint 2025-26



In addition to the issue of environmental degradation, 
it has also become inevitable to find alternatives for 
non-renewable fossil fuels or finding more efficient ways 
of extracting and using fossil fuels. Biotechnology offers 
viable options, primarily because it is environment-friendly 
and uses natural systems. In environmental biotechnology, 
different forms of biological systems, whether naturally 
occurring or genetically engineered, are used.

The basic concepts and approaches in the field of 
environmental biotechnology are bioremediation (that 
includes a wide array of applications such as waste 
treatment, degradation, vermi-technology, etc.), prevention 
of environmental problems, detection and monitoring of 
contaminants and genetic engineering. You have learned 
about bioremediation in Chapter 11 of Unit IV. In this 
section, the focus will be on the second aspect, i.e., 
prevention, and will primarily deal with the production of 
biofuels and avenues in the field of biodegradation and 
manufacture of biodegradable products.

12.1.1 Biofuel

Biofuels are the fuels produced from biological products, 
which could be living organisms or from waste generated 
from biological products, such as from landfills, recycled 
vegetable oil, etc. In many places specific crops, such as 
soybeans, jatropha, pongamia, palm oil, algae, etc., are 
grown for the production of fuel. Fuels produced from such 
crops are known as biofuel or agrofuels. On the basis of 
their characteristics, biofuels can be broadly divided into 
biodiesel, bioalcohol, biogas and biomass in different 
forms.

Biodiesel

Biodiesel is made from raw materials such as animal 
fats, vegetable oils, waste cooking oil, soybean, rapeseed, 
jatropha, mustard, flax, sunflower, palm oil, canola, 
hemp, field pennycress, Pongamia pinnata, algae, etc., by 
the process called trans-esterification. Although in many 
European countries, a 5 per cent biodiesel blend is widely 
used, it can be used in its pure form without blending 
it with fossil diesel. The advantage of biodiesel is that it 

292 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



contains higher hydrogen and oxygen and less carbon when 
compared with fossil fuels. This improves the combustion 
of biodiesel and reduces the particulate emissions from 
unburnt carbon. Another advantage of biodiesel is that 
it can be directly used in regular diesel engines without 
making any changes or modifications to the engines.

Bioalcohol

Bioalcohols, such as bioethanol, are produced from wheat, 
corn, sugarcane, molasses, sugar beets, potato, fruit waste, 
etc., by the process of fermentation. The basic steps in the 
production of bioalcohol include treatments which release 
sugars from the stored starch or cellulose followed by 
fermentation of the sugars by microorganisms, distillation 
and drying.

Box 1: Ethanol Blending in Petrol

Ethanol is widely used across the continents. Although it can be blended in any percentage 
with petrol, the blending percentage varies and ranges from about 2% to almost 30%, 
depending upon the norms adopted by the country. In India, the government has permitted 
oil marketing companies to sell ethanol blended petrol with percentage of ethanol up to 10%. 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) specification recommends to achieve 5% ethanol blending 
across the country as a whole. As more ethanol is blended, the lesser will be the consumption 
of fossil fuel. In addition, ethanol is renewable and also reduces carbon dioxide and other 
greenhouse gas emissions. However, the use of ethanol has practical problems, like reduced 
efficiency of the engine. It makes engines harder to start and causes sputtering and oxidation 
of aluminium in the carburettors. Further, it causes steel components of the engine to rust. 
In order to overcome this issue, automobile manufacturers have to make necessary changes 
in the engine.

As far as the source of biofuel is concerned, micro 
algae and macro algae are being explored for the purpose. 
Micro algae includes microscopic photosynthetic forms, 
and the macro algae are the large multicellular plant-
like organisms, commonly known as seaweeds. Different 
varieties of seaweeds have varied content of oil and sugar. 
The mass production of biofuels from algae is being 
explored because of several reasons, such as the ease with 
which it can be grown and harvested. It is renewable as 
it can be grown and harvested year after year, and it can 
produce both bioalcohol and biodiesel, it is non-edible and 

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 293

Reprint 2025-26



can serve as an alternative to corn, sugarcane, soybeans 
and other sources which are also consumed as food. This 
is also important from the perspective that increased use of 
agriculture fields to produce biofuels or biodiesel which will 
adversely affect food production for human consumption. 
However, in spite of the advantages of using algae for the 
production of biofuel, at present it is still not cost-effective 
and research is underway to overcome such challenges.

Biogas

Biogas is a useful energy source or biofuel produced 
from organic substances such as dung, night soil wastes, 
manure, crops, organic industrial waste, waste water, 
etc., and mainly consists of methane and carbon dioxide. 
It is produced by breaking down of organic material with 
the help of bacteria in anaerobic conditions. This process 
takes place in an anaerobic digester and is accelerated 
by creating the optimal conditions for microorganisms to 
multiply, which leads to a highly efficient breakdown of 
materials.

Biogas could play a key role in the developing market 
for renewable energy. Utilisation of biogas is expected to 
be doubled in next five years. Biogas generation serves 
three important functions: waste removal, environmental 
management and energy production.

In India, under the National Biogas and Manure 
Management Programme, the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy installed about 49.3 lakh biogas plants 
in the country, introducing novel technologies, such as 
cryogenic separation, in situ upgrading, hydrate separation 
and biological methods. Biogas plant is considered to be 
the most sustainable option for households having feed 
material, so as to become self-dependent for cooking gas 
and highly organic enriched bio-manure. It provides the 
solution to protect the households from the problems of 
indoor air pollution at the same time saving on  the cost 
of refilling of LPG cylinders. Biogas is considered to be the 
future of renewable and sustainable energy.

Inspite of its many benefits, the method of its production 
is yet to be perfected so as to simplify and improve the 
process of biogas generation to make it more efficient and 

294 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



user-friendly. Biogas has been found to damage vehicles 
by corroding the metal parts of the engine when used in 
automobiles as a biofuel. This greatly increases the cost of 
maintenance.

Biomass

Biomass, or solid biofuels, are an important source of 
energy, especially for the economically weaker section of 
the society. Some examples of solid biofuels are wood, 
sawdust, coal, grass cuttings, domestic refuse, charcoal, 
agricultural waste, non-food energy crops, dried manure, 
etc. Most of the available biomass can be conveniently 
used directly on stove, furnace, hearth, etc. Certain forms 
of biomass such as sawdust, wood chips, and other 
agricultural wastes are preferably converted into pellets. 
Cow dung cakes are another popular form of solid biofuel. 
However, the problem that comes with the combustion 
of biomass or solid biofuel is that it emits considerable 
amounts of pollutants, such as particulate matters and 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), which are 
harmful to health.

12.1.2 Biodegradation

The natural waste management and recycling system 
breaks down everything from yard waste to crude 
oil keeping the planet clean and healthy. Increase in 
population has resulted in the generation of heaps of 
wastes, many of which are non-biodegradable, such as 
plastics and fluorinated carbons, which takes hundreds 
of years to decompose. Microbes have been identified that 
can break down such non-biodegradable materials. For 
example, scientists have discovered a strain of bacteria 
that can literally eat plastics. They have also found ways to 
improve such activity of the bacteria so that the task can 
be done faster. However, this technology is still developing, 
but it is promising for environment-friendly recycling.

Bioplastics

An alternative to reduce non-biodegradable products is 
the production of materials that are made using biological 
materials. For example, instead of using styrofoams or 

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 295

Reprint 2025-26



plastics in the manufacture of disposable or single use or 
use-and-throw products, plant materials such as leaves, 
bamboo, wood chips, corn starch, seaweeds and natural 
biopolymers, such as polysaccharides, proteins or lignin, 
natural rubber, etc., can be used. Since plastics are made 
from fossil fuels, such approaches to do away with plastic 
products will help reduce the use of fossil fuels and hence, 
thereby reducing the plastic based pollutants. Though less 
than 10% of oil is used to make plastic products, this is 
important keeping in view its impact on the environment. 
Technological innovations have also been made in the 
field of bioplastic production. In 1999, the production of 
biopolymers from seeds and leaves of genetically modified 
plants had been established which is economically 
competitive with polymers produced from petrochemicals. 
Biodegradable plastic, e.g., Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) is 
being produced commercially by fermentation with the 
bacterium Alcaligenes eutropus, and can be produced in 
transgenic plants. The genetically engineered Arabidopsis 
plant may be used to upscale PHB production as the 
three genes involved in PHB synthesis from A. eutropus 
produced PHB globules in their chloroplasts without 
affecting plant growth and development. The large scale 
production of PHB may be done using plants such as 
leaves of populus, the only limitation being its high cost 
as compared to synthetic polymers.

Biotechnology in paper industry

Pulp making is a crucial step in the manufacture of 
paper during which wood chips are cooked by heating 
under pressure using caustic soda and sulfur. During 
this process, lignin is separated from cellulose fibers. 
Biopulping (treatment of wood chips with lignin-degrading 
fungi) improves the effectiveness of pulp making, thereby 
reducing the demand for energy and chemicals, it improves 
paper quality and ultimately decreases the environmental 
impact of pulp production. By increasing such efficiency, it 
helps in conserving raw material, energy, chemicals, etc. On 
the contrary, GM trees that produce less of lignin are being 
considered to be a promising solution to ease the process of 
pulp making. As in the case of biopulping, biobleaching uses 
enzymes such as xylanase to reduce the use of chlorine in 

296 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



bleaching. However, considering the impacts of deforestation 
to obtain wood for paper industries, alternatives are also 
being explored to completely replace the use of wood for the 
manufacture of paper. Non-wood materials such as bagasse, 
bamboo, jute, hemp, esparto, flax, grass, kenaf or reed, 
etc., are now used in paper making, whereby biotechnology 
contributes immensely in paper industry.

Biotechnology in oil recovery

Microbial technologies are also being used in Enhanced Oil 
Recovery (EOR). EOR is a stage in the production of oil, which 
involves the extraction of residual oil from the initial first two 
phases (primary and secondary phases) of production. The 
use of suitable microbes and their metabolic products can 
enhance the efficiency of EOR. The ability of bacteria to feed 
on hydrocarbons has also been exploited to clean-up after 
an oil spill. These oil-eating microbes play an important 
role in maintaining the ecosystem. A genetically engineered 
Pseudomonas bacterium has also been developed, which 
can be used to ‘eat’ oil spills. Such ‘superbugs’ have 
immense environmental benefits. The details of superbug 
construction is given in Box 10 of Chapter 11.

12.1.3 Bioremediation

Bioremediation has gained importance with advances 
in biotechnology, especially environmental restoration, 
using microorganisms to reduce the toxicities caused by 
chemical pollutants including heavy metals in soil or water 
such as As, Cr, Hg, Cd, Zn, etc. Three key principles must 
be considered for selecting the most appropriate strategy 
to treat, contaminated wastes: 

(1) Possibility of pollutant to allow biological transformation 
to less toxic products.

(2) Bio availability of the contaminant to micro-organisms. 

(3) The efficiency of bio-activity.
Recent advances in molecular genetics of biodegradation 
and studies on enzyme-tailoring through recombinant 
DNA–RNA technologies are being utilised for the removal 
of heavy metals and toxic chemicals from contaminated 
sites. Bioremediation has been discussed in detail in 
Chapter 11.

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 297

Reprint 2025-26



12.2 Plant BiotEchnology

Plant biotechnology such as GM technology and molecular-
assisted breeding has generated products that have helped 
to achieve enhanced yields in a more sustainable manner. 
Development of pharmaceuticals, recombinant therapeutic 
proteins, plant-made pharmaceuticals, transgenic plants, 
artificial seeds, and plant-made vaccines or antibodies 
(plantibodies) are currently in advanced research in 
plant science. Recently, attempts are being made to use 
genome editing technique namely CRISPR-Cas9 for crop 
improvements.

12.2.1.  Innovations in plant biotechnology 
through GM crops

You have already studied about GM crops and its 
application in Chapter 4 of the book. Almost 29 countries 
adopted GM crops in which soybeans, maize, cotton and 
canola form the major crops. The transgenic technology 
initially developed was limited to the control of weeds 
and pests, whereas, the second generation of GM crops 
has assisted farmers in the production of plants with 
tolerance to abiotic stress, improved nutritional features, 
can overcome sexual incompatibilities between plants and 
species, and overcome barriers that allow the introduction 
of genes from unrelated organisms such as bacteria, fungi 
or other plants and also from viruses. Innovations made 
in plant biotechnology through GM crops are described 
under various heads in the following sections.

Herbicide tolerant GM Crops: Weeds (plants growing 
where they are not wanted, e.g., Striga) decrease crop 
yields and quality primarily by competing with crop plants 
for light, water and nutrients. Farmers apply herbicides 
or weedicides (e.g. glyphosate) for the eradication of weeds 
in the fields, but the main problem with this is the loss 
of crop plants also as these herbicides are non-selective. 
Newer techniques, based on biotechnology tools, have been 
developed which are quite effective for weed management 
as well as in increasing the yields and income. There are 
several biotechnological strategies for weed control, but the 
most commonly employed approach is the over-production 
of herbicide target enzyme (usually in the chloroplast) in 

298 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



the target plant (crop), so that it becomes insensitive to the 
herbicide. The popular example for such an approach is 
the introduction of a modified gene from an Agrobacterium 
that encodes for a resistant form of an enzyme into crop 
plants for tolerance against the most extensively used 
herbicide glyphosate (sold as Roundup) which is effective 
against many weeds. Roundup Ready GM crop plants, such 
as canola, soybean, corn and cotton, tolerant to glyphosate 
have already been commercialised.

Disease resistant GM crops

A wide range of diseases caused by viruses, fungi, bacteria, 
insects, mites and plant nematodes lead to significant crop 
losses each year. Disease causing microbes and strategies 
to make resistant plants are discussed below.

(i) Viruses

Viruses are among the most ubiquitous pests in agriculture. 
The transgenic technology has been used successfully in 
many plants against several different viruses such as virus 
causing yellow crookneck disease in squash, potato mosaic 
virus, the potato leaf roll virus, barley yellow dwarf virus 
in wheat and papaya ringspot virus (PRSV) for developing 
resistance to virus by introducing gene for viral coat 
proteins. A viral coat protein acts like a vaccine, causing 
the plant to develop resistance to the particular virus. 
Transferring the gene for a viral coat protein, a part of 
the outer shell of a virus that does not cause disease, into 
the plant may confer protection to the plant and induces 
resistance without the introduction of the actual virus.

(ii) Fungi

Fungal diseases cause significant damage to crops 
including fruits and vegetables, and is characterised by 
wilting, mouldy coatings, rusts, blotches, scabs and rotted 
tissue. Finding adequate substitutes for fungicides like 
methyl bromide has intensified the need to develop genetic 
engineering approaches. Defensins are antimicrobial 
proteins that enhance the plant’s tolerance to pathogens 
and are present in insects, mammals (including humans), 
crustaceans, fish and plants. Defensins from moths and 
butterflies, the fruit fly, pea seeds and alfalfa seeds all 

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 299

Reprint 2025-26



show potent antifungal activity too. The first transgenic 
application of defensins was the incorporation of the 
antifungal defensin from alfalfa into potatoes. The 
transgenic potatoes were resistant to the fungal pathogen 
Verticillium dahlia.

Resveratrol from the white grapevine is a secondary 
metabolite that acts as a natural defensin which 
protects the plant from Botrytis cinerea infection. A 
gene of resveratrol when inserted into the host plant 
provides resistance against Botrytis cinerea in wheat and 
barley. Rpi-vnt1.1 gene isolated from Solanum venturi is 
transferred to potato to provide resistance for late blight 
caused by Phytophthora infestans. Similarly, wheat gene 
encoding oxalate oxidase is being transferred to Castanea 
sp. to provide resistance against chestnut blight fungus; 
and chitinase gene from insects is being transferred to 
apple to provide resistance to apple scab fungus.

(iii) Bacteria

Most food crops are susceptible to bacterial infections 
causing leaf and fruit (lesions), soft rots, yellowing, 
wilting, stunting, tumors, scabs or blossom blights. When 
tissue damage occurs on the blossoms, fruit or roots of 
food crops, yields may be reduced. GM crops have been 
developed against various bacterial pathogens in which 
lysozyme genes are being transferred into potatoes to 
provide resistance against blackleg and soft rot diseases 
caused by Erwinia carotovora. Gene from E. carotovora and 
Pseudomonas syringae (pv tabaci) is being inserted into 
rice to make it resistant to wild fire disease.

(iv) Insect

Widely used transgenic pest-protected crops are those that 
express insecticidal proteins derived from genes cloned 
from the soil bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). This 
insecticidal protein called crystal (Cry) proteins or delta-
endotoxins bind specifically to receptor protein in the 
insect gut destroying cells and killing the insect. A number 
of plants offering resistance to insects using this strategy 
have been developed worldwide. In India, Bt cotton is the 
only transgenic plant permitted by the Government for 

300 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



cultivation at commerical level since 2002. Bangladesh 
became the first country in the world to approve the 
commercial planting of Bt brinjal, which started in 2014.

In addition, the widening spread of fall-army worm 
infestations prompted the researchers to strategise on 
its control by using pyramided, i.e., stacking of two or 
more genes in a single crop plant for insect resistant crop 
improvement. Stacking of two genes, one with increased 
water use efficiency and other for resistance to insect 
pests have resulted in the formation of hybrid maize seeds. 
Similarly,  Bt gene was stacked with the drought-tolerance 
trait that expresses the B. subtilis cold-shock protein B 
(cspB).

(v) Plant nematodes

Transgenic strategies to combat nematodes that infect 
bananas, soybeans, rice and potatoes are emerging areas. 
Incorporation of the genes in potatoes produced upto 70 
per cent nematode resistance in field trials. Using genetic 
markers, scientists bred plants containing the resistance 
gene with domesticated varieties, circumventing the 
poor performance characteristics of the wild variety. 
Producing a resistant variety of soybean from wild strain 
is one such example, in which by using specific genetic 
marker, scientists first identified a particular trait and its 
subsequently breeding with plants containing resistance 
gene with domesticated variety. The new varieties are 
not transgenic but have resulted from combining the use 
of modern genetic markers with conventional breeding 
techniques.

There are many other applications of such genetic 
modification of crops through which a tolerant and resistant 
variety of crops can be produced. One of the examples is a 
GM maize CIEA-9 that has been developed in Mexico, which 
has enhanced adaptation to severe drought and extreme 
temperature in which sugar trehalose is broken down by 
a glycoside hydrolase enzyme trehalase. By antisense RNA 
technology, trehalose expression is silenced in maize and 
such a biotech maize requires approximately 20 per cent 
less water and can withstand higher temperature.

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 301

Reprint 2025-26



Box 2: Few GM plants and their acquired charateristics

Crop Name of trait/ Applications
gene transferred

Stress resistant GM crops

Arabidopsis Mannitol Withstand high saline conditions and enhanced 
and Tobacco germination rates and increased biomass

Rice Embryogenesis abundant More tolerant to drought and salinity 
protein gene from barley than conventional varieties of rice

Soybeans HaHB4 transcription factor HB4® soybean named EcoSoy® 
gene  from sunflower plant tolerant to drought and herbicide 

Wheat HaHB4 transcription factor HB4® wheat named EcoWheat® has increased 
gene from sunflower plant the yield upto 20% and drought tolerant

GM crops for enhanced paper quality

Arabidopsis Coenzyme A-ligase Resulted in transgenic plants 
with upto 45% less lignin

Eucalyptus Gene encoding 20% more wood than the conventional 
an Arabidopsis variety and is ready for harvest in five 
thaliana protein and a half years instead of seven

GM crops for improved product

Potato Gene involved in 60% more starch than non-GM plants 
starch synthesis which make potatoes take up less fat during 

frying, resulting in a lower-fat product

Maize and Two stacked genes Confer tolerance to the herbicides 
Soybean  glyphosate and 2,4-D-choline

Apple Gene involved in Apple named Arctic®Gala had 
non-browning non-browning trait

GM technology has also helped scientists in the fortification of many crop plants 
and a few of there have been depicted in Table 12.1.

Table 12.1: Biofortified GM crops

Crop Nutrient Name of the trait/ Benefit 
incorporated gene transferred

Golden Rice Vitamin A (Vit. A) Genes encoding phytoene Golden rice is an 
synthase, carotene efficient source of 
desaturase and lycopene vitamin A in human
beta-cyclase which will lead 
to synthesis of beta-carotene

302 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Soybeans High oleic acid Gene encoding fatty Seeds have increased 
acid desaturase was ratio of oleic acid to 
down regulated linoleic acid content

Tomato Increased shelf life Polygalactouronase expressed Increased shelf life
in antisense orientation

12.2.2. Genome Engineering technology: 
Application of CRISPR-Cas9

In Chapter 5, Section 5.4.2, you learned about genome 
editing with CRISPR-Cas9 technology, in which guide RNA 
bound to target DNA and Cas9 is used to edit genes in 
diverse plants. Scientists at the University of California 
San Diego have developed the first CRISPR-Cas9-based 
gene edited plants, with the objective of producing 
drought and disease-resistant crops. Breaking from the 
traditional inheritance principles that stipulate that an 
offspring acquires genetic materials equally from each 
parent (Mendelian genetics), the new research employs 
CRISPR-Cas9 editing to transfer specific traits from a 
single parent to successive generations. It has been used 
to improve nutritional quality, increase yield, and develop 
resistance to various biotic and abiotic stress in several 
crops, including rice, tomato, and soybean, etc. As we 
know that the traditional methods take years to develop 
a different trait, CRISPR-Cas9 is comparatively rapid, 
than other genetic manipulation techniques. Furthermore, 
CRISPR-Cas9 technology is relatively simple, precise, and 
can be used to create many beneficial traits in plants as 
it targets multiple genes. However, the revolution brought 
by CRISPR-Cas9 in plant molecular biology has raised 
various concerns for its off-target effects, and at times, 
low efficiency. In addition, there are regulatory issues and 
several challenges for its safety and use in the future. 
Efforts are being undertaken to improve its on-target 
efficiency and several modifications of the Cas9 enzyme. 
However, the work carried out is in preliminary stage and 
there is still more to be done.

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 303

Reprint 2025-26



12.3 rEgEnErativE mEdicinE

Regenerative medicine is an emerging multidisciplinary 
specialty in medicine  with the goal of cell and organ 
replacement to restore the loss of function resulting from 
degeneration, trauma or other disease processes. It can 
also protect vulnerable diseased cells from death. The 
oldest strategy is replacement of the diseased or lost organ 
by a new one, which is termed as transplantation. The 
organ transplantation may be of three types: 

1. Autograft – Transplantation of cells, tissues or 
organs between sites within the same individual, 
e.g., skin graft.

2. Allograft – Transplantation of organs or tissues from 
a donor to a non-genetically identical individual of 
the same species. This is the most common practice 
for organ transplant like renal, liver, heart, lungs 
and pancreas.

3. Xenograft – Transplantation of an organ or tissue 
between two different species. ‘Pig valves’, have been 
used to repair or replace a defective heart valve in 
humans.

Majority of organs like liver, kidney, pancreas consists 
of differentiated cells with limited capacity for regeneration. 
In case of major organ damage, these differentiated cells 
cannot proliferate and replace the damage cells. Stem cell 
technology can be helpful in this situation where the stem 
cells have the capability to proliferate and differentiate, 
replacing dead or damaged cells. There are several types of 
stem cells depending on their differentiation and origin as 
depicted in Chapter 9.

12.3.1 Stem Cell Technology

Stem cells exhibit an intrinsic ability to assemble into 
complex structures. When placed within a hydrogel (often 
Matrigel) and in the presence of suitable exogenous factors, 
the stem cells can be coaxed into forming structures that 
contain organised clusters of cells. The recent availability 
of stem cell derived organoid systems to provide 3D 
self-organised tissue models provide a compelling new 
class of biological model to serve as both tissue and organ 
substitutions  (Fig. 12.1).

Organoids are ultra-small, self-assembled three-
dimensional tissue cultures that are derived from stem 

304 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Biochemical tools
Complexity of course

Monolayer cell Spheroid Organoid Tissue Multiplexed models
culture explant “on-a-chip”

Subcellular Cells Simple Layered Organ System Body
tissue tissue

Scale

Fig. 12.1: All organisms follow a system from the subcellular level to the whole body. A number of models 
have been developed across organismal hierarchy, to address definite questions across biology 
and medicine. Each model system has specific characteristics; in general, with increasing scale 
comes increasing system complexity and challenges in cell culture and the reduced availability 
of biochemical and quantitative tools, which can limit study insights. Organoid models provide 
a unique opportunity to incorporate moderate system complexity while still affording many 
tools for probing structure and function. When compared to tissue explants, organoid systems 
can mimic similar cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions while maintaining the ability for long-
term cultures, maintaining signaling cues that are important for survival.

cells. Organoids can be created from both pluripotent 
stem cells (PSCs) and adult stem cells (ASCs) by 
simulating the biochemical and physical characteristics 
of tissue development and homeostasis. Such cultures 
can be maneuvered to replicate most of the complexity 
of the organ, or may be differentiated to express certain 
characteristics, like producing particular subsets of cells 
only. For example, the shape and tissue architecture 
of mesenchymal stem cells from bone marrow directly 
impacts their differentiation into osteoblasts or adipocytes. 
A round shape promotes adipogenic differentiation, 
and cells with wide spreading favour an osteoblastic 
differentiation.

Organoids reiterate a number of biological parameters 
that include spatial organisation of tissue-specific cells 
that are heterogeneous, cell-matrix interactions, cell–cell 

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 305

Reprint 2025-26



interactions, and certain physiological functions generated 
by tissue-specific cells within the organoid.

Organoids bridge a gap in the existing model systems 
by providing a stable system that can be extended to the 
manipulation and mimicking the in vivo physiology. The 
foremost aim of engineering organoid systems is to enhance 
the system utility in downstream applications. Therefore, it 
is necessary to create improved in vivo mimics for tissues 
and organs and to improve the organoid system to 
achieve high-throughput formats or multi-tissue organoid 
compatibility in larger multiplexed systems, e.g., human-
on-a-chip. Bioengineers have long aspired to deconstruct 
biological systems and manipulate or reconstruct the 
system in a controlled manner. Bioengineering approaches 
have enabled us to understand cell behaviour and cell 
organisation, that are the fundamental processes in organoid 
formation. Several improved systems are on the horizon.

Cells in monolayers have the same unlimited access to 
nutrients and growth factors. But, in in vivo, the position 
of cell inside a tissue determines whether it can get enough 
nutrients. In response to the downsides of monolayer 
cultures, biomedical companies have developed various 
types of 3D cell culture systems to exploit its potential for 
predicting more realistic representations of drug response 
in vivo. 

Tumor spheres represent a model of cancer stem cell 
expansion; tissue-derived tumor spheres and organotypic 
multicellular spheroids are characteristically obtained 
from mechanical dissociation and cutting of the tumor 
tissue. However, there is a distinct ordered self-assembly 
in organoids as opposed to spheroid cultures, and the 
former is more dependent on a matrix for its generation.

Organoids have recently attracted attention as a model, 
primarily as they may serve as a better in vitro model when 
compared to 2D or even 3D co-culture systems. Applications 
for organoid research include organ development, disease 
modeling, drug penetration in the centre of the tumor 
mass, drug screening and toxicity testing. To induce 
spheroid formation, one can choose from methods such 
as suspension culture, non-adherent surface methods, 
hanging drop methods, and microfluidic methods 
(Fig. 12.2).

306 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Though 3D cell cultures provide realistic models of 
cell assembly into tissues or organs, the new variables 
as to how  the tissues function, or how the pathological 
processes disturb the cellular functions, need to be 
carefully addressed. Three-dimensional models are far 
more expensive and time-consuming than 2D cultures, 
as very few automation and reproducible applications are 
available. The 3D cultures further require careful planning 
and expert handling.

2D cell culture

Small 3D
aggregates  Spheroids

Magnetic
Hanging levitation
drop  

Microfluidics
Organoids technology

Organ-on-chip Bioprinting

Fig. 12.2: 2D and 3D culture

Rapid scientific development in this field has led to 
several new strategies involving cell based therapy, polymer 
and material science, nanotechnology, bioengineering and 
3D bioprinting making an artificial organ or a substitute 
of the organ. Currently, tissue engineered vascular graft, 
trachea, cardiac patches are in clinical trials. In near future, 
swift development in the field of regenerative medicine 
will empower the physicians to replace the majority of the 
diseased or dead cells in the human body.

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 307

Reprint 2025-26

3 D  C e l l  C u l t u t e



Box 2: Bioprinting

Several  therapies based on the Cells Polymer(s)

principles of regenerative medicine 
are currently being practiced which 
are approved by regulatory bodies. 
The usual practice in regenerative Cross-linker

medicine includes identification of the 
diseased organ dimension by imaging 

Bioink
like Computerised Tomography (CT) 
scan or Magnetic Resonance Imaging 

Polymer
(MRI). The tissue engineered scaffold 

Cells
with biopolymer embedded with cells 
and nanoparticles containing growth 
factors can be made by a computer Functional peptides

(as growth factors or
assisted 3D Bioprinter with exact adhesion molecules)

dimensions calculated from the MRI/
Other polymer

CT scan. The concept is depicted in (optional)

the diagram. 
 Cartilage injury is common in Extrusion-based Inkjet-based Laser-assisted

bioprinting bioprinting bioprinting
sports injury  as well as degenerative 
disease in old population which Polymer Energy-

can lead to significant disabilities. based bioink Laser- absorbing
pulse layer

‘Carticel’ is an innovative therapy 
where autologous cartilage cells Piezoelectric

actuator Donor slide
(chondrocytes) from articular or heater
cartilage fragment removed during 
surgery are expanded in in vitro 
and then implanted at the site of 
injury. ‘laViv’ is a technology where 
autologous fibroblasts are injected in 
the face for the removal of wrinkles 
or beautification of nose as a part 
of cosmetic surgery. ‘Dermagraft’, a in vitro Drug Tissue

patch of allogenic fibroblast dermal disease model screening engineering

substitute, is used for diabetic ulcer. 
Overview of cell-based therapy, polymer and 

Autologous platelet, derived from the 
material science, nanotechnology, bioengineering 

peripheral blood, is used for wound 
and 3D bioprinting for tissue engineering, drug 

healing.  screening and creating in vitro disease model

12.4 nanoBiotEchnology

Nanoscience is the study of materials which are in nanoscale 
range, that includes size in nanometer, that is less than 
one micron. Fig. 12.3 gives clarity on the concept of scales, 

308 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



where an atom is 0.1 nm and a small molecule of sand is 
1 mm. The diagram shows the size comparison among 
an atom, which is less than 1 nm, a fullerene molecule 
containing 60 atoms of carbon (C60), a molecule of DNA, 
protein, a virus, bacteria, red blood cell, pollen and a 
sand particle (Fig. 12.3). The technology of using material 
in nanoscale is called nanotechnology. Nanobiotechnology 
thus implies application in the field of biotechnology at nano 
scale. The use of nanotechnology in medicine for diagnosis 
and therapy is termed as nanomedicine. 

The conversion of any bulk material to nanoscale 
results in the alteration of its physicochemical, biological, 
mechanical, optical and electronic properties. These 
newly acquired novel properties of the materials due to 
conversion into a nanoscale can be utilised for different 
useful purposes.

The typical example of change in property of the bulk 
material when it is converted to nanoparticles of different 
sizes is observed in gold. Gold is a golden coloured metal 
widely used for making ornaments and jewellery.

Fig. 12.4 (a) shows golden colour of the bulk metal. 
The nanoparticles smaller than 30 nm are ruby red, up 
to 100 nm are pink and larger appear darker in colour 
demonstrating change in one of the physical characteristics 

DNA Red
Atom C Protein Virus Bacteria Pollen Sand

60 Diameter Blood Cell

0.1 nm 1 nm 2 nm wide 10 nm 100 nm 1 m 10 m 100 m 1 mm

Fig. 12.3: Concept of scales (0.1 nm –1 mm)

with nanoform that is also size dependent. The bulk 
material, gold, of unit weight (1 mg)  when converted to 
nanoparticles in a reducing size scale for example, with 
diameter of 500 nm, 100 nm and 10 nm, increases the 
number of particles exponentially accompanied by an 
enormous increase in the surface area [Fig. 12.4 (b)]. 
This phenomenon can tremendously increase the surface 
reactivity, which can then be used for different applications 
in the field of nanobiotechnology.

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 309

Reprint 2025-26



(a) (b)

Fig. 12.4: ( a) Gold as a noble metal (b) Colour change 
in gold based on the size.

Nanoparticles can be made from a large number 
of inorganic and organic materials as mentioned in 
the following table (Table 12.2). Depending upon the 
composition, nanoparticles can be categorised as 
biodegradable and non-biodegradable. Properties of 
nanoparticles depend on its size, shape, surface charge 
and composition. Nanoparticles made from one material 
like carbon, depending upon its composition, may acquire 
unique size and shape like fullerene (C ), single wall 

60

and multiwall carbon tube and graphene (Fig.12.5).

 (a)    (b)       (c)       (d) 

Fig. 12.5: (a) Fullerene (C ), (b) single wall, (c) multiwall carbon tube and (d) graphene
60

Table:12.2: Composition of some of the nanoparticles widely explored in nanobiotechnology

Inorganic

Metal Iron oxide, Gold, Silver, Copper, Zinc oxide, Titanium oxide, Cadmium, Selenium

Non-metal Silicon oxide, Calcium phosphate, Ceramic

Organic

Polymer Naturally derived like chitosan from shell, alginate from algae, Cellulose, Lignin

310 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Synthetic Polycaprolactone (PCL), polylactic acid or polylactide (PLA), Poly Lactic-co-
polymers Glycolic Acid (PLGA)

Protein Albumin, Gelatin 

Lipid Cholesterol, Fatty acids, Phospholipids, Liposome

Similarly, cadmium–selenium (CdSe) nanocrystals of 
different sizes produce different colours of fluorescence, 
which does not quench with light (Fig. 12.6). The fluorescent 
CdSe nanocrystals are called Quantum Dots (QDs), which 
can be used for fluorescence based diagnostic tests.

12.4.1 Application of Nanotechnology
Nanotechnology is an enabling technology, which is useful 
in diverse sectors, such as chemicals, textile, consumer 
products, cosmetics, health (Nanomedicine), energy, 
agriculture,  various industries and for  environment as 
shown in the given diagram (Fig. 12.7).

Fig. 12.6: The QDs of different sizes showing 
different colour of fluorescence 

Some of the applications of nanotechnology are 
described in the following sections.

(a) Medicine (Nanomedicine): Drug or other 
biomolecules can be loaded in nanoparticles or 
nanocarriers, which can be targeted to the diseased 
site for delivery. This kind of nanotechnology based 
Drug Delivery Systems (DDS) can increase the 
bioavailability of the drugs at the diseased site with 

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 311

Reprint 2025-26



• Heat retaining textiles

• UV blocking textiles

• Self-cleaning textiles

• Anti-stain textiles • Biomarkers
• Pollution monitoring • Electroconducting textiles • Drug delivery

sensors • MRI contrast agents,
• Pollutant scavengers TEXTILES imaging
• Automotive catalysts • Bio-composites
• Hydrogen storage materials • Cancer therapy

RENEWABLE ENERGY BIOMEDICAL

• Lithium ion battery
electrodes • Sunscreens

• Fuel cell catalysts • Antioxidants
NANO HEALTH

• Environmental ENVIRONMENT • Nutraceuticals
PARTICLES CARE

catalysts • Dental ceramics

• Hydrogen production • Wound dressing
photocatalysts

• Waste water treatment

FOOD
ELECTRONICS

AGRICULTURE

• Chemical and gas sensors • Food processing catalysts
• High density data storage • Food packaging
• Quantum computers INDUSTRIAL • Antifouling coating
• Quantum lasers • Gas-barrier coatings
• Nano-inks • Nano pigments • Wear resistant coatings
• Single electron transistors • Super thermal-conductive • Food quality/safety

liquid
• Nanoscale patterning of analysis sensors

• Refractive index engineering
electronic circuits • Nutraceuticals

• Transparent conductive
polymer

• Anti-bacterial coatings

Fig. 12.7: Nanotechnology an enabling technology relevant to every aspect of life

low systemic toxicity and reduced amount of drug 
required for cure. Currently, systemic administration 
of drug by oral or parenteral routes need higher 
dosage to maintain high serum levels, so that effective 
concentration can be achieved at the diseased site, 
which is associated with toxicity involving other 
organs. Antifungal drug, amphotericin B has a high 
toxicity. When it is delivered in liposomes, which 

312 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



is a spherical vesicle consisting of one or more 
phospholipid bilayers, it shows less toxicity and 
higher efficacy. Systemic toxicity with anticancer 
chemotherapeutic drugs is a major problem in cancer 
management. The anticancer drugs can be targeted to 
cancer micro-environment by enhanced permeability 
and retention (EPR) effect. The endothelial cells in 
the tumor has gaps or fenestration making them 
leaky in comparison to healthy tissue. If small size 
nanocarriers (20 to 30 nm) are loaded with drug and 
administered, it will be accumulated in the tumor 
area through the leaky vessels with retention of the 
drug loaded nanoparticles in the tumor area, this 
phenomenon is called EPR effect, which is shown 
in Fig. 12.8. An example of such kind of DDS is 
Paclitaxel loaded albumin nanoparticles or liposomal 
doxorubicin currently being used for cancer therapy. 
Silver nanoparticles have wide spectrum antimicrobial 
properties and are being used in different wound 
dressings.

Lymph
Healthy tissue atic system

Blood vessel

Endothelial cells

Nanoparticle

Tumor tissue

Fig. 12.8:  Accumulation of drug loaded nanoparticles in tumor 
by enhanced permeability and retention (EPR)

(b) Cosmetics: Zinc oxide and titanium oxide 
nanoparticles are very useful for protection against 
ultraviolet light  and widely used in sunscreen 
cosmetic preparations. Liposomal preparations 
and nanoemulsions are commonly used for better 
penetration of essential oils, vitamins and other 
biomolecules, which can prevent age related skin 
changes, reduce pigmentation and provide many 
other beneficial effects.

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 313

Reprint 2025-26



(c) Agriculture and food packaging: Nanotechnology 
is being used for precision farming techniques 
enhancing the absorption of nutrients. New 
generation of nano-pesticides is more effective 
in controlling plant diseases with less amount 
of pesticide thereby reducing human exposure. 
Nanomaterials are used in food packaging for 
longer preservation and storage. Silver and iron 
nanoparticles can be used for the treatment and 
disinfection of livestock and poultry.

(d) Textile: Nanomaterials can be used for several 
improvements of the textile like stain and water 
repellence, wrinkle-free features, fire retardancy, high 
tensile strength, durability, textured surface and so 
on. Nanotechnology can impart electrical conductivity 
to fibers without compromising their comfort and 
flexibility. The garments can sense and respond to 
external stimuli via electrical, colour or physiological 
signals and keep itself cool in summer and warm 
in winter. In near future, nanotechnology enabled 
garments can monitor the health conditions too.

(e) Nanobiosensors: Nanotechnology has revolutionised 
the area of sensor development for the detection of 
biological molecules, which may be biomarkers of 
diseases. Point of care devices can be made, which 
are low cost and more effective and the tests can 
be done at bedside, in villages with small volume of 
test materials. The scientists are working with the 
concept of ‘Lab on a Chip’, where many tests can 
be done simultaneously using nanotechnology and 
microfluidics.

The above-mentioned examples give a clear insight into 
the enormous scope of nanotechnology applications. In 
future, this technology renders immense hope and may 
lead to innovations in various biomedical applications 
ranging from molecular imaging, drug delivery, gene 
therapy to biosensors and biomarkers. However, the use 
of nanotechnology raises fundamental questions about 
the need for new regulations and we should understand 
the safety issues of using nanoparticles in the body and 
environment.

314 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



12.5 SynthEtic Biology

Traditionally, scientists have used two major strategies 
to study organisms. First is a reductionist approach that 
involves going from higher level description to the lower 
level description, i.e., from the whole animal or plant to 
the tissue level, then to the cellular organelle level and 
finally at the molecular level (DNA, protein, etc.). We use 
several names for this general approach, e.g., anatomy, 
histology, molecular biology, biochemistry and so on. The 
reductionist approach has been highly successful leading 
to the generation of a huge data at various levels.

Now the challenge is to collect this data and weave it 
in the form of databases and computer models of tissues, 
metabolic pathways and so on. This integrative approach 
of data collection and doing biology through computer, is 
more popularly known as bioinformatics, systems biology 
and so on. 

In June 2004, a third major approach was announced 
at MIT USA that focused on building organisms from 
scratch. People asked: Could one chemically synthesise 
a chromosome, assemble mitochondria, construct a 
nucleus, a cell or tissue and ultimately an organism, 
just like an engineer constructs buildings from brick 
and mortar? This new engineering approach of 
building organisms from the bottom up, is called 
synthetic biology. Therefore, synthetic biology may be 
defined as a rationale design approach of constructing 
biological components leading to certain functions. The 
logic is that if engineering principles have worked in 
constructing electronic gadgets, buildings, bridges and 
so on, why not use them in constructing organisms? 
However, to enable such an activity, one needs to build 
(a) standards and (b) rules of composition.

Synthetic biology bridges the gap between biologists 
and engineers to design and build innovative biomolecular 
networks, components and pathways, and to utilise 
these constructs to reprogramme  and rewire organisms. 
Synthetic Biology offers innovative approaches for 
engineering new biological systems or re-designing existing 
ones for useful purpose.

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 315

Reprint 2025-26



Integrating interdisciplinary expertise has enabled 
synthetic biology to address the unpredictable challenges 
linked to the complex intricacy of cellular systems. 
Synthetic biology has enthused researchers to innovate 
and bioengineer biological systems to accomplish explicit 
tasks. Its applications are— biomanufacturing of 
high-value biomolecules, diagnostics, therapeutics leading 
to cheaper drugs, ‘green’ means to fuel our cars and targeted 
therapies for attacking ‘superbugs’ and diseases, such as 
cancer. These re-engineered organisms will change our 
lives over the coming years. While synthetic biology has 
demonstrated its potential to solve high-impact problems, 
a plethora of basic research studies are still going on to 
discover the engineering limits for biological systems.

While people were collectings the datasheets of 
gene, another thought emerged: how about chemically 
synthesising a series of genes in one step, instead of 
assembling them?  This gave rise to the technology of long 
DNA synthesis leading to a major change in the way genetic 
engineering was practised (Fig. 12.9).

Systems (e.g. bacteria,
yeast, plant)

Biology top-down
(reconstitution
of existing form Devices (network/pathways)

Mathematics
of life)

Module (reactions)
Computers Synthetic

Biology

Parts (DNA sequence,
Engineering Bottom-up genes, promoters, operators,

(creating new form transcription factors,  etc.)
Chemistry of life)

Constituents (nucleotides
/amino acids)

Biosensors Biofuels Bioremediation Synthetic life Engineered
enzyme

Antibiotics/
Drugs/Vaccines Food/Drink Biomaterials Agriculture

Fig. 12.9: Summary of synthetic biology indicating the amalgamation of associated disciplines and their 
varied applicability.

316 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



Instead of constructing plasmids and loading them 
with genes, the new strategy was to edit the plasmid in 
the computer, save the document as a text file of nitrogen 
bases (ATGC), email the sequence to the company and 
get the recombinant vector in a month or so. The process 
that would normally take six months to an year could be 
completed in less than a month. This strategy has been 
so successful that a chemically synthesised and a fully 
functional yeast chromosome was made by scientists at 
the John Hopkins University.

12.6 FuturE ProSPEctS

Biotechnological innovations will undoubtedly be at the core 
of discoveries benefiting the society in future, depending 
primarily on how the future unfolds. For example, 
as microbes make their impact, complex ecological 
systems and exploitation of biological knowledge will 
offer innovations in a wide spectrum including medicine, 
health care, food systems, industries and creating smart 
materials.

Currently, scientists are working towards creating 
microbial factories, where bacteria can synthesise 
chemicals and help in the reduction of air, soil and 
water pollution caused by chemical factories. They are 
also trying to clear environmental pollution by designing 
microbes that can eat harmful chemicals and convert 
them into environment friendly end products. People have 
been successful in synthesising natural plant products in 
bacteria and save plants from destruction. Bioremediation 
treatment technologies for contaminated soils and 
groundwater can involve: (1) solid-phase biotreatment; 
(2) slurry-phase treatment; (3) in situ treatment; and (4) 
combination of biological, physical and chemical treatment.

Plant biotechnology with a focus on seed-varietal 
improvement, such as GM technology and molecular-assisted 
breeding, has generated products that help agriculture to 
achieve enhanced yields in a more sustainable manner. 
GM technology has brought significant improvements 
in income, life quality and per acre productivity. Plant-
made pharmaceuticals have become a major focus point 
since 2010, when realistic opportunities for commercial 

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 317

Reprint 2025-26



development emerged. Plant-manufacturing platforms for 
pharmaceuticals or molecular pharming open interesting 
prospects for low-income countries, where large quantities 
of medicines need to be provided on a regular basis. Cost-
effective local focus and needle-free deployment can be of 
great help for the treatment of tropical diseases. In the 
industrial sector, plant biotechnology has the potential 
not only to generate more productive biomass feedstocks 
and minimise inputs, but also to develop more efficient 
biofuels, chemicals and bio-material conversion processes. 
A number of non-food crops, improved with sustainable 
management, have gone through the regulatory process.

Medical applications of biotechnology include 
regenerative medicine, tissue engineering, transplantation, 
stem cell research, nanobiotechnology and synthetic 
biology. The interdisciplinary field of nanobiotechnology 
is bringing the science of the  incomprehensibly small 
devices closer to reality. Although the expectations from 
nanobiotechnology in medicine are high and the potential 
benefits are endlessly enlisted, the safety of nanomedicine 
is not yet fully defined. If synthetic biology becomes 
widespread  in future then the rubber used in tyres, the 
bioacrylic used in glues and paints, the surfactant used in 
shampoos and soaps, additives and flavours used in food 
and so on would be made in side bacteria.

Nevertheless, there are also aspects of synthetic biology 
which may be harmful for humanity, e.g., creating new 
viruses that may give rise to new diseases and designing 
bioweapons, which can be misused against humanity. It is 
therefore more important to promote ethical and humane 
practices in synthetic biology and have strict regulations 
to prevent its misuse.

India has become a key contributor in biotechnology 
sector playing a key role in the global vaccine market 
including DPT, BCG and measles and other vaccines. 
Low cost diagnostics kits and medical interventions along 
with vaccines were promptly developed by the vibrant 
biotechnology sector of India. Recent unprecedented 
pandemic caused by Corona Virus (COVID-19) posed 
a severe threat to human health. Biotechnological 
innovations helped to develop vaccines that saved 

318 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



mankind. In summary, the future of biotechnology 
research is strong and promising. Its development 
requires entrepreneurship as business skills are critical 
for managing research projects and a technical team. 
Technology experts can add real time analysis to the 
cutting-edge research. The Draft National Biotech 
Development Strategy 2020–24 aims to build and nurture 
a vibrant start-up, entrepreneurial, and industrial 
base, connecting academia and industry. It focuses 
strengthening and nurturing of a strong basic research 
and innovation driven ecosystem across research institutes 
and laboratories, public and private sector, with complete 
engagement of start-ups, small, and large industries.

SUMMARY

• Environmental biotechnology focuses on bioremediation 
that includes a wide array of applications, such as waste 
treatment, degradation, vermi-technology. It also includes 
the second aspect, i.e., prevention, that will primarily deal 
with the production of biofuels and avenues in the field of 
biodegradation and manufacture of biodegradable products.

• Biofuels are the fuels produced from biological products 
from living organisms or from waste generated from 
biological products such as from landfills, recycled vegetable 
oil, etc. Fuels produced from crops are known as biofuels 
or agrofuels. On the basis of their characteristics, biofuels 
can be broadly divided into biodiesel, bioalcohol, biogas and 
biomass in different forms.

• Biodegradation using biotechnology helps in environment-
friendly waste recycling. 

• Bioremediation of heavy metals in soil or water such as As, Cr, 
Hg, Cd, Zn, etc. is being done by plants and microorganisms 
such as bacteria and fungi using biotechnology.

• GM technology has evolved to generate a number of products 
and crops with improved traits, such as resistance crops, 
against herbicides, biotic and abiotic stresses, etc., as well 
as with improved nutritional quality and quantity.

• Regenerative medicine is an emerging multidisciplinary 
specialty in medicine with the goal of cell and organ 

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 319

Reprint 2025-26



replacement to restore the loss of function resulting from 
degeneration, trauma and other disease processes.

• Stem cells exhibit an intrinsic ability to assemble into 
complex structures. When placed within a hydrogel (often 
Matrigel) and in the presence of suitable exogenous factors, 
the stem cells can be coaxed into forming structures that 
contain organised clusters of cells.

• The recent availability of stem cell derived organoid systems 
to provide 3D self-organised tissue models provides a 
compelling new class of biological model to serve as both 
tissue and organ substitutions.

• Organoids are ultra-small, self-assembled three-dimensional 
tissue cultures that are derived from stem cells. Organoids 
have been created from both pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) 
and adult stem cells (ASCs) by simulating the biochemical 
and physical characteristics of tissue development and 
homeostasis.

• Nanoscience is the study of materials in the range that 
includes size in nanometer, which is less than one micron, 
i.e., 10-9 to 10-12. The application of material in nanoscale is 
called nanotechnology.

• Nanobiotechnology implies the use of nanotechnology in the 
field of biotechnology. Nanomedicine is the strongest arm of 
nanobiotechnology used for diagnosis, drug/gene delivery 
and therapy. 

• Nanobiosensors: Nanotechnology has revolutionised the 
area of sensor development for the detection of biological 
molecules, which may be biomarkers of disease. Point of care 
devices can be developed, which are low cost, more sensitive 
and the tests can be done at bedside villages with a small 
volume of test materials. The scientists are working with the 
concept of “Lab on a Chip”, where many tests can be done 
simultaneously using nanotechnology and microfluidics.

• Synthetic biology may be defined as a rational design 
approach of constructing biological components leading to 
certain functions.

• The application of automation and artificial intelligence (e.g., 
in designing and building plasmids) may help to reduce the 
time and cost to improve the return on investment.

320 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



EXERCISES

 1. What are the advantages of biodiesel?

 2. Enlist the differences between biodegradation and 
bioremediation.

 3. Explain how biofuel is better than fossil fuels.

 4. Enumerate the challenges in growing 3D cultures.

 5. What are the applications of stem cells in generating 
organoids and spheroids.

 6. What are nanomaterials?

 7. Are there specific health risks from nano products?
 8. Organoids can be created from:

 (a) Both Totipotent and Pluripotent Cells

 (b) Both Pluripotent and Multipotent Cells

 (c) Both Adult Stem Cells and Pluripotent Cells

 (d) Both Adult Stem Cells and Multipotent Cells

 9. Incineration is:

 (a) Extracting metals from their ores using microbes

 (b) Treating waste, which involves the combustion of 
organic substances

 (c) Degrading harmful chemicals and materials using 
microbes

 (d) Remediation of harmful metals from the  environment 
using microbes.

 10. Ultra small, self-assembled, three dimensional tissue 
cultures derived from stem cells are called:

 (a) Spheroids

 (b) Organoids

 (c) Monolayer Cells Culture

 (d) Tissue Explants

 11. What is the colour of the nano gold particles?

 (a) Yellow

 (b) Orange

 (c) Red

 (d) Variable

 12. Quantum dots can be used in:

 (a) Crystallography

 (b) Optoelectronics

 (c) Mechanics

 (d) Quantum physics

Recent Innovations in Biotech... 321

Reprint 2025-26



 13. Fabrics are extensively made out of nano materials like 
___________.

 (a) Carbon nano tubes

 (b) Fullerenes

 (c) Mega tubes

 (d) Polymers

 14. Assertion: Bt cotton is a transgenic plant.

Reason: Bt toxin provides resistance to plants against 
insects.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

 15. Assertion: Biodiesel is made from raw materials such as 
vegetable oils, animal fats, etc.

Reason: Biodiesel reduces the particulate emissions 
from unburnt carbon.

 (a) Both assertion and reason are true and the reason is 
the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (b) Both assertion and reason are true but the reason is 
not the correct explanation of the assertion.

 (c) Assertion is true but reason is false.

 (d) Both assertion and reason are false.

322 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26

##13##

Chapter 13 Entrepreneurship

Entrepreneurs are the harbingers of prosperous society. 13.1  Concept of 

An entrepreneur not only creates employment but also Entrepreneurship

contributes to the economic development of the country. 13.2 Sources of Funds

With the growth of scientific temperament in society 13.3  Entrepreneurship 
people who have created enterprises based on scientific in Biotechnology

discoveries have grown in large numbers. One such field 13.4 Concept of IPR
of entrepreneurship is based on biotechnology. This 13.5 Biopiracy
chapter highlights the role and relevance of entrepreneurs 
in general and biotech entrepreneurs in particular. The 
chapter also has exhibits of cases from the real world about 
entrepreneurs who have caused a niche for themselves by 
successfully launching biotechnology-based enterprises. 
Besides, the chapter also discusses the contemporary 
legislations governing biotechnology-based enterprises.

13.1 ConCept of entrepreneurship

The root word for the term ‘entrepreneur’ is the 
French word ‘enterprendre’ that means ‘to undertake’. 
Entrepreneur thus, is an individual who undertakes an 
activity foreseeing business opportunity. An entrepreneur 
organises resources needed for starting the enterprise and 
also bears the risk involved in the process. Thus, there 

Reprint 2025-26



are three prominent roles that an entrepreneur fulfils—an 
innovator, organiser and a risk bearer.

While performing the three roles mentioned above, an 
entrepreneur does significant tasks for self and the society. 
As an innovator, an entrepreneur is the person who brings 
out new products into the market. As an organiser, he/
she organises the factors of production in order to take 
advantage of opportunity in the market. Finally, as a risk 
bearer he/she shoulders all uncertainties associated with 
the venture.

Box 1

1. Howard Stevenson (1983) defined that “Entrepreneurship is the process by which 
individuals pursue opportunities without regard to the resources they currently control.”

2. “Entrepreneurship is the persistent progression towards an innovative solution to a key 
problem. It’s the constant hunger for making things better and the idea that you are 
never satisfied with how things are.” – Debbie Roxarzade, founder and CEO of Rachel›s 
Kitchen

3. “At its core, [entrepreneurship] is a mindset – a way of thinking and acting. It is 
about imagining new ways to solve problems and create value. Fundamentally, 
entrepreneurship is about...the ability to recognise [and] methodically analyse [an] 
opportunity, and ultimately, to capture [its] value.” – Bruce Bachenheimer, Clinical 
Professor of Management and Executive Director of the Entrepreneurship Lab at Pace 
University

4. “To be a successful entrepreneur you must have a passion for learning – from customers, 
employees and even competitors.” – James Bedal, CEO of Bare Metal Standard

13.1.1 Importance of entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship is widely regarded as the best way to 
augment the growth of an economy. Entrepreneurs have 
played a significant role in developing some of the best 
economies of the world like that of USA and Japan. In 
India too we have had several communities who have 
played a significant role of entrepreneurs for the economic 
development of our nation. Entrepreneurs are the prime 
movers of innovation and the introducers of new products 
into the market. Therefore, they play a key role in improving 

324 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



the lives of our societies. Enumerating the importance of 
entrepreneurship, we see that they:

(a) help in capital creation by bringing together the 
resources of the people.

(b) are employment creators and their role is pivotal. By 
creating employment opportunities, the standard of 
living of people increases and also the purchasing 
power of the people augments.

(c) help in developing total community. If employment 
is diversified among small entrepreneurial units, it 
promotes overall standard of living leading to stability 
and higher quality of community life.

Entrepreneurship is regarded as the panacea for the 
unemployed in an economy. Self-employment empowers 
an individual and helps in bringing about the social change 
for community development.

13.1.2 Qualities of a successful entrepreneur
India has had some of the finest entrepreneurs in history 
that laid the foundation of Indian economy. We can see 
that they all possess certain distinct qualities, some of 
which are summarised below:

1. Initiative: Being an innovator is a significant 
characteristic of an entrepreneur. Entrepreneur takes 
initiative at the right time to launch a venture, enduring 
all the struggles of initiation of a new venture.

2. Knowledge and skill: An entrepreneur is a skilled 
individual who possesses the relevant knowledge 
relating to the industry, economy, consumer choices, 
technology, etc., and prospects of growth for the same 
in future.

3. Risk taker: An entrepreneur is ready to take the 
uncertainties associated with the enterprise. An 
entrepreneur has the foresight to accept the long-term 
prospect of success for the enterprise. In doing so, 
he/she is ready to withstand the short-term risks 
associated with the venture.

4. Adaptability: An entrepreneur is adaptable to the 
changing business environment. As an entrepreneur 
starts and grows the business, they constantly 
monitor the business environment and adapt 
themselves to the changes taking place in it.

Entrepreneurship 325

Reprint 2025-26



Box 2: Story of Dr Krishna Ella, founder of Bharat Biotech International Ltd.

As students we sometimes ask our teachers or ourselves “Why am I learning this? Will 
I even use it in real life?”. Well, if your life goals are similar to those of Dr. Krishna 
M.Ella,that is, to create massive positive changes through scientific innovation,then you 
just might.
 Dr. Ella is the Chairman and Managing Director of Bharat Biotech International 
Limited (BBIL), which he co-founded with his wife in 1996 in Hyderabad, Telangana. 
A person hailing from a rural background and born in a village Nemili in Tamil Nadu, 
started his early education from the same village, had his share of ups and downs to 
achieve the feat what he is today. He completed his higher schooling and intermediate 
course in Life Sciences from Madras followed by completing his higher degrees in 
Agriculture from Maharashtra and later from Karnataka. In order to gain marketing 
experience, he worked with the Agricultural Division of a Pharmaceutical company in 
India as well.
 He also pursued Masters in Science (specialisation in Plant Pathology) at the 
University of Hawaii and doctoral programme at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
after getting a scholarship. Followed by his Ph. D. in 1993, Dr. Ella joined the Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston, where he made a shift from Plant Pathology 
to human and yeast molecular biology. While conducting regular research, he started 
thinking of innovative ideas for the development and production of Recombinant 
Hepatitis B Vaccine.
 In 1996, Dr. Ella returned to India and with the encouragement of his wife and 
his mother, set up a small laboratory in the city of Hyderabad. Their prime objective 
was to innovate in the development of affordable vaccines and biotherapeutics. As 
they wanted India to be known as the country that innovated and the name ‘Bharat 
Biotech International Ltd., was chosen. BBIL was established in 1997 in Hyderabad 
with the funds and assistance from angel investors. Since its inception, BBIL has 
produced over 4 billion doses of various human vaccines for diseases such as Hepatitis 
B, Rabies, Diphtheria, Rotavirus, and corona virus, etc., most of them for the Universal 
Immunisation Programme of India and for more than 120 developing countries to 
safeguard global public health.
 COVAXIN® is Bharat Biotech’s 17th Vaccine and the first COVID-19 Vaccine which 
made in India. Dr. Ella and his team developed COVAXIN®, the inactivated whole virus 
and adjuvanted vaccine, in a record time of just eight months. COVAXIN® has been in 
use as a life saving vaccine against the COVID-19 pandemic since December 2020 across 
India and many other developing countries. WHO has also approved COVAXIN for 
emergency use against COVID-19.
 Dr. Ella once said, “Solving today’s problem is not innovation, it is 
the ability to predict the future problem and finding solutions to solve an 
important problem, something that matters to public health.” He strongly 
believes in the potential of upcoming generation of students to shape 
the future of India. “For students of science, their focus on academic 
performance today can yield a better life for them and also for everyone 
around them. Many years from now, there will be a new generation of 
science students reading about a different entrepreneur in their textbook.
You can be that entrepreneur too!”

(Courtesy: Bharat Biotech International Limited (BBIL) )

326 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



5. Self-confidence: An entrepreneur is confident of the 
decisions they take. This self-belief is a key factor that 
makes entrepreneurs successful and acts as a catalyst 
in making them take up risks.

6. Wealth creators: Entrepreneurs are wealth creators 
that translate great ideas into commercial success. 
Those who succeed after taking these risks turn out 
to be wealth creators for themselves and for the nation 
they belong to, by providing valuable employment 
opportunities to the people. Thus, it is seen that every 
successful and economically developed nation has 
nurtured and promoted the entrepreneurial spirit 
among its people.

13.1.3 Difference between Entrepreneur 
and Intrapreneur

Entrepreneur and intrapreneur have similar values—
that of innovation and creativity, the two are often 
used interchangeably. However, an entrepreneur and 
intrapreneur have distinctive differences. An entrepreneur 
is a person who takes risks to start a business venture 
in order to earn profit. They foresee the opportunities 
for products and services and coordinates with the factors 
of production to establish an enterprise. On the contrary, 
an intrapreneur is an employee of an organisation 
who promotes innovation among the employees of the 
organisation. They are hired to bring about success in a 
business venture.

13.1.4 Planning and Resourcing an Enterprise
Planning and resourcing an enterprise are critical steps in 
transforming a business idea into a sustainable venture. 
Planning involves setting clear objectives, defining the 
business model, analyzing the market, and outlining 
strategies for operations, marketing, and growth. It includes 
identifying potential risks and devising contingency plans 
to address them. Resourcing focuses on securing the 
necessary inputs to support the business, such as financial 
capital, skilled personnel, technology, raw materials, and 
infrastructure. This process requires evaluating resource 
availability, sourcing strategies, and cost-effectiveness 

Entrepreneurship 327

Reprint 2025-26



while ensuring alignment with the enterprise’s goals. 
Effective planning and resourcing ensure that the 
enterprise is well-prepared to navigate challenges, leverage 
opportunities, and achieve long-term success

13.2 sourCes of funds

Define Start-up
In entrepreneurial terminology, the term ‘Start-up’ has 
become a popular word. Under the Startup India Action 
Plan, startups that meet the definition as prescribed under 
G.S.R. notification 127 (E) dated 16 January, 2019 are 
eligible to apply for recognition under the programme. The 
startups have to provide support documents at the time of 
application.
Eligibility criteria for startup recognition:

(a) The startup should be incorporated as a private 
limited company or registered as a partnership firm 
or a limited liability partnership.

(b) Turnover should be less than INR 100 crores in any 
of the previous financial years.

(c) An entity shall be considered as a startup up to 10 
years from the date of its incorporation.

(d) The startup should be working towards innovation or 
improvement of the existing products, services and 
processes and should have the potential to generate 
employment and create wealth. An entity formed by 
splitting up or reconstruction of an existing business 
shall not be considered a ‘Startup’.

Box 3: Six sources of financing the new venture:

1. Personal investment: The first investor in a business is the ‘entrepreneur’ himself/
herself. By putting in his/her own money, the entrepreneur proves to bankers and 
other investors, his/her long-term commitment to the venture.

2. Venture capital: Venture capitalists are investors that look for technology driven 
enterprises and companies that have a high growth potential. Some of the high 
growth potential sectors are Information Technology, Biotechnology, etc. The Venture 
Capitalists take an equity position in the company in order to help in developing a 
high-risk venture. They look for high return on investment when the business is 
developed, after which they may exit.

328 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



3. Angel investors: Angel investors are generally, wealthy individuals who invest in 
promising startups. These investors are very often leaders in their own fields, who 
invest money, ideas and experience in the promising ventures. They tend to finance 
the early stages of business.

4. Business incubators: Business incubators, also called accelerators, are investors 
who support high-tech sector by giving support to them in various stages of 
development. There are incubation centers in academic institutions and industrial 
cooperatives as well. Incubation phase lasts generally for two years only.

5. Government grant and subsidy: Government agencies provide financing such as 
grants and subsidies in order to promote business.

6. Bank loans: These are the most commonly used source of funding business ventures. 
For being eligible for a bank loan, a good idea itself is not enough, it should be 
complimented by an appealing business plan. Loans for start-ups typically require a 
personal guarantee from the entrepreneur.

13.3 entrepreneurship in BioteChnology

13.3.1 Significance of Biotechnology 
Entrepreneur

Biotechnology entrepreneurship consists of all the activities 
that an entrepreneur does to build and sustain an enterprise 
based on biotechnological innovation. It is an enterprise 
built by the amalgamation of science and business.

Some definitions of Biotechnology Entrepreneurship 
given by experts are as under:
1. ‘Biotechnology’ by accepted definition, involves the 

use of living organisms or parts of living organisms 
through biological processing to develop new products 
or provide new methods of production—‘Damian Hine 
and John Kapeleris (2006)

2. The concept of bio-entrepreneurship was elaborated 
by A.D. Meyers (2008) as “Bio-entrepreneurship is the 
process of creating value from life science innovation. 
It is referred to by several names including—bioscience 
entrepreneurship, life science entrepreneurship or 
bioscience enterprise. Whatever the descriptor, the 
fundamental notion is about moving a life science 
discovery or invention from the research phase through 
development to a commercial market.” 

Biotech entrepreneurs are the backbone of biotech 
industry. They are the innovators with a vision that their 
idea will impact the life of masses for better. Biotech 

Entrepreneurship 329

Reprint 2025-26



entrepreneurs start companies for the reasons given as 
under:
1. Biotech entrepreneurs believe that their ideas can 

solve a real-life problem of people around the world.
2. Biotech entrepreneurs are found to be altruistic in 

nature while starting their enterprise.
3. Financial rewards are also motivators to prove to 

the world that their discoveries can be commercial 
successes.

13.3.2 Assimilation of two distinctly 
different disciplines

Biotechnology is pure science, which when takes the form 
of an enterprise becomes commerce (a distinctly different 
discipline altogether). This intertwining of two disciplines 
can be a challenge for first time entrepreneurs. Scientific 
research requires academic skill in the subject while 
setting up biotechnology enterprise demands knowledge 
of economic conditions, decision making ability and risk-
taking ability between a General entrepreneur and Biotech 
entrepreneur is as under:

Table 13.1: Comparison between General and Biotech Entrepreneurs

Basis General Entrepreneur Biotech Entrepreneur

Idea Must be competitive Must be competitive

Team work Necessary and must be experienced Necessary and must be experienced

Risk Takes all risks with perseverance Takes all risks with perseverance

Gestation period Low to high depending on High

the type of enterprise

Degree of Present, but not scientific in nature Uncertainty in business apart 

uncertainty from other types carries inherent 

scientific uncertainty.

Capital Low to high depending on High

requirements the type of enterprise

Relevance Moderate to negligible Very high

of academic 

qualification

Regulatory Moderate High

framework

330 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



13.3.3 Process of starting a Biotech 
enterprise

Starting an enterprise requires intense planning and does 
not happen without a proper roadmap in place. The element 
of ‘chance’ should be avoided and rationale should be 
present for every action taken while starting an enterprise. 
As the words of Louis Pasteur go, “chance only favors the 
prepared mind”, an entrepreneur must be prepared for the 
outcome of his actions. This is true for all enterprises and 
also for biotech entrepreneurs. Following are the steps that 
are critical to starting a biotech enterprise:
Step 1: Need assessment
The entrepreneur should conduct a thorough assessment 
of the market demand for the product. The entrepreneur 
must be absolutely sure that there is a real market need 
for the product to be offered. Also, one has to be sure 
that the technology of interest is protected by intellectual 
property (IP).  Finally, the entrepreneur needs to secure 
the assets, IP rights and assurances from the inventors 
and key personnel (in case the promoter is not the only one 
involved in the business).

Step 2: Identification of founders and key personnel
A new entrepreneur must look for like-minded 
individuals, who can join the team and bring the idea 
into reality. Generally, we see that a new entrepreneur 
works collectively with a team of people with expertise in 
diverse disciplines. Selecting this key group of people is a 
challenge, yet this group is indispensable to the success 
of an entrepreneurial idea.

Step 3: Getting a legal expert
This individual is a key partner.  A legal advisor will be the 
individual the promoter will go to for advice and guidance. 
He will help the promoter move through the corporate and 
business issues during all the stages of establishing and 
growing his company.

Step 4: Incorporation as a Limited Company
It is advisable for the entrepreneurs of Biotechnology 
based start ups to register their companies as Private 
Limited Companies under the provision of the Companies 
Act 2013. Due to the nature of the business that demands 

Entrepreneurship 331

Reprint 2025-26



high capital investment and an above average gestation 
period, a Limited enterprise would be the best fit for a 
Biotechnology Startup.

Step 5: Design a marketing and business strategy
A well-designed business and marketing strategy are the 
next requirements. It will not be possible to raise money 
unless it clearly describes the market problem and need 
for the product, how the new product will solve the need, 
how much money the new product will generate, how the 
fund generated will be utilised and the expected return on 
investment.

Step 6: After the seed capital is raised the technology 
development should be the focus
It is important to highlight the key product development 
milestones in biotechnology ventures. The product is the 
pivot in a biotech enterprise and hence innovation in the 
same must be consistent to keep the market sentiments 
positive to establish and grow.

13.4 ConCept of ipr

The proprietary aspect is the key feature of biotechnology 
of modern times. In the past, innovations in biotechnology 
came out only of publicly funded laboratories. In present 
times, biotech innovations are well protected within legal 
framework of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR).

With the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property 
Rights (TRIPS) Agreement of World Trade Organisation 
(WTO), the Intellectual Property Rights attained the 
authority to enforce the law internationally. According to 
TRIPS, the intellectual property rights are:

Box 4: Copyright and Related Rights

 1.  Rights of artists, painters, musicians, sculptors, photographers and authors for 
copyright in their works.

 2.  Rights of computer programmes, whether in source or object code for a copyright 
in their programmes and compilation of data.

 3.  Rights of performers, producers of phonograms and broadcasting organisations in 
respect of fixation on their programmes for copyright in their work.

332 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



 4. Right of traders in their trademarks.

 5.  Right of manufacturers and producers on geographical indication in relation to 
such products and produce.

 6. Right of designers for their distinctive design striking to the eye.

 7. Right of the inventor for patent of his/her invention.

 8. Rights of plant breeders and farmers.

 9. Rights of biological diversity.

10.  Right of computer technologist for their layout design of integrated circuits.

11.  Right of businessmen for protection of their undisclosed information on technology 
and management.

13.4.1 The aspects of IPR involved in 
Biotechnology

(a) Patent
The Patents Act 1970, along with the Patents Rules 1972, 
came into force on 20th April 1972, replacing the Indian 
Patents and Designs Act 1911. The Patents Act was largely 
based on the recommendations of the Ayyangar Committee 
Report headed by Justice N. Rajagopala Ayyangar. One of 
the recommendations was the allowance of only process 
patents with regard to the inventions relating to drugs, 
medicines, food and chemicals.

Later, India became signatory to many international 
arrangements with an objective of strengthening its patent 
law and coming in league with the modern world. One 
of the significant steps towards achieving this objective 
was becoming the member of the TRIPS system. Being 
a signatory to TRIPS, India was under a contractual 
obligation to amend its Patents Act to comply with its 
provisions. India had to meet the first set of requirements 
on 1 January 1995 to give a pipeline protection till the 
country starts granting product patent.

Section 5, an important section of the Indian Patent 
Act,1970 was deleted by the 2005 Amendment Act to allow 
product patents in the area of biotechnology, chemicals 
and pharmaceuticals. The basic criteria for a patent to be 

Entrepreneurship 333

Reprint 2025-26



granted are novelty, non-obviousness (inventive step) and 
utility. For a patent to be granted in India, it should not 
be covered in the negative list in Section 3, which provides 
an extensive list of what are not considered as inventions 
under the Indian Patents Act. The inventions related to 
DNA molecules or sequences must not be contrary to 
public order and morality.

The biotechnology industry is devoted to the 
development of commercially valuable therapeutic, 
biochemical and pharmaceutical products and processes 
among others. Many of these products and processes 
revolve around the manipulation of DNA molecules and 
their encoded proteins. In the last thirty years, great 
strides have been made in the field of biotechnology and 
particularly in recombinant DNA research. However, with 
this progress has come a degree of uncertainty regarding 
the obviousness of certain biotechnological inventions.

For example, procedures of cloning genes and 
transporting them between organisms have become 
common place. The accessibility of these methods along 
with the central doctrine of molecular biology, i.e., DNA 
is transcripted into RNA, which in turn is translated into 
functional or structural protein molecules, has created a 
somewhat disarrayed legal structure.

In India, only inventions are patentable while 
discoveries are not. There is a clear distinction between 
inventions and discoveries as the law specifies that only 
inventions create patentable subject matter. Indian patent 
law provides for a demonstrative list where it has mentioned 
the subjects that are not patentable. Any subject matter, 
which does not fall within the domains of the demonstrated 
list, does establish a patentable subject matter. The list has 
been updated and altered to comply with the provisions of 
the TRIPS.

(b) Plant Breeder’s Rights and Farmer’s 
Variety Act
Plant breeder’s rights (PBRs) are used to protect new 
varieties of plants by giving exclusive commercial rights 
for about 20–25 years to market a new variety or its 
reproductive material. The variety must be novel, distinct, 
uniform and stable. This protection stops anyone from 
growing or selling the variety without the permission of 

334 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



owner. Exceptions may be made, however, for both research 
and the use of seed saved by a farmer for replanting.

(c) Trademark
The Trademark Act, 1999 under Section 2 (zb) defines 
‘trade mark’ as “a mark capable of being represented 
graphically and which is capable of distinguishing the goods 
or services of one person from those of others and may 
include shape of goods, their packaging and combination of 
colours…” Besides, the Act also provided for the definition 
of ‘mark’ under Section 2(m), which enumerates a mark 
to include a device, brand, heading, label, ticket, name, 
signature, word, letter, numeral, shape of goods, packaging 
or combination of colours or any combination thereof.
Two essential ingredients for Trademark registration

1. The mark is capable of being represented graphically.

2. Capable of distinguishing goods and services of one 
person from those of others.

(d) Copyright
Copyright is a right given by the law to the creator of 
literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work and the 
producers of cinematograph films and sound recordings. 
In fact, it is a bundle of rights including, inter alia, rights of 
reproduction, communication to the public, adaptation and 
translation of the work. There could be slight distinctions 
in the alignment of the rights dependent on the work.

Some of the exclusions are the uses of the work—
(a) for the purpose of research or private study

(b) for criticism or review

(c) for reporting current events

(d) for judicial proceeding

(e) for performance by an amateur club or society if the 
performance is given to a non-paying audience

(f) for the making of sound recordings of literary, 
dramatic or musical works under certain conditions

(e) Trade Secrets
In India, trade secrets refer to confidential business 

information, such as formulas, processes, designs, or 
methods, that provide a competitive advantage and are kept 

Entrepreneurship 335

Reprint 2025-26



secret by a company. Unlike patents or trademarks, trade 
secrets are not registered, and their protection depends on 
the company’s ability to maintain confidentiality through 
internal measures, like non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) 
and secure information practices. Although India does not 
have a specific law dedicated to the protection of trade 
secrets, it is safeguarded under Indian contract law (such 
as through NDAs and confidentiality clauses) and tort 
law, which allows for remedies in cases of unauthorized 
use or disclosure. The TRIPS Agreement (Trade-Related 
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights), to which India 
is a signatory, mandates member countries to protect 
undisclosed information that has commercial value, as 
long as reasonable steps are taken to maintain its secrecy. 
In India, the legal protection for trade secrets is primarily 
enforced through civil suits for breach of contract or 
misappropriation, with remedies such as damages or 
injunctions. India’s legal framework is also aligned with 
international standards under TRIPS, although trade 
secret protection in India is more reliant on contract law 
than dedicated trade secret legislation.

13.5 Biopiracy
When there is commercial exploitation of biochemicals or 
genetic materials which occur naturally, it is known as 
biopiracy. Generally, indigenous people have traditional 
understanding of biological features and genetic diversity 
of the natural environment passed on from one generation 
to another. Few of the traditional knowledge relevant to 
global survival has the elements listed below:

1. Farming or agriculture
2. Medicinal plants
3. Varieties of food crops

There have been cases of infringement of rights towards 
traditional materials in recent times. Here are some 
examples:
1. The biopiracy case of the Neem tree (Azadirachta 

indica) highlights how multinational corporations 
exploited traditional knowledge. Native to India, neem 
has been used for centuries in traditional medicine 
and agriculture for its antimicrobial and pesticidal 
properties. In the 1990s, W.R. Grace and Co. and the 

336 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



United States Department of Agriculture obtained a 
patent for neem oil extraction and use as a pesticide, 
claiming it as a novel invention despite its well-
documented traditional use. In 2000, the EPO revoked 
the patent, marking a victory for indigenous knowledge 
and setting a global precedent against biopiracy while 
emphasizing the need to protect biodiversity and the 
rights of local communities.

2. The biopiracy case of turmeric involved the patenting 
of its traditional use in wound healing, a practice 
well-known in Indian culture for centuries. In 1995, 
two researchers from the University of Mississippi 
Medical Center were granted a U.S. patent for using 
turmeric powder to heal wounds, claiming novelty in 
their application. This sparked outrage as turmeric’s 
medicinal properties were part of India’s ancient 
Ayurvedic knowledge. The Indian Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research (CSIR) challenged the patent, 
presenting documented evidence from ancient texts 
and publications that turmeric’s wound-healing 
properties were already well-established. In 1997, the 
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) revoked 
the patent, recognizing the lack of novelty. This 
case became a landmark victory in the fight against 
biopiracy, emphasizing the need to safeguard traditional 
knowledge and prevent its unjust appropriation by 
corporations.

3. The biopiracy case of Basmati rice involved the 
U.S.-based company RiceTec Inc., which, in 1997, 
was granted a patent by the United States Patent 
and Trademark Office (USPTO) for certain strains of 
Basmati rice and methods of breeding them. Basmati, 
a variety of aromatic long-grain rice, is traditionally 
grown in the Indian subcontinent and is deeply tied to 
the cultural heritage and agricultural practices of India 
and Pakistan. The patent allowed RiceTec to label their 
rice as “Basmati” in international markets, threatening 
the livelihood of Indian farmers and undermining the 
unique geographic identity of traditional Basmati. 
The Indian government and advocacy groups strongly 
opposed the patent, arguing that Basmati rice and 
its qualities were a product of traditional agricultural 
knowledge and not an invention. After a widespread 
international campaign, several claims in the patent 
were successfully challenged, leading to a partial 

Entrepreneurship 337

Reprint 2025-26



revocation of the patent. This case underscored the 
need for international mechanisms like Geographical 
Indications (GIs) to protect traditional products and 
highlighted the importance of combating biopiracy to 
preserve the rights of local farmers and communities.

In order to curb the biopiracy of traditional medicines, 
Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) has been 
set up which is a pioneering initiative of India to prevent 
the misappropriation of country’s traditional medicinal 
knowledge at International Patent Offices. Its beginning 
dates back to the Indian effort on revocation of the patent 
on wound healing properties of turmeric at the USPTO.

SUMMARY

• Entrepreneur is an individual who undertakes an activity 
foreseeing business opportunity. They organise resources 
needed for starting the enterprise and also bear the risk 
involved in the process.

• Entrepreneurship is widely regarded as the best way to 
augment the growth of an economy. Entrepreneurs have 
played a significant role in developing some of the best 
economies of the world like that of USA and Japan. In India 
also we have had several communities who have played 
the significant role of entrepreneurs for the economic 
development of our nation.

• Entrepreneurs are seen to display certain inherent qualities 
like that of initiative, knowledge and skill, risk-taker, 
adaptability, self-confidence and they are also the wealth 
creators.

• The two terms—entrepreneur and intrapreneur, are often 
used interchangeably. But each has a distinctive definition. 
An entrepreneur is a person who takes risks to start a 
business venture in order to earn profit. On the contrary, an 
intrapreneur is an employee of an organisation who promotes 
innovation among the employees of the organisation.

• In entrepreneurial terminology, the term ‘Startup’ has 
become a popular word. A startup should be working towards 
innovation or improvement of the existing products, services 
and processes and should have the potential to generate 
employment and to create wealth. An entity formed by 
splitting up or reconstruction of an existing business shall 
not be considered a ‘Startup’.

338 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



• There are seven sources of starting a new venture viz. 
Personal Investment, Venture Capital, Angel Investors, 
Business Incubators, Government Grant Subsidy and Bank 
Loans.

• Biotechnology entrepreneurship consists of all the activities 
that an entrepreneur does to build and sustain an enterprise 
based on biotechnological innovation. It is an enterprise built 
by the amalgamation of science and business.

• There are six steps that are critical to starting a biotech 
enterprise, these are—Need assessment, Identification 
of founders and key personnel, Getting a legal expert, 
Incorporate the company as a Limited Company, Design a 
marketing and business strategy, and Focus on technology 
development.

• The proprietary aspect is the key feature of biotechnology 
in modern times. In the past, innovations in biotechnology 
came out only of publicly funded laboratories. In present 
times, biotech innovations are well protected within legal 
framework of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR). Aspects of 
IPR involved in biotechnology are Patent, Plant Breeder’s 
rights and Farmer’s Variety Act, Trademark, Copyright and 
Trade-secrets.

• Biopiracy is a major issue in efforts to commercialise 
biotechnological knowledge. When there is commercial 
exploitation of biochemicals or genetic materials, which occur 
naturally, it is known as biopiracy. Generally, indigenous 
people have traditional understanding of biological features 
and genetic diversity of the natural environment passed on 
from one generation to another. There have been cases of 
infringement of rights towards traditional materials in recent 
times. A case of biopiracy by multinational corporations is 
that of the Neem tree of India. Another case was when patent 
was granted to researchers for the use of turmeric in wound 
healing, which was revoked later. Yet another case was when 
rice similar to Basmati was granted patent in USA, which 
was also revoked later.

• In order to curb the biopiracy of traditional medicines, 
Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) has been 
set up which is a pioneering initiative of India to prevent 
misappropriation of country’s traditional medicinal 
knowledge at International Patent Offices.

Entrepreneurship 339

Reprint 2025-26



EXERCISES

 1. Define the term ‘entrepreneurship’. Describe its 
importance.

 2. What are the qualities of an entrepreneur?
 3. Differentiate between entrepreneur and intrapreneur.
 4. What are the steps of preparing a feasibility report?
 5. Define a ‘start-up’. What are the sources of funds for a 

new venture?
 6. Elaborate the significance of a Biotechnology 

Entrepreneur.

 7. Identify the similarities and differences between General 
Entrepreneur and Biotechnology Entrepreneur.

 8. Explain the process of starting a Biotech Enterprise.

 9. Explain the concept of IPR and aspect of IPR in 
Biotechnology.

 10. Explain the role of IPR in Biotechnology Enterprise.
 11. What are the three central criteria for grant of Patents of 

any scientific inventions?
 12. ‘Angel’ usually provide what type of financing?
  (a) Debt
  (b) Equity

  (c) Stock Sales

  (d) None of the above

 13. A patent is granted for a specified amount of time because 
of the assumption:

  (a) That during this time, the firm will cover its 
development costs

  (b) That firm will earn a sufficient profit during this 
period

  (c) To limit the monopoly of the firm
  (d) That it will stimulate the idea and development of a 

better product

 14. A short-term, internal source of funds can be obtained by 
reducing all of the following EXCEPT ______________.

  (a) short-term assets

  (b) cash

  (c) fixed assets
  (d) Inventory

340 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26



 15. A typical researcher entrepreneur usually ___________.
  (a) is highly creative and enjoys the process of research

  (b) does not encourage change

  (c) is not willing to take risk

  (d) dislikes change

 16. Which of the following elements is NOT an important 
element of the financial data and projections section of a 
business plan?

  (a) SWOT analysis

  (b) Projected income statements
  (c) Break-even analysis

  (d) Cost controls
 17. Which of the following cannot be covered under the 

copyright protection?
  (a) Computer software
  (b) Computer hardware
  (c) Poems and songs
  (d) Models and sculpture

 18. Which of the following is false?
  (a) A business plan is often prepared by an existing 

company to ensure that growth is properly managed.

  (b)  A business plan is usually not required when 
obtaining finance for a startup.

  (c)  If a business plan is completed for a start-up, it may 
help the entrepreneur avoid costly mistakes.

  (d) All of the above.

 19. Which of the statements is/are true with respect to 
entrepreneurship?

  (i) Entrepreneur is an individual who undertakes an 
activity foreseeing business opportunity.

  (ii) He/She organises resources needed for starting the 
enterprise and also bears the risk involved in the 
process.

  (iii) There are three prominent roles that an entrepreneur 
fulfils that of an innovator, organiser and a risk 
bearer.

  Options:

  (a) Only (i)

  (b) Only (i) and (ii)

  (c) Only (i) and (iii)

  (d) (i), (ii) and (iii) are true

Entrepreneurship 341

Reprint 2025-26



 20. Seed capital assistance is ______________________.
  (a) a long-term assistance.

  (b) initial assistance

  (c) a help for the purchase of seeds.

  (d) a short-term assistance.

 21. Which one of the following is a pioneering initiative of 
India to prevent misappropriation of country’s traditional 
medicinal knowledge at International Patent Offices?

  (a) Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL)
  (b) National Digital Library of India (NDLI)
  (c) Digital Library of Open Access Books (DOAB)
  (d) Universal Digital Library

342 Biotechnology XII

Reprint 2025-26