Business studies

Part ii

Business Finance and Marketing
Textbook for Class XII

Reprint 2025-26



12114 – BuSINeSS StudIeS Part II ISBN 81-7450-697-7 (Part I)
Textbook for Class XII 81-7450-756-6 (Part II)

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
First Edition    No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 

May 2007  Jyaistha 1929 system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior 

Reprinted permission of the publisher.

February 2008, March 2009,  This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of 
trade,  be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without 

January 2010, January 2011, the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than 
January 2012, January 2013, that in which it is published.

November 2013, January 2015,  The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page. 

May 2016, January 2018, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or 
by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.

February 2019, November 2019 and
January 2021 OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION  

Revised Edition DIVISION NCERT

August 2022  Sharavana 1944 NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg

Reprinted New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708

March 2024 Chaitra 1946
108, 100 Feet Road 

December 2024 Pausha 1946 Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O. Navjivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446

PD 37T BS
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454

CWC Complex
© National Council of Educational Maligaon  
Research and Training, 2007, 2022 Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869 

0361-2674869 

Publication Team

` 50.00 Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan
Division
Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar

Chief Production : Jahan Lal
Officer (In charge)
Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar

Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT Manager
watermark

Assistant Editor : Vineet Joshi
Published at the Publication Division Assistant Production  : Deepak Kumar 
by the Secretary, National Council of Officer
Educational Research and Training, 
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 Cover
and printed at Manipal Technologies Shweta Rao
Limited, Udayavani Building, Press Illustrations
Corner, Manipal, Karnataka–576104 Suresh Lal

Reprint 2025-26



Foreword

The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that 
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. 
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning 
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the 
school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on 
the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They 
also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp 
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will 
take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system 
of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
 The success of this effort depends on the steps that school 
principals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on 
their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. 
We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children 
generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on 
to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis 
of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites 
of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible 
if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as 
receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
 These aims imply considerable change in school routines and 
mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary 
as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the required 
number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods 
used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this 
textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, 
rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have 
tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and 
reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration 
for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook 
attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space 
to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small 
groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.

Reprint 2025-26



iv

 The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) 
appreciates the hardwork done by the textbook development committee 
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the 
advisory group in Social Sciences Professor Hari Vasudevan and the 
Chief Advisor for this book, D.P.S. Verma, Professor (Retd.), Delhi School 
of Economics, University of Delhi, and Dr. G.L. Tayal, Reader, Ramjas 
College, University of Delhi, for guiding the work of this committee. 
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are 
grateful to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to 
the institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us 
to draw upon their resources, material and personnel. We are especially 
grateful to the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed 
by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of 
Human Resource Development, under the chairpersonship of Professor 
Mrinal Miri and Professor. G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and 
contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform and 
continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes 
comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further 
revision and refinement.
        Director
New Delhi   National Council of Educational
20 November 2006 Research and Training

Reprint 2025-26



ratIoNalISatIoN of CoNteNt IN the textBookS

In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content 

load on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises 

reducing the content load and providing opportunities for experiential 

learning with creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has 

undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. 

Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across classes 

have been taken into consideration in this exercise.

Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the 

following:

•	 Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in 

the same class

•	 Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same 

subject

•	 Difficulty level

•	 Content, which is easily accessible to students without much 

interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through 

self-learning or peer-learning

•	 Content, which is irrelevant in the present context

This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out 

the changes given above.

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26



TexTbook developmenT CommiTTee

Chairperson, Advisory CommiTTee For TexTbooks in SoCial SCienCes aT 
senior seCondary level

Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of 
Calcutta, Kolkata

ChieF Advisor

D.P.S. Verma, Retired Professor, Department of Commerce, Delhi School 
of Economics, University of Delhi, Delhi.

Advisor

G.L. Tayal, Reader, Ramjas College, University of Delhi, Delhi.

Members

Anand Saxena, Reader, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya College, University of 
Delhi, Delhi.

Davinder K. Vaid, Professor, Department of Education in Social Sciences 
and Humanities, NCERT, New Delhi.

M.M. Goyal, Reader, PGDAV College, University of Delhi, Delhi.

Narsimha Murthy, Principal, University Post-Graduate College, Subedari, 
Anam Konda, Distt. Warangal, Andhra Pradesh.

Pooja Dasani, PGT (Commerce) Convent of Jesus and Mary, 
Gol Dakkhana, New Delhi.

R.B. Solanki, Principal, B.R. Ambedkar College, University of Delhi, Delhi.

Ruchi Kakkar, Lecturer, Acharya Narendra Dev College, University of 
Delhi, Delhi.

Shruti Bodh Aggarwal, Vice-Principal, Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, 
Kishanganj, Delhi.

Sumati Verma, Reader, Sri Aurobindo College, University of Delhi, Delhi.

Y.V. Reddy, Reader, Department of Commerce, Goa University, Goa.

member CoordinaTor

Minoo Nandrajog, Reader, Department of Education in Social Sciences 
and Humanities, NCERT, New Delhi.

Reprint 2025-26



aCknowledgemenTs

The National Council of Educational Research and Training 
acknowledges the valuable contributions of the Textbook Development 
Commiteee, which took considerable pain in the development and review 
of manuscript as well.
 Thanks are due to Savita Sinha Professor and Head, Department 
of Education in Social Science for her guidance and constant support 
at every stage of the textbook development process. The textbook has 
been reworked and updated at appropriate point of time in the context of 
recent development in business scenario and the Compaines Act 2013. 
The contribution of practcing teacher of Business Studies is also duly 
acknowledged for develping e-resourses for QR Codes.
 The contribution of APC Office, Administration, Publication Division, 
and Secretariat of NCERT are also duly acknowledged for bringing out 
the updated textbook of Business Studies.

noTe To The TeaCher

This textbook is expected to provide a good understanding of the 
environment in which a business operates. A manager has to analyse the 
complex, dynamic situations in which a business is placed. Therefore, 
content enrichment in the form of business news and abstracts of articles 
from business journals and magazines has been given as inset material 
(boxes). This will encourage students to be observant about all business 
activity and discover what is happening in business organisations with 
the expectation that they will update their knowledge through the use  
of libraries, newspapers, business oriented  TV programmes and the 
Internet. Various types of questions are given and case problems have 
been introduced to test the application of subject knowledge to realistic 
business situations.

Reprint 2025-26



Contents

  Foreword iii

  rationalisation oF Content in the textbooks v

Chapter 9 FinanCial ManageMent 215

Chapter 10 Marketing 242

Chapter 11 ConsuMer ProteCtion 289

Reprint 2025-26



ConTenTs (parT i)

ChapTer 1 nature and signiFicance oF ManageMent 1

ChapTer 2 PrinciPles oF ManageMent 30

ChapTer 3 Business environMent 69

ChapTer 4 Planning 91

ChapTer 5 organising 109

ChapTer 6 staFFing 139

ChapTer 7 directing 169

ChapTer 8 controlling 201

Reprint 2025-26


##9##
chapter 
9

Financial ManageMenT

LEARNING OBJECTIVES  When TaTa STeel acquired 
coruS

After studying this chapter, you 
should be able to: Tata Steel, the biggest steel producer 

in the Indian private sector acquired 

¾ explain the meaning of Corus, a Dutch Steel Company in a 

business finance; deal worth 12 billion USD in 2007. A 
financial decision of this magnitude 
has significant implicitness for both 

¾ d e s c r i b e  f i n a n c i a l Tata Steel and Corus as well as their 
management; employees and shareholders. Details 

of acquisition are as follows:
¾ explain the role of financial 

�	This acquisition has been a largest 
m a n a g e m e n t  i n  o u r 
enterprise; private sector transaction by Indian 

company outside of India and 
named Tata Steel Europe in 2010.

¾ discuss  ob jec t i ves  o f 
financial management and �	Tata Steel raised a debt of over $8 
how they could be achieved; billion to finance the transaction. 

The deal will be paid for by Tata Steel 
¾ explain the meaning and UK, a special purpose vehicle (SPV) 

importance of financial set up for the purpose. Another 
planning; company of the Tata group, Tata 

Sons Ltd., invested $ 1 billion 
¾ state the meaning of capital dollars for preference shares along 

structure; with Tata Steel which will invest an 
equal amount. 

¾ analyse the factors affecting �	Tata Steel, the acquirer company, 

the choice of an appropriate arranged about 36,500 crores of 
capital structure; rupees to finance the take-over.

�	Tata Steel raised this amount 
¾ state meaning of fixed through debt or  equity or  a 

capital and working capital; combination of both. Some amount 
and came from internal accruals also. 

This financing decision affected the 
¾ analyse the factors affecting capital structure of the acquirer.

the requirement of fixed and 
 Source: The Economic Times

working capital.

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

216

inTroducTion thus, very crucial for the survival and 
growth of a business.

In the above case, these decisions 
require careful financial planning, 

Financial ManageMenT
an understanding of the resultant 
capital structure and the riskiness All finance comes at some cost. It 
and profitability of the enterprise. All is quite imperative that it needs to 
these have a bearing on shareholders be carefully managed. Financial 
as well as employees. They require Management is concerned with optimal 
an understanding of  business procurement as well as the usage of 
finance, major financial decision finance. For optimal procurement, 
areas, financial risk, and working different available sources of finance 
capital requirements of the business. are identified and compared in terms 
Finance, as we all know, is essential of their costs and associated risks. 
for running a business. Success of Similarly, the finance so procured 
business depends on how well finance needs to be invested in a manner that 
is invested in assets and operations the returns from the investment exceed 

and how timely and cheaply the the cost at which procurement has 

finances are arranged, from outside taken place. Financial Management 

or from within the business.  aims at reducing the cost of funds 
procured, keeping the risk under 

Meaning oF B control and achieving effective 
uSineSS Finance

deployment of such funds. It also 
Money required for carrying out aims at ensuring availability of enough 
business activities is called business funds whenever required as well as 
finance. Almost all business activities avoiding idle finance. Needless to 
require some finance. Finance is emphasise, the future of a business 
needed to establish a business, to depends a great deal on the quality of 
run it, to modernise it, to expand, or its financial management.
diversify it. It is required for buying Importance : The role of financial 
a variety of assets, which may be management  cannot  be  over-
tangible like machinery, factories, emphasised, since it has a direct 
buildings, offices; or intangible such bearing on the financial health of a 
as trademarks, patents, technical business. The financial statements, 
expertise, etc. Also, finance is central such as Balance Sheet and Profit 
to running the day-to-day operations and Loss Account, reflect a firm’s 
of business, like buying material, financial position and its financial 
paying bills, salaries, collecting cash health. Almost all items in the financial 
from customers, etc. needed at every statements of a business are affected 
stage in the life of a business entity. directly or indirectly through some 
Availability of adequate finance is, financial management decisions. Some 

Reprint 2025-26



FINANCIAL MANAgeMeNTS

217

prominent examples of the aspects raised by way of debt and/or equity 
being affected could be as under: is also a financial management 

 (i) The size and the composition of decision. The amounts of debt, 

fixed assets of the business: For equity share capital, preference 

example, a capital budgeting share capital are affected by the 
financing decision, which is a part 

decision to invest a sum of Rs. 100 
crores in fixed assets would raise of financing management.

the size of fixed assets block by this ( v) All items in the Profit and Loss 

amount. Account, e.g., Interest, Expense, 
Depreciation, etc. : Higher amount 

( ii) The quantum of current assets and 
of debt means higher interest 

its break-up into cash, inventory expense in future. Similarly, use 
and receivables: With an increase of higher equity may entail higher 
in the investment in fixed assets, payment of dividends. Similarly, an 
there is a commensurate increase expansion of business which is a 
in the working capital requirement. result of capital budgeting decision 
The quantum of current assets is likely to affect virtually all items 
is also influenced by financial in the profit and loss account of the 
management decisions. In addition, business.
decisions about credit and inventory 

It can, thus, be stated that the 
management affect the amount of 

financial statements of a business 
debtors and inventory which in 

are largely determined by financial 
turn affect the total current assets 
as well as their composition. management decisions taken earlier. 

Similarly,  the future f inancial 
( iii) The amount of long-term and statements would depend upon past 

short- term funds to be used: as well as current financial decisions. 
Financial management, among 

Thus, the overall financial health 
others, involves decision about 

of a business is determined by the 
the proportion of long-term and quality of its financial management. 
short-term funds. An organisation Good financial management aims at 
wanting to have more liquid assets mobilisation of financial resources at 
would raise relatively more amount 

a lower cost and deployment of these 
on a long-term basis. There is 

in most lucrative activities.
a choice between liquidity and 
profitability. The underlying 

oBjecTiveS
assumption here is that current 
liabilities cost less than long term The pr imary a im of  f inancia l 
liabilities. management  i s  t o  max im i se 

( iv) Break-up of long-term financing into shareholders’ wealth, which is referred 
debt, equity etc: Of the total long- to as the wealth-maximisation concept. 
term finance, the proportions to be The market price of a company’s shares 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

218

is linked to the three basic financial some value addition should take place. 
decisions which you will study a little All those avenues of investment, modes 
later. This is because a company funds of financing, ways of handling various 
belong to the shareholders and the components of working capital must 
manner in which they are invested and be identified which will ultimately lead 
the return earned by them determines to an increase in the price of equity 
their market value and price. It means share. It can happen through efficient 
maximisation of the market value of decision-making. Decision-making is 
equity shares. The market price of efficient if, out of the various available 
equity share increases, if the benefit alternatives, the best is selected.
from a decision exceeds the cost 
involved. All financial decisions aim at Financial Decisions

ensuring that each decision is efficient 
Financial management is concerned 

and adds some value. Such value 
with the solution of three major issues 

additions tend to increase the market relating to the financial operations 
price of shares. Therefore, those 
financial decisions are taken which of a firm corresponding to the three 

questions of investment, financing 
will ultimately prove gainful from and dividend decision. In a financial 
the point of view of the shareholders. 

context, it means the selection of 
The shareholders gain if the value of 

best financing alternative or best 
shares in the market increases. Those investment alternative. The finance 
decisions which result in decline in 

function, therefore, is concerned 
the share price are poor financial 

with three broad decisions which are 
decisions. Thus, we can say, the 
objective of financial management is explained below:

to maximise the current price of equity 
Investment Decision

shares of the company or to maximise 
the wealth of owners of the company, A firm’s resources are scarce in 
that is, the shareholders. comparison to the uses to which 

Therefore, when a decision is taken they can be put. A firm, therefore, 
about investment in a new machine, has to choose where to invest these 
the aim of financial management resources, so that they are able to earn 
is to ensure that benefits from the the highest possible return for their 
investment exceed the cost so that investors. The investment decision, 
some value addition takes place. therefore, relates to how the firm’s 
Similarly, when finance is procured, funds are invested in different assets.
the aim is to reduce the cost so that Investment decision can be long-
the value addition is even higher. term or short-term. A long-term 

In fact, in all financial decisions, investment decision is also called a 
major or minor, the ultimate objective Capital Budgeting decision. It involves 
that guides the decision-maker is that committing the finance on a long-

Reprint 2025-26



FINANCIAL MANAGEMENTS

219

term basis. For example, making decisions) are concerned with the 
investment in a new machine to decisions about the levels of cash, 
replace an existing one or acquiring inventory and receivables. These 
a new fixed asset or opening a new decisions affect the day-to-day 
branch, etc. These decisions are very working of a business. These affect 
crucial for any business since they the liquidity as well as profitability of a 
affect its earning capacity in the long business. Efficient cash management, 
run. The size of assets, profitability inventory management and receivables 
and competitiveness are all affected by management are essential ingredients 
capital budgeting decisions. Moreover, of sound working capital management.
these decisions normally involve 
huge amounts of investment and are Factors affecting Capital 
irreversible except at a huge cost. Budgeting Decision
Therefore, once made, it is often almost 

A number of projects are often available 
impossible for a business to wriggle out 
of such decisions. Therefore, they need to a business to invest in. But each 

project has to be evaluated carefully 
to be taken with utmost care. These 

and, depending upon the returns, a 
particular project is either selected or 
rejected. If there is only one project, its 
viability in terms of the rate of return, 
viz., investment and its comparability 
with the industry’s average is seen. 
There are certain factors which affect 
capital budgeting decisions.
(a) Cash flows of the project: When 

a company takes an investment 
decision involving huge amount 
it expects to generate some cash 
flows over a period. These cash 
flows are in the form of a series 
of cash receipts and payments 

Wealth Maximisation Concept
over the life of an investment. 
The amount of these cash flows 

decisions must be taken by those who should be carefully analysed before 
understand them comprehensively. considering a capital budgeting 
A wrong capital budgeting decision decision.
normally has the capacity to severely (b) The rate of return: The most 
damage the financial fortune of a important criterion is the rate 
business. Short-term investment of return of the project. These 
decisions (also called working capital calculations are based on the 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

220

expected returns from each whether or not a firm has earned a 
proposal and the assessment of profit. Likewise, the borrowed funds 
the risk involved. Suppose, there have to be repaid at a fixed time. The 
are two projects, A and B (with the risk of default on payment is known 
same risk involved), with a rate as financial risk which has to be 
of return of 10 per cent and 12 considered by a firm likely to have 
per cent, respectively, then under insufficient shareholders to make 
normal circumstance, project B these fixed payments. Shareholders’ 
should be selected. funds, on the other hand, involve no 

(c) The investment criteria involved: commitment regarding the payment 
The decision to invest in a particular of returns or the repayment of capital. 
project involves a number of A firm, therefore, needs to have a 
calculations regarding the amount judicious mix of both debt and equity 
of investment, interest rate, cash in making financing decisions, which 
flows and rate of return. There are may be debt, equity, preference share 
different techniques to evaluate capital, and retained earnings.
investment proposals which The cost of each type of finance has 
are known as capital budgeting to be estimated. Some sources may 
techniques. These techniques are be cheaper than others. For example, 
applied to each proposal before debt is considered to be the cheapest 
selecting a particular project. of all the sources, tax deductibility 

of interest makes it still cheaper. 
Financing Decision Associated risk is also different for 

This decision is about the quantum each source, e.g., it is necessary to 

of finance to be raised from various pay interest on debt and redeem the 

long-term sources. Short-term sources principal amount on maturity. There 

are studied under the ‘working capital is no such compulsion to pay any 

management’. dividend on equity shares. Thus, there 

It involves identification of various is some amount of financial risk in 
available sources. The main sources debt financing. The overall financial 
of funds for a firm are shareholders’ risk depends upon the proportion of 
funds and borrowed funds. The debt in the total capital. The fund 
shareholders’ funds refer to the equity raising exercise also costs something. 
capital and the retained earnings. This cost is called floatation cost. 
Borrowed funds refer to the finance It also must be considered while 
raised through debentures or other evaluating different sources. Financing 
forms of debt. A firm has to decide the decision is, thus, concerned with the 
proportion of funds to be raised from decisions about how much to be raised 
either sources, based on their basic from which source. This decision 
characteristics. Interest on borrowed determines the overall cost of capital 
funds have to be paid regardless of and the financial risk of the enterprise.

Reprint 2025-26



FINANCIAL MANAgeMeNTS

221

Financial Decisions

Factors Affecting Financing different. A prudent financial 
Decisions manager would normally opt for a 

The financing decisions are affected source which is the cheapest.

by various factors. Important among (b) Risk: The risk associated with each 
them are as follows: of the sources is different.
(a) Cost: The cost of raising funds (c) Floatation Costs: Higher the floatation 

through different sources are cost, less attractive the source.

Reprint 2025-26



BUsiness  stUDies

222

(d) Cash Flow Position of the Company: in the business. While the dividend 
A stronger cash flow position may constitutes the current income 
make debt financing more viable re-investment as retained earning 
than funding through equity. increases the firm’s future earning 

(e) Fixed Operating Costs: If a business capacity. The extent of retained 
has high fixed operating costs (e.g., earnings also influences the financing 
building rent, Insurance premium, decision of the firm. Since the firm 
Salaries, etc.), It must reduce fixed does not require funds to the extent 
financing costs. Hence, lower debt of re-invested retained earnings, the 
financing is better. Similarly, if decision regarding dividend should 
fixed operating cost is less, more be taken keeping in view the overall 
of debt financing may be preferred. objective of maximising shareholder’s 

(f) Control Considerations: issues of wealth.
more equity may lead to dilution 
of management’s control over Factors Affecting Dividend 
the business. Debt financing has Decision
no such implication. Companies 
afraid of a takeover bid would How much of the profits earned by a 
prefer debt to equity. company will be distributed as profit 

and how much will be retained in the 
(g) State of Capital Market: Health of business is affected by many factors. 

the capital market may also affect Some of the important factors are 
the choice of source of fund. During discussed as follows:
the period when stock market is (a) Amount of Earnings: Dividends 
rising, more people invest in equity. are paid out of current and past 
However, depressed capital market earning. Therefore, earnings is a 
may make issue of equity shares major determinant of the decision 
difficult for any company. about dividend. 

(b) Stability Earnings: Other things 
Dividend Decision remaining the same, a company 
The third important decision that having stable earning is in a better 
every financial manager has to position to declare higher dividends. 
take relates to the distribution of As against this, a company having 
dividend. Dividend is that portion unstable earnings is likely to pay 
of profit which is distributed to smaller dividend.
shareholders. The decision involved (c) Stability of Dividends: Companies 
here is how much of the profit earned general ly fol low a policy of 
by company (after paying tax) is to be stabilising dividend per share. The 
distributed to the shareholders and increase in dividends is generally 
how much of it should be retained made when there is confidence that 

Reprint 2025-26



Financial ManageMents

223

their earning potential has gone way of dividends. As compared 
up and not just the earnings of to this, higher dividends may be 
the current year. In other words, declared if tax rates are relatively 
dividend per share is not altered if lower. Though the dividends are free 
the change in earnings is small or of tax in the hands of shareholders, 
seen to be temporary in nature. a dividend distribution tax is levied 

(d) Growth Opportunities: Companies on companies. Thus, under the 
having good growth opportunities present tax policy, shareholders 
retain more money out of their are likely to prefer higher dividends.
earnings so as to finance the (h) Stock Market Reaction: Investors, 
required investment. The dividend in general, view an increase in 
in growth companies is, therefore, dividend as a good news and 
smaller, than that in the non– stock prices react positively to it. 
growth companies. Similarly, a decrease in dividend 

(e) Cash Flow Position: The payment may have a negative impact on the 
of dividend involves an outflow of share prices in the stock market. 
cash. A company may be earning Thus, the possible impact of 
profit but may be short on cash. dividend policy on the equity share 
Availability of enough cash in price is one of the important factors 
the company is necessary for considered by the management 
declaration of dividend. while taking a decision about it.

(f) Shareholders’ Preference: While (i) Access to Capital Market: Large and 
declaring dividends, managements reputed companies generally have 
must keep in mind the preferences easy access to the capital market 
of the shareholders in this regard. If and, therefore, may depend less 
the shareholders in general desire on retained earning to finance 
that at least a certain amount is their growth. These companies 
paid as dividend, the companies tend to pay higher dividends than 
are likely to declare the same. There the smaller companies which have 
are always some shareholders who relatively low access to the market.
depend upon a regular income (j) Lega l  Const ra in ts :  Cer ta in 
from their investments. provisions of the Companies Act 

(g) Taxation Policy: The choice between place restrictions on payouts as 
the payment of dividend and dividend. Such provisions must 
retaining the earnings is, to some be adhered to while declaring the 
extent, affected by the difference in dividend.
the tax treatment of dividends and (k) Contractual Constraints: While 
capital gains. If tax on dividend is granting loans to a company, 
higher, it is better to pay less by sometimes the lender may impose 

Reprint 2025-26



BUsiness  stUDies

224

certain restrictions on the payment forecast all the items which are likely 
of dividends in future. The to undergo changes. It enables the 
companies are required to ensure management to foresee the fund 
that the dividend does not violate requirements both the quantum as 
the terms of the loan agreement in well as the timing. Likely shortage 
this regard. and surpluses are forecast so that 

necessary activities are taken in 
Financial P advance to meet those situations. 

lanning
Thus, financial planning strives to 

Financial planning is essentially the achieve the following twin objectives.
preparation of a financial blueprint of (a) To ensure availability of funds 
an organisation’s future operations. whenever required: This include 
The objective of financial planning a proper estimation of the funds 
is to ensure that enough funds are required for different purposes 
available at right time. If adequate such as for the purchase of long-
funds are not available the firm will term assets or to meet day-to-
not be able to honour its commitments day expenses of business etc. 
and carry out its plans. On the other Apart from this, there is a need to 
hand, if excess funds are available, it estimate the time at which these 
will unnecessarily add to the cost and funds are to be made available. 
may encourage wasteful expenditure. Financial planning also tries to 
It must be kept in mind that financial specify possible sources of these 
planning is not equivalent to, or a funds. 
substitute for, financial management. (b) To see that the firm does not 
Financial management aims at raise resources unnecessarily: 
choosing the best investment and Excess funding is almost as bad 
financing alternatives by focusing on as inadequate funding. Even if 
their costs and benefits. Its objective there is some surplus money, good 
is to increase the shareholders’ wealth. financial planning would put it to 
Financial planning on the other the best possible use so that the 
hand aims at smooth operations financial resources are not left idle 
by focusing on fund requirements and don’t unnecessarily add to 
and their availability in the light of the cost.
financial decisions. For example, if a Thus, a proper matching of funds 
capital budgeting decisions is taken, requirements and their availability 
the operations are likely to be at a is sought to be achieved by financial 
higher scale. The amount of expenses planning. This process of estimating 
and revenues are likely to increase. the fund requirement of a business 
Financial planning process tries to and specifying the sources of funds 

Reprint 2025-26



Financial ManageMents

225

is called financial planning. Financial Further, the sources from which the 
planning takes into consideration the external funds requirement can be 
growth, performance, investments met are identified and cash budgets 
and requirement of funds for a given are made, incorporating these factors.
period. Financial planning includes 
both short-term as well as long-term imPortance

planning. Long-term planning relates 
to long term growth and investment. Financial planning is an important 
It focuses on capital expenditure part of overall planning of any business 
programmes. Short-term planning enterprise. It aims at enabling the 
covers short-term financial plan called company to tackle the uncertainty in 
budget. respect of the availability and timing 

Typically, financial planning is of the funds and helps in smooth 
done for three to five years. For longer functioning of an organisation. The 
periods it becomes more difficult and importance of financial planning can 
less useful. Plans made for periods of be explained as follows:
one year or less are termed as budgets.  (i) It helps in forecasting what may 
Budgets are example of financial happen in future under different 
planning exercise in greater details. business situations. By doing so, it 
They include detailed plan of action helps the firms to face the eventual 
for a period of one year or less. situation in a better way. In other 

Financial planning usually begins words, it makes the firm better 
with the preparation of a sales  forecast. prepared to face the future. For 
Let us suppose a company is making example, a growth of 20% in sales is 
a financial plan for the next five years. predicted. However, it may happen 
It will start with an estimate of the that the growth rate eventually 
sales which are likely to happen in turns out to be 10% or 30%. 
the next five years. Based on these, Many items of expenses shall be 
the financial statements are prepared different in these three situations. 
keeping in mind the requirement By preparing a blueprint of these 
of funds for investment in the fixed three situations the management 
capital and working capital. Then the may decide what must be done 
expected profits during the period are in each of these situations. This 
estimated so that an idea can be made preparation of alternative financial 
of how much of the fund requirements plans to meet different situations is 
can be met internally i.e., through clearly of immense help in running 
retained earnings (after dividend the business smoothly.
payouts). This results in an estimation  (ii) It helps in avoiding business 
of the requirement for external funds. shocks and surprises and helps 

Reprint 2025-26



BUsiness  stUDies

226

Cutting Back on Debt

Even successful businesses have debt, but how much is too much? Learning how 
to manage debt is what can put you ahead.

Taking on the right amount of debt can mean the difference between a business 
struggling to survive and one that can respond nimbly to changing economic or 
market conditions. A number of circumstances may justify acquiring debt. As a 
general rule, borrowing makes the most sense when you need to bolster cash flow 
or finance growth or expansion. But while debt can provide the leverage you need 
to grow, too much debt can strangle your business. So the question is: How much 
debt is too much?

The answer, experts say, lies in a careful analysis of your cash flow as well as 
your industry. A business that doesn’t grow dies. You’ve got to grow, but you’ve got 
to grow within the financial constraints of your business. What is the ideal capital 
structure a business needs in its industry to remain viable? The higher the volatility 
(in your industry), the less debt you should have. The smaller the volatility, the more 
debt you can afford.

Although banks and other financial institutions look for a satisfactory debt-to-
equity ratio before agreeing to make a loan, don’t assume a creditor’s willingness 
to extend funds is evidence that your business is in a strong debt position. Some 
financial institutions are overzealous lenders, particularly when trying to lure or hold 
on to promising business customers. “The bank may be looking more at collateral 
than whether the (business’s) earnings are going to come in to justify the debt service.

To avoid these and other credit pitfalls, it’s up to you to get the financial facts 
on your business and make sound borrowing decisions. Unfortunately, many 
entrepreneurs fail to recognise how important financial analysis is to running a 
successful business. Even business owners who receive detailed financial statements 
from their accountants often do not take advantage of the valuable information 
contained in the documents.

the company in preparing for the  (vi) It provides a l ink between 
future. investment and financing decisions 

 (iii) If helps in co-ordinating various on a continuous basis.
business functions, e.g., sales and  (vii) By spelling out detailed objectives 
production functions, by providing for various business segments, it 
clear policies and procedures. makes the evaluation of actual 

 (iv) Detailed plans of action prepared performance easier.
under financial planning reduce 
waste, duplication of efforts, and caPital Structure

gaps in planning. One of the important decisions under 
 (v) It tries to link the present with the financial management relates to the 

future. financing pattern or the proportion of 

Reprint 2025-26



Financial ManageMents

227

the use of different sources in raising is likely to lower the over-all cost of 
funds. On the basis of ownership, the capital of the firm provided that the 
sources of business finance can be cost of equity remains unaffected. 
broadly classified into two categories Impact of a change in the debt-equity 
viz., ‘owners’ funds’ and ‘borrowed ratio upon the earning per share is 
funds’. Owners’ funds consist of dealt with in detail later in this chapter.
equity share capital, preference share Debt is cheaper but is more risky 
capital and reserves and surpluses or for a business because the payment of 
retained earnings. Borrowed funds can interest and the return of principal is 
be in the form of loans, debentures, obligatory for the business. Any default 
public deposits etc. These may be in meeting these commitments may 
borrowed from banks, other financial force the business to go into liquidation. 
institutions, debentureholders and There is no such compulsion in case of 
public. equity, which is therefore, considered 
 Capital structure refers to the mix riskless for the business. Higher use 
between owners and borrowed funds. of debt increases the fixed financial 
These shall be referred as equity and charges of a business. As a result, 
debt in the subsequent text. It can increased use of debt increases the 
be calculated as debt-equity ratio financial risk of a company.

 Debt  Financial risk is the chance that 
i.e.,  


or a a firm would fail to meet its payment 

Equity 
s the proportion 

obligations.
of debt out of the total capital i.e., Capital structure of a company, 

thus, affects both the profitability and 
 Debt  the financial risk. A capital structure 
 Debt +Equity  . will be said to be optimal when the 

Debt and equity differ significantly proportion of debt and equity is 
in their cost and riskiness for the such that it results in an increase 
firm. The cost of debt is lower than in the value of the equity share. In 
the cost of equity for a firm because other words, all decisions relating to 
the lender’s risk is lower than the capital structure should emphasise on 
equity shareholder’s risk, since the increasing the shareholders’ wealth. 
lender earns an assured return and The proportion of debt in the overall 
repayment of capital and, therefore, capital is also called financial leverage. 
they should require a lower rate of 
return. Additionally, interest paid Financial leverage is computed as D

 
on debt is a deductible expense for E

computation of tax liability whereas D

dividends are paid out of after-tax or  when D is the Debt and E is 
D+ E

profit. Increased use of debt, therefore, the Equity. As the financial leverage 

Reprint 2025-26



BUsiness  stUDies

228

Example I

Company X Ltd.

 Total Funds used Rs. 30 Lakh
 Interest rate 10% p.a.
 Tax rate 30%
 EBIT Rs. 4 Lakh
 Debt

 situation i nil

 Situation II Rs. 10 Lakh
 Situation III Rs. 20 Lakh

EBIT-EPS Analysis

  Situation I Situation II Situation III 

 EBIT  4,00,000  4,00,000 4,00,000
 Interest NIL 1,00,000 2,00,000
 EBT  4,00,000 3,00,000 2,00,000
 (Earnings before taxes)
 Tax 1,20,000 90,000 60,000
 EAT 2,80,000 2,10,000 1,40,000
 (Earnings after taxes)
 No. of shares of Rs.10 3,00,000 2,00,000 1,00,000
 EPS 0.93 1.05 1.40
 (Earnings per share)

increases, the cost of funds declines situations-II and III, respectively. All 
because of increased use of cheaper debt is at 10% p.a.
debt but the financial risk increases.  The company earns Rs. 0.93 per 
The impact of financial leverage on the share if it is unlevered. With debt of 
profitability of a business can be seen Rs. 10 lakh its EPS is Rs. 1.05. With 
through EBIT-EPS (Earning before a still higher debt of Rs. 20 lakh, its, 
Interest and Taxes-Earning per Share) EPS rises to Rs. 1.40. Why is the EPS 
analysis as in the following example. rising with higher debt? It is because 
 Three situations are considered. the cost of debt is lower than the return 
There is no debt in situation-I i.e. that company is earning on funds 
(unlevered business). Debt of Rs. 10 employed. The company is earning a 
lakh and 20 lakh are assumed in Return on Investment (RoI).

Reprint 2025-26



Financial ManageMents

229

 more of cheaper debt to enhance the 
EBIT 

of 13.33%  × 100
  EPS. Such practice is called Trading 
Total Investment  , on Equity.

 4Lakh
 ×   Trading on Equity refers to the 

100
 
30Lakh  . This is higher than increase in profit earned by the equity 

the 10% interest it is paying on debt shareholders due to the presence of 

funds. With higher use of debt, this fixed financial charges like interest. 
difference between RoI and cost of debt  Now consider the following case of 

Company Y. All details are the same 
increases the EPS. This is a situation except that the company is earning 
of favourable financial leverage. In a profit before interest and taxes of 
such cases, companies often employ Rs. 2 lakh.

Example II

Company Y Ltd.

  situation i situation ii situation iii

 EBIT 2,00,000  2,00,000 2,00,000
 Interest  NIL 1,00,000 2,00,000
 EBT 2,00,000   1,00,000 NIL
 Tax 60,000 30,000  NIL
 EAT 1,40,000 70,000 NIL
 No. of shares of Rs.10  3,00,000 2,00,000 1,00,000
 EPS 0.47 0.35 NIL

In this example, the EPS of the not recommended. An increase in debt 
company is falling with increased use may enhance the EPS but as pointed 
of debt. It is because the Company’s out earlier, it also raises the financial 
rate of return on investment (RoI) is risk. Ideally, a company must choose 
less than the cost of debt. The RoI that risk-return combination which 
for company Y is 2Lakh

× maximises shareholders’ wealth. The 
100 , i.e., 

30Lakh debt-equity mix that achieves it, is the 
6.67%, whereas the interest rate on optimum capital structure.
debt is 10%. In such cases, the use 
of debt reduces the EPS. This is a Factors affecting the Choice of 

situation of unfavourable financial Capital Structure

leverage. Trading on Equity is clearly Deciding about the capital structure 
unadvisable in such a situation. of a firm involves determining the 

Even in case of Company X, relative proportion of various types 
reckless use of Trading on Equity is of funds. This depends on various 

Reprint 2025-26



BUsiness  stUDies

230 231

factors. For example, debt requires 3. Debt Service Coverage Ratio 
regular servicing. Interest payment (DSCR): Debt Service Coverage Ratio 
and repayment of principal are takes care of the deficiencies referred 
obligatory on a business. In addition to in the Interest Coverage Ratio (ICR). 
a company planning to raise debt The cash profits generated by the 
must have sufficient cash to meet the operations are compared with the total 
increased outflows because of higher cash required for the service of the 
debt. Similarly, important factors debt and the preference share capital. 
which determine the choice of capital It is calculated as follows:
structure are as follows:

Profit after tax + Depreciation + Interest + Non Cash exp.
1. Cash Flow Position: Size of projected Pref. Div + Interest + Repayment obligation
cash flows must be considered before 
borrowing. Cash flows must not only a higher DSCR indicates better 
cover fixed cash payment obligations ability to meet cash commitments 
but there must be sufficient buffer and consequently, the company’s 
also. It must be kept in mind that potential to increase debt component 
a company has cash payment in its capital structure.
obligations for (i) normal business 4. Return on Investment (RoI): if 

operations; (ii) for investment in the RoI of the company is higher, it 
fixed assets; and (iii) for meeting can choose to use trading on equity 
the debt service commitments i.e., to increase its EPS, i.e., its ability to 
payment of interest and repayment use debt is greater. We have already 
of principal. observed in Example I that a firm 
2. Interest Coverage Ratio (ICR): can use more debt to increase its 
The interest coverage ratio refers to EPS. However, in Example II, use of 
the number of times earnings before higher debt is reducing the EPS. It is 
interest and taxes of a company covers because the firm is earning an RoI of 
the interest obligation. This may be only 6.67% which lower than its cost 
calculated as follows: of debt. In example I the RoI is 13.33%, 
 ICR = EBIT and trading on equity is profitable. 

Interest It shows that, RoI is an important 
The higher the ratio, lower shall determinant of the company’s ability 

be the risk of company failing to to use Trading on equity and thus the 
meet its interest payment obligations. capital structure.
However, this ratio is not an adequate 5. Cost of debt: A firm’s ability to 
measure. A firm may have a high EBIT borrow at a lower rate increases its 
but low cash balance. Apart from capacity to employ higher debt. Thus, 
interest, repayment obligations are more debt can be used if debt can be 
also relevant. raised at a lower rate.

Reprint 2025-26



Financial ManageMents

230 231

6. Tax Rate: Since interest is a company is unable to meet its fixed 
deductible expense, cost of debt is financial charges namely interest 
affected by the tax rate. The firms in payment, preference dividend and 
our examples are borrowing @ 10%. repayment obligations. Apart from 
Since the tax rate is 30%, the after the financial risk, every business 
tax cost of debt is only 7%. A higher has some operating risk (also called 
tax rate, thus, makes debt relatively business risk). Business risk depends 
cheaper and increases its attraction upon fixed operating costs. Higher 
vis-à-vis equity. fixed operating costs result in higher 
7. Cost of Equity: Stock owners business risk and vice-versa. The total 
expect a rate of return from the equity risk depends upon both the business 
which is commensurate with the risk risk and the financial risk. If a firm’s 
they are assuming. When a company business risk is lower, its capacity to 
increases debt, the financial risk use debt is higher and vice-versa.
faced by the equity holders, increases. 10. Flexibility: If a firm uses its 
Consequently, their desired rate of debt potential to the full, it loses 
return may increase. It is for this flexibility to issue further debt. To 
reason that a company can not use maintain flexibility, it must maintain 
debt beyond a point. If debt is used some borrowing power to take care of 
beyond that point, cost of equity may unforeseen circumstances.
go up sharply and share price may 
decrease inspite of increased EPS. 11. Control: Debt normally does 
Consequently, for maximisation of not cause a dilution of control. A 
shareholders’ wealth, debt can be used public issue of equity may reduce the 
only upto a level. managements’ holding in the company 

and make it vulnerable to takeover. 
8. Floatation Costs: Process of 
raising resources also involves some This factor also influences the choice 
cost. Public issue of shares and between debt and equity especially in 
debentures requires considerable companies in which the current holding 
expenditure. Getting a loan from a of management is on a lower side.
financial institution may not cost 12. Regulatory Framework: Every 
so much. These considerations company operates within a regulatory 
may also affect the choice between framework provided by the law e.g., 
debt and equity and hence the public issue of shares and debentures 
capital structure. have to  be made under SEBI 
9. Risk Consideration: As discussed guidelines. Raising funds from banks 
earlier, use of debt increases the and other financial institutions require 
financial risk of a business. Financial fulfillment of other norms. The relative 
risk refers to a position when a ease with which these norms can, be 

Reprint 2025-26



BUsiness  stUDies

232

met or the procedures completed may for more than one year, usually 
also have a bearing upon the choice of for much longer, e.g., plant and 
the source of finance. machinery, furniture and fixture, land 
13. Stock Market Conditions: if the and building, vehicles, etc.
stock markets are bullish, equity Decision to invest in fixed assets 
shares are more easily sold even at must be taken very carefully as the 
a higher price. Use of equity is often investment is usually quite large. 
preferred by companies in such a Such decisions once taken are 
situation. However, during a bearish irrevocable except at a huge loss. 
phase, a company, may find raising Such decisions are called capital 
of equity capital more difficult and it budgeting decisions.
may opt for debt. Thus, stock market current assets are those assets 

conditions often affect the choice which, in the normal routine of the 
between the two. business, get converted into cash or 
14. Capital Structure of other cash equivalents within one year, e.g., 
Companies: A useful guideline in the inventories, debtors, bills receivables, 
capital structure planning is the debt- etc.
equity ratios of other companies in Management of Fixed Capital
the same industry. There are usually Fixed capital refers to investment 
some industry norms which may help. in long-term assets. Management of 
Care however must be taken that the 
company does not follow the industry fixed capital involves allocation of 
norms blindly. For example, if the firm’s capital to different projects or 
business risk of a firm is higher, it can assets with long-term implications 
not afford the same financial risk. It for the business. These decisions 
should go in for low debt. Thus, the are called investment decisions or 
management must know what the capital budgeting decisions and affect 
industry norms are, whether they are the growth, profitability and risk of 
following them or deviating from them the business in the long run. These 
and adequate justification must be long-term assets last for more than 
there in both cases. one year.

 It must be financed through 
F long-term sources of capital such 

ixed and Working caPital
as equity or preference shares, 

Meaning debentures, long-term loans and 
Every company needs funds to finance retained earnings of the business. 
its assets and activities. Investment Fixed Assets should never be financed 
is required to be made in fixed assets through short-term sources.
and current assets. Fixed assets are  Investment in these assets 
those which remains in the business would also include expenditure on 

Reprint 2025-26



Financial ManageMents

233

acquisition, expansion, modernisation (iv) Irreversible decisions: these 

and their replacement. These decisions decisions once taken, are not 
include purchase of land, building, reversible without incurring heavy 
plant and machinery, launching losses. Abandoning a project after 
a new product line or investing in heavy investment is made is quite 
advanced techniques of production. costly in terms of waste of funds. 
Major expenditures such as those Therefore, these decisions should 
on advertising campaign or research be taken only after carefully 
and development programme having evaluating each detail or else the 
long term implications for the firm adverse financial consequences 
are also examples of capital budgeting may be very heavy.
decisions. The management of fixed 
capital or investment or capital Factors affecting the Requirement 
budgeting decisions are important for of Fixed Capital
the following reasons:

1. Nature of Business: The type 
(i) Long-term growth: These decisions of business has a bearing upon 

have bearing on the long-term the fixed capital requirements. For 
growth. The funds invested in 
long-term assets are likely to yield example, a trading concern needs 
returns in the future. These will lower investment in fixed assets 
affect the future prospects of the compared with a manufacturing 
business. organisation; since it does not require 

to purchase plant and machinery, etc.
(ii) Large amount of funds involved: 

These decisions result in a 2. Scale of Operations: A larger 
substantial portion of capital funds organisation operating at a higher 
being blocked in long-term projects. scale needs bigger plant, more space 
Therefore, these investments are etc. and therefore, requires higher 
planned after a detailed analysis investment in fixed assets when 
is undertaken. This may involve compared with the small organisation.
decisions like where to procure 3. Choice of Technique: Some 
funds from and at what rate of organisations are capital intensive 
interest. whereas others are labour intensive. 

(iii) Risk involved: Fixed capital involves A capital-intensive organisation 
investment of huge amounts. It requires higher investment in plant 
affects the returns of the firm as a and machinery as it relies less on 
whole in the long-term. Therefore, manual labour. The requirement of 
investment decisions involving fixed capital for such organisations 
fixed capital influence the overall would be higher. Labour intensive 
business risk complexion of the firm. organisations on the other hand 

Reprint 2025-26



BUsiness  stUDies

234

require less investment in fixed assets. lease, the firm pays lease rentals and 
Hence, their fixed capital requirement uses it. By doing so, it avoids huge sums 
is lower. required to purchase it. Availability of 
4. Technology Upgradation: In certain leasing facilities, thus, may reduce 
industries, assets become obsolete the funds required to be invested in 
sooner. Consequently, their replace- fixed assets, thereby reducing the fixed 
ments become due faster. Higher capital requirements. Such a strategy 
investment in fixed assets may, is specially suitable in high risk lines 
therefore, be required in such cases. of business.
For example, computers become 8. Level of Collaboration: At times, 
obsolete faster and are replaced much certain business organisations share 
sooner than say, furniture. Thus, such each other’s facilities. For example, 
organisations which use assets which a bank may use another’s ATM or 
are prone to obsolescence require some of them may jointly establish a 
higher fixed capital to purchase such particular facility. This is feasible if the 
assets. scale of operations of each one of them 

is not sufficient to make full use of the 
5. Growth Prospects: Higher growth 
of an organisation generally requires facility. Such collaboration reduces 
higher investment in fixed assets. the level of investment in fixed assets 
Even when such growth is expected, for each one of the participating 
a company may choose to create organisations.
higher capacity in order to meet the 

Working caPital
anticipated higher demand quicker. 
This entails larger investment in fixed Apart from the investment in fixed 
assets and consequently larger fixed assets every business organisation 
capital. needs to invest in current assets. This 
6. Diversification: A firm may choose investment facilitates smooth day-to-
to diversify its operations for various day operations of the business. Current 
reasons, With diversification, fixed assets are usually more liquid but 
capital requirements increase e.g., a contribute less to the profits than fixed 
textile company is diversifying and assets. Examples of current assets, in 
starting a cement manufacturing order of their liquidity, are as under.
plant. Obviously, its investment in 1. Cash in hand/Cash at Bank
fixed capital will increase. 2. Marketable securities
7. Financing Alternatives: A developed 3. Bills receivable
financial market may provide leasing 
facilities as an alternative to outright 4. Debtors
purchase. When an asset is taken on 5. Finished goods inventory

Reprint 2025-26



Financial ManageMents

235

6. Work in progress amount of working capital required. 
7. Raw materials A trading organisation usually 

needs a smaller amount of working 
8. Prepaid expenses capital compared to a manufacturing 

These assets, as noted earlier, are organisation. This is because there 
expected to get converted into cash is usually no processing. Therefore, 
or cash equivalents within a period there is no distinction between raw 
of one year. These provide liquidity to materials and finished goods. Sales 
the business. An asset is more liquid can be effected immediately upon 
if it can be converted into cash quicker the receipt of materials, sometimes 
and without reduction in value. even before that. In a manufacturing 
Insufficient investment in current business, however, raw material needs 
assets may make it more difficult for to be converted into finished goods 
an organisation to meet its payment before any sales become possible. 
obligations. However, these assets Other factors remaining the same, a 
provide little or low return. Hence, a trading business requires less working 
balance needs to be struck between capital. Similarly, service industries 
liquidity and profitability. which usually do not have to maintain 

Current liabilities are those inventory require less working capital.
payment obligations which are due 

2.  Scale  of  Operat ions:  For 
for payment within one year; such as organisations which operate on a 
bills payable, creditors, outstanding higher scale of operation, the quantum 
expenses and advances received from of inventory and debtors required is 
customers, etc. generally high. Such organisations, 

Some part of current assets is therefore, require large amount of 
usually financed through short-term working capital as compared to the 
sources, i.e., current liabilities. The organisations which operate on a lower 
rest is financed through long-term scale.
sources and is called net working 
capital. Thus, NWC = CA – CL (i.e. 3. Business Cycle: Different phases of 
Current Assets - Current Liabilities.) business cycles affect the requirement 
Thus, net working capital may be of working capital by a firm. In 
defined as the excess of current assets case of a boom, the sales as well as 
over current liabilities. production are likely to be larger and, 

therefore, larger amount of working 
capital is required. As against this, 

FactorS aFFecting the Working 
the requirement for working capital 

caPital requirementS will be lower during  the period of 
1. Nature of Business: The basic depression as the sales as well as 
nature of a business influences the production will be small.

Reprint 2025-26



BUsiness  stUDies

236

4. Seasonal Factors: Most business degrees of efficiency. For example, 
have some seasonality in their a firm managing its raw materials 
operations. In peak season, because of efficiently may be able to manage with 
higher level of activity, larger amount a smaller balance. This is reflected 
of working capital is required. As in a higher inventory turnover ratio. 
against this, the level of activity as Similarly, a better debtors turnover 
well as the requirement for working ratio may be achieved reducing 
capital will be lower during the the amount tied up in receivables. 
lean season. Better sales effort may reduce the 
5. Production Cycle: Production average time for which finished goods 
cycle is the time span between the inventory is held. Such efficiencies 
receipt of raw material and their may reduce the level of raw materials, 
conversion into finished goods. Some finished goods and debtors resulting 
businesses have a longer production in lower requirement of working 
cycle while some have a shorter capital.
one. Duration and the length of 9. Availability of Raw Material: if 

production cycle, affects the amount the raw materials and other required 
of funds required for raw materials materials are available freely and 
and expenses. Consequently, working continuously, lower stock levels may 
capital requirement is higher in firms suffice. If, however, raw materials do 
with longer processing cycle and lower not have a record of un-interrupted 
in firms with shorter processing cycle. availability, higher stock levels may 
6. Credit Allowed: Different firms be required. In addition, the time lag 
allow different credit terms to their between the placement of order and 
customers. These depend upon the the actual receipt of the materials (also 
level of competition that a firm faces called lead time) is also relevant. Larger 
as well as the credit worthiness of the lead time, larger the quantity of 
their clientele. A liberal credit policy material to be stored and larger shall 
results in higher amount of debtors, be the amount of working capital 
increasing the requirement of working required.
capital. 10. Growth Prospects: If the growth 
7. Credit Availed: Just as a firm potential of a concern is perceived to 
allows credit to its customers it also be higher, it will require larger amount 
may get credit from its suppliers. of working capital so that it is able 
To the extent it avails the credit to meet higher production and sales 
on purchases, the working capital target whenever required.
requirement is reduced. 11. Level of Competition: Higher level 
8. Operating Efficiency: Firms of competitiveness may necessitate 
manage their operations with varied larger stocks of finished goods to 

Reprint 2025-26



Financial ManageMents

237

meet urgent orders from customers. rate of inflation. It must, however, 
This increases the working capital be noted that an inflation rate of 5%, 
requirement. Competition may also does not mean that every component 
force the firm to extend liberal credit of working capital will change by 
terms discussed earlier. the same percentage. The actual 
12. Inflation: With rising prices, requirement shall depend upon the 
larger amounts are required even rates of price change of different 
to maintain a constant volume of components (e.g., raw material, 
production and sales. The working finished goods, labour cost,) Finished 
capital requirement of a business goods as well as their proportion in 
thus, become higher with higher the total requirement.

key termS

Financial Management Wealth Maximisation Investment Decision
Financing Decision Dividend Decision Capital Budgeting
Working Capital Financial Planning Capital Structure
Trading on Equity

SUMMARY

Business finance: The money required for carrying out business activities is 
called business finance. Almost all business activities require some finance. 
Finance is needed to establish a business, to run it, to modernise it, to expand, 
and diversify it. 
Financial Management: Financial Management is concerned with optimal 
procurement as well as usage of finance. For optimal procurement, different 
available sources of finance are identified and compared in terms of their costs 
and associated risks.
Objectives and Financial Decisions The primary aim of financial management 
is to maximise shareholders’ wealth which is referred to as the wealth 
maximisation concept. The market price of a company’s shares are linked to 
the three basic financial decisions
Financial decision-making is concerned with three broad decisions which are 
Investment Decision, Financing Decision, Dividend Decision

Financial Planning and Importance Financial planning is essentially 
preparation of a financial blueprint of an organisation’s future operations. The 

Reprint 2025-26



BUsiness  stUDies

238

objective of financial planning is to ensure that enough funds are available at 
right time.
 Financial planning strives to achieve the following twin objectives.
 (a) To ensure availability of funds whenever these are required:
 (b) To see that the firm does not raise resources unnecessarily:
 Financial planning is an important part of overall planning of any business 
enterprise. It aims at enabling the company to tackle the uncertainty in respect 
of the availability and timing of the funds and helps in smooth functioning of 
an organisation. 

Capital Structure and Factors One of the important decisions under financial 
management relates to the financing pattern or the proportion of the use 
of different sources in raising funds. On the basis of ownership, the sources 
of business finance can be broadly classified into two categories viz., ‘owners 
funds’ and ‘borrowed funds’. Capital structure refers to the mix between owners 
and borrowed funds.
 Deciding about the capital structure of a firm involves determining the 
relative proportion of various types of funds. This depends on various factors 
which are: Cash Flow Position, Interest Coverage Ratio (ICR), Debt Service 
Coverage Ratio (DSCR), Return on Investment (RoI), Cost of debt, Tax Rate, 
Cost of Equity, Floatation Costs, Risk Consideration, Flexibility, Control, 
Regulatory Framework, Stock Market Conditions, and Capital Structure of 
other Companies.

Fixed and Working Capital Fixed capital refers to investment in long-term 
assets. Management of fixed capital involves around allocation of firm’s capital 
to different projects or assets with long-term implications for the business. 
These decisions are called investment decisions or capital budgeting decisions. 
They affect the growth, profitability and risk of the business in the long run.
 Factors affecting the Requirement of Fixed Capital are: Nature of Business, 
Scale of Operations, Choice of Technique, Technology Upgradation, Growth 
Prospects, Diversification, Financing Alternatives and Level of Collaboration.
 Apart from the investment in fixed assets, every business organisation 
needs to invest in current assets. This investment facilitates smooth day-to-
day operations of the organisation. Current assets are usually more liquid but 
contribute less to the profits than fixed assets.
 Factors affecting the working capital requirement are: Nature of Business, 
Scale of Operations, Business Cycle, Seasonal Factor, Production Cycle, Credit 

Reprint 2025-26



Financial ManageMents

239

Allowed, Credit Availed, Operating Efficiency, Availability of Raw Material, 
Growth Prospects, Level of competition, and rate of Inflation.

EXERCISES

Very Short Answer Type

1. What is meant by capital structure?
2. Sate the two objectives of financial planning.
3. Name the concept of financial management which increases the return 

to equity shareholders due to the presence of fixed financial charges.
4. Amrit is running a ‘transport service’ and earning good returns by 

providing this service to industries. Giving reason, state whether the 
working capital requirement of the firm will be ‘less’ or ‘more’.

5. Ramnath is into the business of assembling and selling of televisions. 
Recently he has adopted a new policy of purchasing the components on 
three months credit and selling the complete product in cash. Will it affect 
the requirement of working capital? Give reason in support of your answer.

Short Answer Type

1. What is financial risk? Why does it arise? 
2. Define current assets? Give four examples of such assets. 
3. What are the main objectives of financial management? Briefly explain. 
4. Financial management is based on three broad financial decisions. What 

are these?
5. Sunrises Ltd. dealing in readymade garments, is planning to expand 

its business operations in order to cater to international market. For 
this purpose the company needs additional `80,00,000 for replacing 
machines with modern machinery of higher production capacity. The 
company wishes to raise the required funds by issuing debentures. The 
debt can be issued at an estimated cost of 10%. The EBIT for the previous 
year of the company was `8,00,000 and total capital investment was 
`1,00,00,000. Suggest whether issue of debenture would be considered 
a rational decision by the company. Give reason to justify your answer. 
(Ans. No, Cost of Debt (10%) is more than ROI which is 8%).

Reprint 2025-26



BUsiness  stUDies

240 241

6. How does working capital affect both the liquidity as well as profitability 
of a business?

7. Aval Ltd. is engaged in the business of export of canvas goods and bags. In 
the past, the performance of the company had been upto the expectations. 
In line with the latest demand in the market, the company decided to 
venture into leather goods for which it required specialised machinery. 
For this, the Finance Manager Prabhu prepared a financial blueprint 
of the organisation’s future operations to estimate the amount of funds 
required and the timings with the objective to ensure that enough funds 
are available at right time. He also collected the relevant data about the 
profit estimates in the coming years. By doing this, he wanted to be sure 
about the availability of funds from the internal sources of the business. 
For the remaining funds, he is trying to find out alternative sources from 
outside.
a. Identify the financial concept discussed in the above paragraph. Also, 

state the objectives to be achieved by the use of financial concept so 
identified. ( Financial Planning).

b. ‘There is no restriction on payment of dividend by a company’. 
Comment. ( Legal & Contractual Constraints)

Long Answer Type

1. What is working capital? Discuss five important determinants of working 
capital requirement? 

2. “Capital structure decision is essentially optimisation of risk-return 
relationship.” Comment.

3. “A capital budgeting decision is capable of changing the financial fortunes 
of a business.” Do you agree? Give reasons for your answer?

4. Explain the factors affecting dividend decision? 
5. Explain the term ‘Trading on Equity’? Why, when and how it can be used 

by company. 
6. ‘S’ Limited is manufacturing steel at its plant in India. It is enjoying a 

buoyant demand for its products as economic growth is about 7–8 per 
cent and the demand for steel is growing. It is planning to set up a new 
steel plant to cash on the increased demand. It is estimated that it will 
require about `5000 crores to set up and about `500 crores of working 
capital to start the new plant.

Reprint 2025-26



Financial ManageMents

240 241

a. Describe the role and objectives of financial management for this 
company.

b. Explain the importance of having a financial plan for this company. 
Give an imaginary plan to support your answer.

c. What are the factors which will affect the capital structure of this 
company?

d. Keeping in mind that it is a highly capital-intensive sector, what factors 
will affect the fixed and working capital. Give reasons in support of 
your answer.

Reprint 2025-26


##10##
chapter 
10

markeTing

Learning Objectives Where Do Companies Do Their Business?

In the Markets or in the Society?
After studying this chapter, 

It is an undisputed fact that a company’s survival 
you should be able to: does not depend upon its consumers alone, but a 

diverse set of stakeholders like the government, 
¾ explain the meaning of religious leaders, social activists, NGOs, media, 

‘marketing’; etc. Hence, earning the satisfaction of these 
segments is also as imperative as they add to the 

¾ distinguish between power of the brand by word of mouth.
‘ m a r k e t i n g ’  a n d The social concern adds to the strength of the 
‘selling’; brand. Corporates that embraced the deepest 

social values, have been successful in building 
¾ l is t  out important powerful brand, and, eventually, robust customer 

functions of marketing; relationship. The area of corporate social justice 
fall under two broad categories. The issues such 

¾ examine the role of as the nutrition of children, child care, old-age 
market ing  in the homes, amelioration of hunger, offering aid to 
development of  an those affected by natural calamities, etc. needing 
economy in a firm, instant attention with humanitarian perspective, 
to the society and to comes under the first category.
consumers; The issues that contribute to making society a 

pleasant place to live in the long run, may be grouped 
¾ explain the elements of under the second category. The issues which come 

marketing-mix; under this category are health awareness and aid, 
education, environmental protection, women’s 

¾ classify products into employment and empowerment, preventing unjust 
different categories; discriminations (on the basis of caste, community, 

religion, ethnicity, race, and sex), eradication 
¾ analyse the factors of poverty through employment, preservation 

affecting price of a of culture, values, and ethics, contribution to 

product; research, etc.

Procter and Gamble’s (P&G) philosophy is that it 
¾ l i s t  out  the types should lead the industry in implementing a global 

o f  c h a n n e l s  o f environmental programme. P&G is one of the 

distribution; and first companies in the world to actively study the 
influence of consumer products on the environment 

¾ expla in  the  major and introduce concentrated products, recycled 

tools of promotion, viz. plastic bottles, and refill packages to the industry. 
P&G contributes to sustainable development 

advertising, personal 
and addresses environmental and social issues 

selling, sales promotion connected with its products and services.
and publicity.

Source: Adapted from ‘Effective Executive’

Reprint 2025-26



MArkeTING

243

The term marketing has been described pricing are required. All these activities 
by different people in different ways. are referred to as marketing activities.
Some people believe that marketing is Thus, ‘merchandising’, ‘selling’ and 
same as ‘shopping’. Whenever they go distribution are all parts of a large 
out for shopping of certain products or number of activities undertaken by 
services, they describe it as marketing. a firm, which are collectively called 
There are some other people who marketing.
confuse marketing with ‘selling’ and It may be noted here that marketing 
feel that marketing activity starts is not merely a post- production 
after a product or service has been activity. It includes many activities 
produced. Some people describe it to that are performed even before goods 
mean ‘merchandising’ or designing a are actually produced, and continue 
product. All these descriptions may be even after the goods have been 
partly correct but marketing is a much sold. For example, activities such 
broader concept, which is discussed as identification of customer needs, 
as follows: collection of information for developing 

Traditionally, marketing has been the product, designing suitable product 
described in terms of its functions or package and giving it a brand name are 
activities. In this respect, marketing performed before commencement of 
has been referred to as performance of the actual production. Similarly, many 
business activities that direct the flow follow up activities are required for 
of goods and services from producers maintaining good customer relations 
to consumers. for procuring repeat sale.

As  we  know,  mos t  o f  the In modern times, emphasis is placed 
manufacturing firms do not produce on describing marketing as a social 
goods for their own consumption process. It is a process whereby people 
but for the consumption or use exchange goods and services for money 
by others.  Therefore,  to move or for something of value to them. Taking 
the goods and services from the the social perspective, Phillip kolter has 
producer to consumers, a number of defined marketing as, “a social process 
activities, such as product designing by which individual groups obtain what 
or  merchandis ing,  packaging, they need and want through creating 
warehous ing ,  t ranspor ta t ion , offerings and freely exchanging products 
branding, selling, advertising and and services of value with others”.

“Business is not financial science, it’s about trading, buying and selling. It’s about 
creating a product or service so good that people will pay for it.”

— anta roddick 

“Marketing takes a day to learn. Unfortunately it takes time to master.”

         — Philip Kotler

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

244

Understanding Market

In the traditional sense, the term ‘market’ refers to the place where buyers and sellers 
gather to enter into transactions involving the exchange of goods and services. It is 
in this sense that this term is being used in day to day language, even today. The 
other ways in which this term is being used is in the context of a product market 
(cotton market, gold or share market), geographic market (national and international 
market), type of buyers (consumer market and industrial market) and the quantity 
of goods transacted (retail market and wholesale market).

But in modern marketing sense, the term market has a broader meaning. It refers 
to a set of actual and potential buyers of a product or service. For example, when a 
fashion designer designs a new dress and offers it for exchange, all the people who 
are willing to buy and offer some value for it can be stated to be the market for that 
dress. Similarly, market for fans or bicycles or electric bulbs or shampoos refers to 
all the actual and potential buyers for these products.

Thus, marketing is a social process Needs are basic to human beings 
where in people interact with others, and do not pertain to a particular 
in order to persuade them to act in product. Wants, on the other hand, 
a particular way, say to purchase are culturally defined objects that are 
a product or a service, rather than potential satisfiers of needs. In other 
forcing them to do so. A careful analysis words, human needs shaped by such 
of the definition shows the following factors as culture, personality and 
important features of marketing: religion are called wants. A basic need 
1. needs and Wants: The process for food, for example, may take various 
of marketing helps individuals and forms such as want for dosa and rice 
groups in obtaining what they need for a South Indian and chapatti and 
and want. Thus, the primary reason or vegetables for a North Indian person.
motivation for people to engage in the A marketer’s job in an organisation 
process of marketing is to satisfy some is to identify needs of the target 
of their needs or wants. In other words, customers and develop products and 
the focus of the marketing process is services that satisfy such needs.
on satisfaction of the needs and wants 2. creating a Market Offering: On 
of individuals and organisations. the part of the marketers, the effort 

A need is a state of felt deprivation involves creation of a ‘market offering. 
or feeling of being deprived of Market offering refers to a complete 
something. If unsatisfied, it leaves a offer for a product or service, having 
person unhappy and uncomfortable. given features like size, quality, taste, 
For example, on getting hungry, we etc; at a certain price; available at a 
become uncomfortable and start given outlet or location and so on. Let 
looking for objects that are capable of us say the offer is for a cell phone, 
satisfying our hunger. available in four different versions, 

Reprint 2025-26



MArkeTING

245

on the basis of certain features such offering the same by giving something 
as size of memory, television viewing, in return. For example, a person 
internet, camera, etc., for a given price, feeling hungry may get food by offering 
say between ` 5,000 and ` 20,000 to give money or some other product 
(depending on the model selected), or service in return to someone who 
available for sale at say firm’s exclusive is willing to accept the same for food.
shops in and around all metropolitan In the modern world, goods are 
cities in the country. A good ‘market produced at different places and are 
offer’ is the one which is developed after distributed over a wide geographical 
analysing the needs and preferences of area through various middlemen, 
the potential buyers. involving exchanges at different levels 
3. customer value:  The process of distribution. exchange is, therefore, 
of marketing facilitates exchange of referred to as the essence of marketing. 
products and services between the For any exchange to take place, it is 
buyers and the sellers. The buyers, important that the following conditions 
however, make buying decisions on are satisfied:
their perceptions of the value of the (i) Involvement of at least two parties 
product or service in satisfying their viz., the buyer and the seller.
need, in relation to its cost. A product (ii) each party should be capable 
will be purchased only if it is perceived of offering something of value to 
to be giving greatest benefit or value the other. For example, the seller 
for the money. The job of a marketer, offers a product and the buyer, 
therefore, is to add to the value of the money.
product so that the customers prefer it 

(iii) each party should have the ability 
in relation to the competing products 

to communicate and deliver the 
and decide to purchase it.

product or service. No exchange 
4. exchange Mechanism: The process can take place if the buyers and 
of marketing works through the sellers are not able to communicate 
exchange mechanism. The individuals with each other or if they can not 
(buyers and sellers) obtain what they 

deliver something of value to 
need and want through the process of 

the other.
exchange. In other words, the process 
of marketing involves exchange of (iv) each party should have freedom to 

products and services for money or accept or reject other party’s offer.

something considered valuable by (v) The parties should be willing to 
the people. enter into transaction with each 

exchange refers to the process other. Thus, the acceptance or 
through which two or more parties rejection of the offer takes place on 
come together to obtain the desired voluntary basis rather than on the 
product or service from someone, bases of any compulsion.

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

246

The points listed above are the standards of people and providing 
necessary conditions for an exchange medication to the sick.
to take place. Whether the exchange 
actually takes place or not depends on Marketing ManageMent

the suitability of the act of exchange to Marketing management means 
both the parties, whether it makes the management of the marketing function. 
parties better off or at least not worse off. In other words, marketing management 

Another important point to be refers to planning, organising, directing 
noted is that Marketing is not merely a and control of the activities which 
business phenomena or confined only facilitate exchange of goods and services 
to business organisations. Marketing between producers and consumers or 
activities are equally relevant to non- users of products and services. Thus 
profit organisations such as hospitals, the focus of marketing management 
schools, sports clubs and social and is on achieving desired exchange 
religious organisations. It helps these outcomes with the target markets. 
organisations in achieving their goals Taking a management perspective, the 
such as spreading the message of term marketing has been defined as 
family planning, improving the literacy “the process of planning and executing 

What can be Marketed?

Physical Products : Motor cycle, ipods, Mobile phone, Footwear, Television, 
Refrigerator.

Services : Insurance, Health Care, Business Process Outsourcing, 
Security, Financial Services (Investment),Computer 
Education, Online Trading.

Ideas : Polio Vaccination, Helpage, Family Planning, Donation of 
Blood (Red cross), Donation of money on Flag Day (National 
Foundation for Communal Harmony).

Persons : For Election of Candidates for Certain Posts.

Place : ‘Visit Agra – ‘City of Love’, ‘Udaipur – ‘The City of Lakes’, 
‘Mysore – The City of Gardens’, ‘When Orisa celebrates, 
Eleven the God Join In’. 

Events : Sports events (say Olympics, Cricket series), diwali mela, 
fashion show, music concert, film festival, elephant race 
(Kerala Tourism).

Information : Production packaging and distribution of information by 
organisations such as by universities, research organisation, 
providing information as market information (marketing 
research agencies), technology information.

Reprint 2025-26



MArkeTING

247

the conception, pricing, promotion prospective buyers and persuade 
and distribution of ideas, goods and them to buy these products.
services to create exchanges that satisfy Marketing management involves 
individual and organisational goals” by performance of various functions 
American Management Association, such as analysing and planning the 
similarly Philip kotler has defined 

marketing activities, implementing 
Marketing management as the art and 

marketing plans and setting control 
science of choosing target markets 

mechanism. These functions are 
and getting, keeping and growing 

to be performed in such a way that 
customers through creating, delivering 

organisation’s objectives are achieved 
and communicating superior customer 
values of management. at the minimum cost.

A careful analysis of the definition Marketing management generally 

reveals that the process of management is related to creation of demand. 

of marketing involves: However, in certain situations, the 

(i) Choosing a target market, say a manager has to restrict the demand. 
manufacturer may choose to make For example, if there is a situation of 
readymade garments for children ‘overfull demand’, i.e., the demand 
up to the age of 5 years; being more than what the company 

(ii) In respect of the target market can or want to handle, (like what 

chosen, the focus of the process of the situation in our country was 

management is on getting, keeping before the adoption of policies of 
as well as growing the customers. liberalisation and globalisation, in 
That means the marketer has to early 90’s, in most consumer products 
create demand for his products be it automobiles or electronics goods 
so that the target customers or other durable products. The job of 
purchase the product, keep them marketing mangers, in these situations 
satisfied with the firm’s products would be to find ways to reduce the 
and also attract more customers demand temporarily by say reducing 
to the firm’s products so that the the expenditure on promotion or 
firm can grow; and increasing the prices. Similarly, if the 

(iii) The mechanism for achieving demand is ‘irregular’, such as in case of 
the objective is through creating, seasonal products, (say fans, woollen 
developing and communicating clothes) the marketer’s job is to change 
superior values for the customers. the time pattern of demand through 
That means, the primary job such methods as providing short-term 
of a marketing manager is to incentives, to the buyers. Thus, the 
create superior values so that marketing management in not only 
the customers are attracted to concerned with creating demand but 
the products and services and with managing the demand effectively, 
communicate these values to the as per the situation in the market.

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

248

Marketing versus selling

Many people confuse ‘selling’ for ‘marketing’. They consider these two terms as one 
and the same. Marketing refers to a large set of activities of which selling is just one 
part. For example, a marketer of televisions, before making the sale, does a lot of 
other activities such as planning the type and model of televisions to be produced, 
the price at which it would be sold and selecting the distribution outlets at which the 
same would be available, etc. In short, marketing involves whole range of activities 
relating to planning, pricing, promoting and distributing the products that satisfy 
customer’s needs.

The function of selling, on the other hand, is restricted to promotion of goods and 
services through salesmanship, advertising, publicity and short-term incentives so 
that title of the product is transferred from seller to buyer or in other words product 
is converted into cash.

markeTing managemenT goods started picking up but the 
philosophies number of producers were limited. 

As a result, the demand exceeded 
In order to achieve desired exchange the supply. Selling was no problem. 
outcomes with target markets, it is Anybody who could produce the goods 
important to decide what philosophy or was able to sell. The focus of business 
thinking should guide the marketing activities was, therefore, on production 
ef forts of  an organisation. An of goods. It was believed that profits 
understanding of the philosophy or could be maximised by producing 
the concept to be adopted is important at large scale, thereby reducing the 
as it determines the emphasis or average cost of production. It was 
the weightage to be put on different also assumed that consumers would 
factors, in achieving the organisational favour those products which were 
objectives. For example, whether the widely available at an affordable price. 
marketing efforts of an organisation will Thus, availability and affordability 
focus on the product—say designing of the product were considered to 
its features etc or on selling techniques be the key to the success of a firm. 
or on customer’s needs or the social Therefore, greater emphasis was 
concerns. placed on improving the production 

The concept or philosophy of and distribution efficiency of the firms.
marketing has evolved over a period 
of time, and is discussed as follows. the Product concept

the Production concept As a result of emphasis on production 
capacity during the earlier days, the 

During the earlier days of industrial position of supply increased over 
revolution, the demand for industrial period of time. Mere availability and 

Reprint 2025-26



MArkeTING

249

low price of the product could not advertising, personal selling and sales 
ensure increased sale and as such the promotion were considered essential 
survival and growth of the firm. Thus, for selling of products. Thus, the focus 
with the increase in the supply of the of business firms shifted to pushing 
products, customers started looking the sale of products through aggressive 
for products which were superior in selling techniques with a view to 
quality, performance and features. persuade, lure or coax the buyers 
Therefore, the emphasis of the firms to buy the products. Making sale 
shifted from quantity of production through any means became important. 
to quality of products. The focus of It was assumed that buyers can be 

business activity changed to bringing manipulated but what was forgotten 

continuous improvement in the quality, was that in the long run what matters 

incorporating new features, etc. Thus, most is the customer satisfaction, 

product improvement became the key rather than anything else.

to profit maximisation of a firm, under 
the Marketing concept

the concept of product orientation.
Marketing orientation implies that 

the selling concept focus on satisfaction of customer’s 
needs is the key to the success of 

With the passage of time, the marketing 
any organisation in the market. 

environment underwent further 
It assumes that in the long run 

change. The increase in the scale of 
an organisation can achieve its 

business further improved the position 
objective of maximisation of profit by 

with respect to supply of goods, 
identifying the needs of its present 

resulting in increased competition 
and prospective buyers and satisfying 

among sellers. The product quality 
them in an effective way. All the 

and availability did not ensure the decisions in a firm are taken from 
survival and growth of firms because the point of view of the customers. In 
of the large number of sellers selling other words, customer’s satisfaction 
quality products. This led to greater become the focal point of all decision 
importance to attracting and persuading making in the organisation. For 
customers to buy the product. The example, what product wil l  be 
business philosophy changed. It was produced, with what features and at 
assumed that the customers would what price shall it be sold, or where 
not buy, or not buy enough, unless shall it be made available for sale will 
they are adequately convinced and depend on what do the customers 
motivated to do so. Therefore, firms want. If the customers want features 
must undertake aggressive selling like double door in a refrigerator or a 
and promotional efforts to make separate provision for water cooler in 
customers buy their products. The it, the organisation would produce a 
use of promotional techniques such as refrigerator with these features, would 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

250

price it at a level which the customers (i) Identi f ication of  market or 
are willing to pay and so on. If all customer who are chosen as the 
marketing decisions are taken with target of marketing effort.
this prospective, selling will not be any (ii) Understanding needs and wants 
problem. It will automatically follow. of customers in the target market.
The basic role of a firm then is to (iii) Development of products or 
‘identify a need and fill it’. The concept services for satisfying needs of 
implies that products ad-services are the target market.
bought not merely because of their 

(iv) Satisfying needs of target market 
quality, packing or brand name, 
but because they satisfy a specific better than the competitors.

need of a customer. A pre-requisite (v) Doing all this at a profit.
for the success of any organisation, Thus, the focus of the marketing 
therefore, is to understand and concept is on customer needs and the 
respond to customer needs. customer satisfaction becomes the 

To sum up, the marketing concept means to achieving the firms’ objective 
is based on the following pillars: of maximising profit. The purpose of 

Differences in the Marketing Management Philosophies

Philosophies/ Production  Product selling  Marketing  societal
 bases concept concept concept concept concept

1. Starting Factory Factory Factory Market Market,
 Point     Society

2. Main Quantity of  Quality, existing Customer Customer 
 Focus product performance, product needs needs and 
   features of   society’s 
   product   well being

3. Means Availability  Product  Selling  Integrated  Integrated 
  and improve- and  marketing marketing
  affordability ments promoting
  of product

4. Ends Profit through  Profit through  Profit  Profit  Profit 
  volume of product  through  through  through 
  production quality sales customer  customer 
    volume     satisfaction  satisfaction
      and social
      welfare

Reprint 2025-26



MArkeTING

251

marketing is to generate customer to consumers or users in such a way 
value at a profit. that maximises the satisfaction of 

customers’ needs. From the view point 
the societal Marketing concept of management function, number of 

activities are involved, which have 
The marketing concept, as described 

been described as below:
in the preceeding section cannot be 
considered as adequate if we look 1. gathering and analysing Market 

at the challenges posed by social information: One of the important 

problems like environmental pollution, functions of a marketer is to gather 

deforestation, shortage of resources, and analyse market information. This 

population explosion and inflation. It is is necessary to identify the needs 

so because any activity which satisfies of the customers and take various 

human needs but is detrimental to the decisions for the successful marketing 

interests of the society at large cannot of the products and services. This 

be justified. The business orientation is important for making an analysis 

should, therefore, not be short-sighted of the available opportunities and 

to serve only consumers’ needs. It threats as well as strengths and 

should also consider large issues of long- weaknesses of the organisation and 

term social welfare, as illustrated above. help in deciding what opportunities 

The societal marketing concept can best be pursued by it. For example, 

holds that the task of any organisation rapid growth is predicted in several 

is to identify the needs and wants areas in the Indian economy, say in 

of the target market and deliver the the use of the Internet, market for cell 

desired satisfaction in an effective phones and several other areas. Which 

and efficient manner so that the long- of these areas a particular organisation 
should enter, or in which area should 

term well-being of the consumers and 
it expand, requires a careful scanning 

the society is taken care of. Thus, 
of the strengths and weaknesses of the 

the societal marketing concept is the 
organisation, which is done with the 

extension of the marketing concept 
help of careful market analysis.

as supplemented by the concern for 
With the growth of computers, 

the long-term welfare of the society. 
a new trend has emerged in the 

Apart from the customer satisfaction, 
collection of market information. 

it pays attention to the social, ethical 
More and more companies are using 

and ecological aspects of marketing. 
interactive sites on the internet, to 

There are large number of such issues 
gather customer views and opinions, 

that need to be attended. before taking important business 
decisions. One of the popular TV 

FunCTions oF markeTing
News Channel (in Hindi) seeks viewers 

Marketing is concerned with exchange choice (through SMS) on which of the 
of goods and services from producers given four or five main news stories 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

252

of the day would be broadcasted as and consistency in the output. 
detailed story at the prime time, to S tandard i sa t i on  ensures  the 
ensure that the viewers get to listen buyers that goods conform to the 
to the story of their own choice. predetermined standards of quality, 
2. Marketing Planning: Another price and packaging and reduces 
important activity or area of work of the need for inspection, testing and 
a marketer is to develop appropriate evaluation of the products.
marketing plans so that the marketing Grad ing  i s  the  process  o f 
objectives of the organisation can be classification of products into different 
achieved. For example a marketer of groups, on the basis of some of its 
colour TV, having 10 per cent of the important characteristics such as 
current market share in the country, quality, size, etc. Grading is particularly 
aims at enhancing his market share necessary for products which are not 
to 20 per cent, in the next three years. produced according to predetermined 
He will have to develop a complete specifications, such as in the case 
marketing plan covering various of agricultural products, say wheat, 
important aspects including the plan oranges, etc. Grading ensures that 
for increasing the level of production, goods belong to a particular quality 
promotion of the products, etc., and and helps in realising higher prices for 
specify the action programmes to high quality output.
achieve these objectives. 5. Packaging and Labelling: Packaging 
3 . P r o d u c t  D e s i g n i n g  a n d refers to designing and developing the 
Development: Another important package for the products. Labelling 
marketing activity or decision refers to designing and developing the 
area relates to product designing label to be put on the package. The 
and development. The design of label may vary from a simple tag to 
the product contributes to making complex graphics.
the product attractive to the target Packaging and labelling have 
customers. A good design can improve become so important in modern day 
performance of a product and also marketing that these are considered 
give it a competitive advantage in the as the pillars of marketing. Packaging 
market. For example, when we plan is important not only for protection 
to buy any product say a motorbike, of the products but also serves as 
we not only see its features like cost, a promotional tool. Sometimes, the 
mileage, but also the design aspects quality of the product is assessed by 
like its shape, style, etc. the buyers form packaging. We have 
4. standardisation and grading: seen that in the success of many of the 
Standardisation refers to producing consumer brands in recent times such 
goods of predetermined specifications, as Lays or Uncle Chips potato wafers 
which helps in achieving uniformity Clinic Plus shampoos, and Colgate 

Reprint 2025-26



MArkeTING

253

Toothpaste, etc., packaging has played Customer support services are very 
an important role. effective in bringing repeat sales from 

6. branding: A very important decision the customers and developing brand 

area for marketing of most consumer loyality for a product.

products is whether to sell the product 8. Pricing of Product: Price of 
in its generic name (name of the product refers to the amount of money 
category of the product, say Fan, Pen, customers have to pay to obtain a 
etc.) or to sell them in a brand name product. Price is an important factor 
(such as Pollar Fan or rottomac Pen). affecting the success or failure of a 
Brand name helps in creating product product in the market. The demand 
differentiation, i.e., providing basis for for a product or service is related to 
distinguishing the product of a firm its price. Generally lower the price, 
with that of the competitor, which in higher would be the demand for the 
turn, helps in building customer’s product and vice-versa. The marketers 
loyality and in promoting its sale. have to properly analyse the factors 
The important decision areas in determining the price of a product and 
respect of branding include deciding take several crucial decisions in this 
the branding strategy, say whether respect, including setting the pricing 
each product will be given a separate objectives, determining the pricing 
brand name or the same brand name strategies, determining the price and 
will be extended to all products of the changing the prices.
company, say Phillips bulbs, tubes 9.  Promotion: Promotion of products 
and television or Videocon washing and services involves informing the 
machine, television, and refrigerator. customers about the firm’s product, 
Selection of the brand name plays its features, etc., and persuading 
an important role in the success of a them to purchase these products. 
product. The four important methods of 
7. customer support services: promotion include advertising, 
A very important function of the Personal Selling, Publicity and 
marketing management relates Sales Promotion. A marketer has 
to developing customer support to take several crucial, decisions in 
services such as after sales services, respect of promotion of the products 
handling customer complaints and services such as deciding the 
and adjustments, procuring credit promotion budget, the promotion 
services, maintenance services, mix, i.e., the combination of the 
technical services and consumer promotional tools that will be use, 

information. All these services aim the promotion budget, etc.

at providing maximum satisfaction 10.  Physical Distribution: Managing 
to the customers, which is the key to physical distribution is another 
marketing success in modern days. very important function in the 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

254

marketing of goods and services. 12. storage or Warehousing : 
The two major decision areas under Usually there is a time gap between 
this function include (a) decision the production or procurement of 
regarding channels of distribution goods and their sale or use. It may 
or the marketing intermediaries (like be because of irregular demand for 
whole salers, retailers) to be used the products such as in the case 
and (b) physical movement of the of woollen garments or raincoats, 
product from where it is produced or there may be irregular supply 
to a place where it is required by the because of seasonal production such 
customers for their consumption or as in the case of agricultural products 
use. The important decision areas (sugarcane, rice, wheat, cotton, etc.). 
under physical distribution include In order to maintain smooth flow 
managing inventory (levels of stock of products in the market, there 
of goods), storage and warehousing is a need for proper storage of the 
and transportation of goods from one products. Further, there is a need for 
place to the other. storage of adequate stock of goods to 

11. transportation: Transportation protect against unavoidable delays in 
delivery or to meet out contingencies 

involves physical movement of goods 
in the demand. In the process of 

from one place to the other. As 
marketing, the function of storage 

generally the users of products, 
is performed by different agencies 

particularly consumer products 
such as manufacturers, wholesalers 

are wide spread and geographically 
and retailers.

separated from the place these are 
produced, it is necessary to move 

markeTing mix
them to the place where it is needed 
for consumption or use, For example, The marketing mix consists of various 
tea produced in Assam has to be elements, which have broadly been 
transported not only within the state classified into four categories, popularly 
but to other far off places like Tamil known as four Ps of marketing. These 
Nadu, Punjab, Jammu and kashmir are: (i) Product, (ii) Price, (iii) Place, 
and Haryana, rajasthan, where it is and (iv) Promotion. These are briefly 
consumed. discussed as follows:

A marketing firm has to analyse 1. Product: Product means goods 
its transportation needs after taking or services or ‘anything of value’, 
into consideration various factors which is offered to the market for 
such as nature of the product, cost sale. For example, Hindustan lever 
and location of target market and 

offers number of consumer products 
take decisions in respect of mode 

like toiletries (Close-Up toothpaste, 
of transportation to be chosen and 

Lifebuoy soap, etc.), detergent powder 
other related aspects. (Surf, Wheel), food products (Refined 

Reprint 2025-26



MArkeTING

255

Vegetable Oil); Tata offers Tata Steel, etc. These aspects are very important, 
Trucks, Salt and a large number of particularly in the marketing of 
other products; LG electronics offers consumer durable products (like 
televisions, refrigerators, colour Automobiles, refrigerators, etc.). The 
monitors for computers, etc; Amul important product decisions include 
offers a number of food products deciding about the features, quality, 
(Amul milk, ghee, butter, cheese, packaging, labelling and branding of 
chocolates, etc.). the products.

The concept of product relates 2. Price: Price is the amount of money 
to not only the physical product as customers have to pay to obtain 
mentioned in the above examples but the product. In case of most of the 
also the benefits offered by it from products, level of price affects the level 
customer’s view point (for example of their demand. The marketers have 
toothpaste is bought for whitening not only to decide about the objectives 
teeth, strengthening gums, etc.). of price setting but to analyse the 
The concept of product also include factors determining the price and fix a 
the extended product or what is price for the firm’s products. Decisions 
offered to the customers by way have also to be taken in respect of 
of after sales services, handling discounts to customers, traders and 
complaints, availability of spare parts credit terms, etc., so that customers 

Marketing Mix: elements

Product Price

Product Mix Price Level
Product Quality Margins
New Product Pricing Policy
Design and Development Pricing Strategies
Packaging Price Change
Labelling
Branding

Place Promotion

Channel Strategy Promotion Mix
Channel Selection Advertising
Channel Conflict Personal Selling
Channel Cooperation  Sales Promotion
Physical Distribution Publicity
 Public relations

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

256

perceive the price to be in line with the newspaper, magazines, the objections 
value of the product. of customers, etc.).

3.  Place: Place or Physical Distribution The success of a market offer will 

include activities that make firm’s depend on how well these ingredients 

products available to the target are mixed to create superior value for 

customers. Important decision areas the customers and simultaneously 

in this respect include selection of achieve their sale and profit objectives. 
dealers or intermediaries to reach the Let us say a firm would like to achieve 
customers, providing support to the necessary volume of sale at a cost that 

intermediaries (by way of discounts, will permit a desired level of profit. 
But so many alternative mixes can 

promotional campaigns, etc.). The 
be adopted by a firm to achieve this 

intermediaries in turn keep inventory 
of the firm’s products, demonstrate objectives. The issue before a firm then 

is to decide what would be the most 
them to potential buyers, negotiate 

effective combination of elements to 
price with buyers, close sales and 

achieve the given objectives.
also service the products after the 
sale. The other decision areas relate 

proDuCTs
to managing inventory, storage and 
warehousing and transportation of From the customer’s point of view, a 
goods from the place it is produced to product is a bundle of utilities, which 
the place it is required by the buyers. is purchased because of its capability 

4. Promotion: Promotion of products to provide satisfaction of certain need. 

and services include activities that A buyer buys a product or service 

communicate availability, features, for what it does for her or the benefit 
it provides to her. There can be three 

merits, etc., of the products to the 
types of benefits a customer may 

target customers and persuade them to 
seek to satisfy from the purchase of a 

buy it. Most marketing organisations, 
product, viz., 

undertake various promotional 
(i)  functional benefits, 

activities and spend substantial 
amount of money on the promotion (ii)  psychological benefits, and 
of their goods through using number (iii)  social benefits. 
of tools such as advertising, personal For example, the purchase of a 
selling and sales promotion techniques motorcycle provides functional utility 
(like price discounts, free samples, of transportation, but at the same 
etc.). A large number of decisions time satisfies the need for prestige and 
are to be taken in each of the area esteem and provides social benefit by 
specified above. For example, in the the way of acceptance from a group, 
respect of advertising it is important to by riding a motorbike. Thus, all these 
decide about the message, the media aspects should be considered while 
to be used (example, print-media– planning for a product.

Reprint 2025-26



MArkeTING

257

Classification of Products 1. convenience Products: Those 

Products may broadly be classified consumer products, which are purchased 
frequently, immediately and with least time 

into two categories — (i) consumers’ 
products, and (ii) industrial products. and efforts are referred to as convenience 

The consumer products may further goods. examples of such products 

be classified into different groups, as are cigarettes, ice creams, medicines, 

detailed below: newspaper, stationery items toothpaste 
etc. These products have low unit-value 

C and are bought in small qualities.
onsumer proDuCTs

2. shopping Products: Shopping 
Products, which are purchased by 

products are those consumer goods 
the ultimate consumers or users for 

where buyers devote considerable 
satisfying their personal needs and 

time, to compare the quality, price, 
desires are referred to as consumer 
products. For example, soap, edible style, suitability, etc., at several stores, 

oil, eatables, textiles, toothpaste, fans, before making final purchase. Some 
etc. which we use for our personal and of the examples of shopping products 

non-business use are consumer goods. are clothes, shoes, jewellery, furniture, 

We can classify the consumer product radio, television, etc. 

into the following three categories as 3. speciality Products: Speciality 
here under: products are those consumer goods 

Products

Consumer Products Industrial Products

Durability Basis Shopping efforts Involved

Non- Durable Services Conven- Shopping Speciality
Durable ience Products Products

Products

Classification of Products

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

258

Convenience Products

which have certain special features DuraBiliTy oF proDuCTs

because of which people make special 
On the basis of their durability, 

efforts in their purchase. These the consumer products have been 
products are such, which have reached classified into three categories— 
a brand loyalty of the highest order, Durable, Non-durable and Services.
with a significant number of buyers. 1. non-durable Products: The 
The buyers are willing to spend a lot consumer products which are 
of time and efforts on the purchase normal ly  consumed in one or 
of such products. For example, if few uses are called non-durable 
there is a rare collection of artwork products. For example, products like 
or of antiques, some people may be toothpaste, detergents, bathing soap 
willing to spend a lot of shopping and stationary products etc. From 
effort and travel long distance to buy the marketing point of view, these 
such products. In our day-to-day life, products generally command a small 

we see people going to a particular margin, should be made available 

hair-cutting saloon or restaurant, or in many locations and need to be 
heavily advertised.

a tailor. The demand for these goods 
is relatively inelastic, i.e., even if the 2. Durable Products: Those tangible 

price is increased, the demand does consumer products which normally 
survive many years, for example, 

not come down.

Reprint 2025-26



MArkeTING

259

Shopping Products

refrigerator, radio, bicycle, sewing inDusTrial proDuCTs

machine and kitchen gadgets are 
Industrial products are those products, 

referred to as durable products. which are used as inputs in producing 
These goods are generally used for other products. The examples of such 
a longer period, command a higher products are raw materials, engines, 
per unit margin, require greater lubricants, machines, tools, etc. In 
personal- selling efforts, guarantees other words, industrial products are 
and after sales services, on the part meant for non-personal and business 
of the seller. use for producing other products.

3. services: By services we mean The market for industrial products 

those intangible activities, benefits consists of manufacturers, transport 
agencies, banks and insurance 

which are offered for sale, e.g., dry 
companies, mining companies and 

cleaning, watch repairs, hair cutting, 
public utilities. Industrial products 

postal services, services offered by a are those products, which are used as 
doctor, an architect and a lawyer. inputs in producing other products. 

The examples of such products are 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINeSS  STUDIeS

260

Speciality Products

raw materials, engines, lubricants, petroleum, iron ore), fish and lumber; 
machines, tools, etc. In other words, and (b) manufactured material and 
industrial products are meant for parts. These are again of two types – 
non-personal and business use for component materials like glass, iron, 
producing other products. plastic and component parts such as 
The market for industrial products tyre, electric bulb, steering, and battery.
consists of manufacturers, transport (ii) capital items: These are such 
agencies, banks and insurance goods that are used in the production 
companies, mining companies and of finished goods. These include: (a) 
public utilities. installations like elevators, mainframe 

Computers, and (b) equipments like 
Classification Hand Tools, Personal Computer, Fax 
The industrial goods are classified Machines, etc.
into the following major categories: (iii) supplies and business services: 
(i) Materials and Parts: These include These are short lasting goods and 
goods that enter the manufacture’s services that facilitate developing or 
products completely. Such goods managing the finished product. These 
are of two types: (a) raw material: include: (a) maintenance and repair 
including farm products like cotton, items like Paint, Nails, etc., and (b) 
sugar cane, oil seed and natural operating supplies like Lubricant, 
products such as minerals (say crude Computer Stationary,  Writing  Paper, etc.

Reprint 2025-26



MArkeTING

261

Industrial Goods

Materials and Capital Items Supplies and
Parts  Business Services

raw Manufactured  Installations equipments Maintanence Operating
Material  Material and Parts   and repair  Supplies
    items

Farm Natural Component Component
Products Products Material Parts

Classification of Industrial Goods

BranDing If products were sold by generic 
names, it would be very difficult for the 

One of the most important decisions 
marketers to distinguish their products 

that a marketer has to take in the area from that of their competitors. Thus, 
of ‘product’ is in respect of branding. most marketers give a name to their 
He has to decide whether the firm’s product, which helps in identifying and 
products will be marketed under distinguishing their products from the 
a brand name or a generic name. competitors’ products. This process of 
Generic name refers to the name of giving a name or a sign or a symbol 
the whole class of the product. For etc., to a product is called branding. 
example, a book, a wristwatch, tyre, The various terms relating to branding 
camera, toilet soap, etc. We know are as follows:
that a camera is a lens surrounded 1. brand: A brand is a name, term, sign, 
by plastic or steel from all sides and symbol, design or some combination of 
having certain other features such them, used to identify the products—
as a flash gun and so on. Similarly goods or services of one seller or group 
book is a bunch of papers, which of sellers and to differentiate them from 
are in a bound form, on which some those of the competitors. For example, 
useful information about a subject some of the common brands are Bata, 
is printed. Thus, all products having Lifebuoy, Dunlop, and Parker. Brand 
these characteristics would be called is a comprehensive term, which has 
by the generic name such as camera two components—brand name and 
or book. brand mark.

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

262

2. Brand Name: That part of a brand, (ii) A brand should suggest the 
which can be spoken, is called a brand product’s benefits and qualities. 
name. In other words, brand name is It should be appropriate to the 
the verbal component of a brand. product’s function.

3. Brand Mark: That part of a brand (iii) A brand name should be distinctive.
which can be recognised but which is (iv) The brand name should be 
not utterable is called brand mark. It adaptable to packing or labelling 
appears in the form of a symbol, design, requirements ,  to  d i f f e rent 
distinct colour scheme or lettering. advertising media and to different 
4. Trade Mark: A brand or part of a languages.
brand that is given legal protection (v) T h e  b r a n d  n a m e  s h o u l d 
is called trademark. The protection is be sufficiently  versatile to 
given against its use by other firms. accommodate new products, which 
Thus the firm, which got its brand are added to the product line.
registered, gets the exclusive right for (vi) It should be capable of being 
its use. In that case, no other firm can registered and protected legally.
use such name or mark in the country.

(vii) Chosen name should have staying 
Though branding adds to the cost 

power i.e., it should not get out 
e.g., to the cost of packaging, labelling, 

of date.
legal protection, and promotion, it 
provides several advantages to the 
sellers as well as the consumers. Packaging

One of the most important developments 
Characteristics of Good Brand Name affecting the business world in 
Choosing the right brand name is recent years has been in the area of 

not an easy decision. What makes packaging. Many products, which we 

this decision important is the fact thought could never lend themselves 

that once a brand name is chosen to packing because of their nature, 

and the product is launched in have been successfully packed e.g., 

the market, changing the brand Pulses, Ghee, Milk, Salt, Cold Drinks, 

name is very difficult. So, getting it etc. Packaging refers to the act of 

right the first time is very essential. designing and producing the container 

Following are some of the considerations, or wrapper of a product. Packaging 

which should be kept in mind while plays a very important role in the 

choosing a brand name. marketing success or failure of many 

(i) The brand name should be short, products, particularly the consumer 

easy to pronounce, spell, recognise non-durable products. In fact if one 

and remember e.g., Ponds, VIP, makes an analysis of the reasons for 

Rin, Vim, etc. the success of some of the successful 

Reprint 2025-26



MARkETING

263

products in the recent past, it can be product (e.g., a toothpaste tube, a 
noted that packaging has played its match box, etc.).
due role. For example, it was one of 2. Secondary Packaging: It refers to 
the important factors in the success of additional layers of protection that are 
products like Maggie’s Noodles, Uncle kept till the product is ready for use, 
Chips or Crax wafers. e.g., a tube of shaving cream usually 

comes in a card board box. When 
Levels of Packaging consumers start using the shaving 

There can be three different levels of cream, they will dispose off the box 

packaging. These are as below: but retain the primary tube.

1. Primary Package: It refers to the 3. Transportation Packaging: It refers 

product’s immediate container. In to further packaging components 

some cases, the primary package is necessary for storage, identification 
kept till the consumer is ready to use or transportation. For example, a 

the product (e.g., plastic packet for toothpaste manufacturer may send the 

socks); whereas in other cases, it is goods to retailers in corrugated boxes 

kept throughout the entire life of the containing 10, 20, or 100 units.

Levels of Packaging

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

264

Importance of Packaging perception of customers about the 

Packaging has acquired great quality of the product. For example, 
significance in the marketing of goods by looking at the package of a 

product say Paint or Hair Oil, one 
and services, because of following can make some guess about quality 
reasons:

of the product contained in it.
(i) Rising Standards of Health 

and Sanitation: Because of the 
increasing standards of living Functions of Packaging

in the country, more and more As stated above, packaging performs a 
people have started purchasing number of functions in the marketing 
packed goods as the chances of of goods. Some of the important 
adulteration in such goods are functions are as follows:
minimised. (i) Product Identification: Packaging 

(ii) Self Service Outlets: The self- greatly helps in identification 
service retail outlets are becoming of the products. For example, 
very popular, particularly in major Colgate in red colour, or Ponds 
cities and towns. Because of cream jar can be easily identified 
this, some of the traditional role by its package.
assigned to personal selling in (ii) Product Protection: Packaging 
respect of promotion has gone to protects the contents of a product 
packaging. from spoilage, breakage, leakage, 

(iii) Innovational Opportunity: Some of pilferage, damage, climatic effect, 
the recent developments in the etc. This kind of protection 
area of packaging have completely is required during storing, 
changed the marketing scene distribution and transportation 
in the country. For example, of the product.
milk can now be stored for 4-5 (iii) Facilitating Use of the Product: The 
days without refrigeration in size and shape of the package 
the recently developed packing should be such that it should be 
materials. Similarly, in the area convenient to open, handle and 
of pharmaceuticals, soft drinks, use for the consumers. Cosmetics, 
etc., lots of new innovations have medicines and tubes of toothpastes 
come in respect of packaging. As a are good examples of this.
result, the scope for the marketing (iv) Product Promotion: Packaging is 
of such products has increased. also used for promotion purposes. 

(iv) Product Differentiation: Packaging A start l ing colour scheme, 
is one of the very important means photograph or typeface may be 
of creating product differentiation. used to attract attention of the 
The colour, size, material, etc., of people at the point of purchase. 
package makes real difference in the Sometimes it may work even better 

Reprint 2025-26



MARkETING

265

than advertising. In self-service ‘Complete Germicheck Formula’; 
stores, this role of packaging the Package of a brand of Coconut 
becomes all the more important. Oil describes the product as pure 

coconut oil with Heena, Amla, Lemon 

Labelling and specifies how these are good for 
Hair. Thus, one of the most important 

A simple looking but important task functions of labels is to describe the 
in the marketing of goods relates to product, its usage, cautions in use, 
designing the label to be put on the etc. and specify its contents.
package. The label may vary from a 
simple tag attached to the product 2. Identification of the Product 
(such as in case of local unbranded or brand :  The other important 

products like sugar, wheat, pulses, function performed by labels is 

etc.) indicating some information to help in identifying the product 

about the quality or price, to complex or brand. For example, the brand 

graphics that are part of the package, name of any product, say Biscuits 

like the ones on branded products. or Potato Chips imprinted on its 

Lables are useful in providing detailed package helps us to identify, from 

information about the product, its number of packages, which one is 

contents, method of use, etc. The our favourite brand. Other common 

various functions performed by a label identification information provided 
are as follows: by the labels include name and 

address of the manufacturer, net 
1. Describe the Product and specify weight when packed, manufacturing 
its contents: Let us look at some of the date, maximum retail price and 
labels of the products used by us in our Batch number.
day to day life. The label on the package 

3. Grading of Products: Another 
of a local tea company describes the 

important function performed by 
company as ‘Mohini Tea Company, an 
ISO 9001:200C Certified Company’; a labels is to help grading the products 

into different categories. Sometimes 
popular brand of Prickly Heat Powder, 

marketers assign different grades to 
describes how the product provides 

indicate different features or quality of 
relief from prickly heat and controls 

the product. For example, a popular 
bacterial growth and infection, giving 

brand of Hair Conditioners comes in 
caution forbidding its application on 

different categories for different hair, 
cuts and wounds. Package of fast food 

say for ‘normal hair’ and for other 
products like ready to eat Dosa, Idli 

categories. Different type of tea is sold 
or Noodles, describe the procedure of 

by some brands under Yellow, red and 
cooking these products; the Package 

Green Label categories.
of a toothpaste brand lists the ‘Ten 
Teeth and Gum Problems’, which 4. Helps in Promotion of Products: 

the product claims to fight with its An important function of label is to 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

266

aid in promotion of the products. A represent the sum of values that 
carefully designed label can attract consumers exchange for the benefit 
attention and give reason to purchase. of having or using the product and is 
We see many product labels providing referred to as the price of the product. 
promotional messages for example, Similarly, money paid for the services 
the pack of a popular Amla Hair Oil such as fare for the transport service, 
states, ‘Baalon mein Dum, Life mein premium for an insurance policy, and 
Fun’. The label on the package of a fee to a doctor for his medical advise 

brand of Detergent Powder says, ‘keep represent the price of these services. 

cloth look good and your machine in Price may therefore be defined as the 
top condition’. Labels play important amount of money paid by a buyer (or 

role in sales promotional schemes received by a seller) in consideration 

launched by companies. For example of the purchase of a product or 

the label on the package of a Shaving a services. 

Cream mentions, ‘40% Extra Free’ or Pricing occupies an important 

package of a toothpaste mentioning, place in the marketing of goods and 
services by a firm. No product can 

‘Free Toothbrush Inside’, or ‘Save ̀  15’.
be launched without a price tag or 

5. Providing Information Required at least some guidelines for pricing. 
by Law: Another important function Pricing is often used as a regulator of 
of labeling is to provide information the demand of a product. Generally, 
required by law. For example, if the price of a product is increased, 
packaged food articles must have list i ts  demand comes down,  and 
of ingredients declaration regarding vice-versa.
vegetarian or non-vegetarian food Pricing is considered to be an 
additives and date of manufacturing effective competitive weapon. In the 
or packing on the label.  Such conditions of perfect competition, 
information is required on processed most of the firms compete with each 
foods, drugs and tobacco products. other on the basis of this factor. It is 
In case of hazardous or poisonous also the single most important factor 
material, appropriate safety-warning affecting the revenue and profits of a 
need to be put on the label. firm. Thus, most marketing firms give 

Thus, labels perform number high importance to the fixation of price 
of important functions relating to for their products and services.
communicating with the potential 
buyers and promoting the sale of Factors affecting Price 
the products. Determination

There are number of factors which 
Pricing affect the fixation of the price of a 
When a product is bought, some product. Some of the important factors 
money is paid for it. This money in this regard are discussed as below:

Reprint 2025-26



MARkETING

267

1. Product cost: One of the most Semi variable costs are those costs 
important factor affecting price which vary with the level of activity 
of a product or service is its cost. but not in direct proportion with it. 
This includes the cost of producing, For example, compensation of a sales 
distributing and selling the product. person may include a fixed salary of 
The cost sets the minimum level or say ` 10,000 plus a commission of 5 
the floor price at which the product per cent on sales. With an increase 
may be sold. Generally all marketing in the volume of sales, the total 
firms strive to cover all their costs, compensation will increase but not in 
at least in the long run. In addition, direct proportion with the change in 
they aim at earning a margin of profit the volume of sale.

over and above the costs. In certain Total Costs are the sum total of the 

circumstance, for example, at the time fixed, variable and semi-variable costs 
of introducing a new product or while for the specific level of activity, say 
entering a new market, the products volume of sales or quantity produced.
may be sold at a price, which does not 2. The Utility and Demand: While 
cover all the costs. But in the long run, the product costs set the lower limits 
a firm cannot survive unless at least of the price, the utility provided by the 
all its costs are covered. product and the intensity of demand of 

There are broadly three types of the buyer sets the upper limit of price, 

costs: viz., Fixed Costs, Variable Costs which a buyer would be prepared 

and Semi Variable Costs. Fixed costs to pay. In fact the price must reflect 
are those costs, which do not vary with the interest of both the parties to the 

the level of activity of a firm say with transaction—the buyer and the seller. 

the volume of production or sale. For The buyer may be ready to pay up to 
the point where the utility from the 

example, rent of a building or salary 
product is at least equal to the sacrifice 

of a sales manager remains the same 
made in terms of the price paid. The 

whether 1000 units or 10 units are 
seller would, however, try to at least 

produced in a week.
cover the costs. According to the law of 

Those costs which vary in direct 
demand, consumers usually purchase 

proportion with the level of activity are 
more units at a low price than at a 

called variable costs. For example, the 
high price.

costs of raw material, labour and power 
are directly related with the quantity of 3. Extent of Competition in the 
goods produced. Let us say, if the cost Market: Between the lower limit and 
of wood for manufacturing one chair the upper limit where would the price 
comes to ` 100 the cost of wood for 10 settle down? This is affected by the 
chairs would be ` 1000. Obviously, nature and the degree of competition. 
there will be no cost of wood if no chair The price will tend to reach the upper 
is produced. limit in case there is lesser degree of 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

268

competition while under conditions of maximising profit in the short run and 
free competition, the price will tend to in the long run. If the firm decides to 
be set at the lowest level maximise profits in the short run, it 

Competitors’ prices and their would tend to charge maximum price 
anticipated reactions must be for its products. But if it is to maximise 
considered before fixing the price its total profit in the long run, it would 
of a product. Not only the price but opt for a lower per unit price so that it 
the quality and the features of the can capture larger share of the market 
competitive products must be examined and earn greater profits through 
carefully, before fixing the price. increased sales.

4. Government and Legal Regulations: Apart from profit maximisation, 
In order to protect the interest of public the pricing objectives of a firm may 
against unfair practices in the field of include:

price fixing, Government can intervene (a) Obtaining Market Share Leadership: 

and regulate the price of commodities. If a firms objective is to obtain 

Government can declare a product larger share of the market; it will 

as essential product and regulate its keep the price of its products at 

price. For example, the cost of a drug lower levels so that greater number 

manufactured by a company having of people are attracted to purchase 

monopoly in the production of the the products;

same come to ` 20 per strip of ten (b) Surviving in a Competitive Market: 
and the buyer is prepared to pay any If a firm is facing difficulties in 
amount for it, say ̀  200. In the absence surviving in the market because of 
of any competitor, the seller may intense competition or introduction 
be tempted to extort the maximum of a more efficient substitute 
amount of ` 200 for the drug and by a competitor, it may resort 
intervene to regulate the price. Usually to discounting its products or 
in such a case, the Government does running a promotion campaign to 
not allow the firms to charge such a liquidate its stock; and
high price and intervene to regulate the (c) A t ta in ing  P roduc t  Qua l i t y 
price of the drug. This can be done by Leadership: In this case, normally 
the Government by declaring the drug higher prices are charged to cover 
as essential commodity and regulating high quality and high cost of 
its price. research and Development.

5. Pricing Objectives : Pricing Thus, the price of a firm’s products 
objectives are another important factor and services is affected by the pricing 
affecting the fixation of the price of a objective of the firm.
product or a service. Generally the 6. Marketing Methods Used: Price 
objective is stated to be maximise the fixation process is also affected by 
profits. But there is a difference in other elements of marketing such 

Reprint 2025-26



MARkETING

269

as distribution system, quality of promoted, these must be made 
salesmen employed, quality and available to customers at the right 
amount of advertising, sales promotion place, in right quantity and at the right 
efforts, the type of packaging, product time. For example, a person convinced 
differentiation, credit facility and about the quality, etc. of a product, say, 
customer services provided. For a detergent bar, wants to purchase the 
example, if a company provides free same. He/She goes to a retail outlet and 
home delivery, it has some of flexibility asks for the product. If that product is 
in fixing prices. Similarly, uniqueness not available in that shop, he/she may 
of any of the elements mentioned purchase some of the alternative brand 
above gives the company a competitive available. This way a sure sale is lost 
freedom in fixing prices of its products. because goods were not available at 

the place where the customer wanted 
Physical Distribution to purchase. Thus, it is an important 

responsibility of the marketers to make 
The fourth important e lement 

the product physically available at a 
of marketing mix is the physical 

place where the customers would like 
distribution of products and services. 
Through this component of marketing them to buy. The physical handling 

mix, the goods and services are made and movement of goods from place of 

available at right place, at right time production to the place of distribution 

to right people without change. is referred to as physical distribution, 

Once goods are manufactured, which is a very important element of 

packaged, branded, priced, and marketing mix.

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

270

Physical distribution covers all customers to the manufacturers. A 
the activities required to physically good physical distribution system 
move goods from manufacturers to should provide for an accurate and 
the customers. Important activities speedy processing of orders, in 
involved in the physical distribution the absence of which, goods would 
include transportation, warehousing, reach the customers late or in wrong 
material handling, and inventory quantity or specifications. This would 
control. These activities constitute result in customer dissatisfaction, 
major components of  physical with the danger of loss of business 
distribution. and goodwill.

2. Transportation: Transportation is 
Components of Physical the means of carrying goods and raw 
Distribution materials from the point of production 
The main components of physical to the point of sale. It is one of the major 
distribution are explained as follows: elements in the physical distribution 

1. Order Processing: In a typical of goods. It is important because 

buyer-seller relationship, order unless the goods are physically 

placement is the first step. Products made available, the sale cannot 

flow from manufacturers to customers be completed.

via channel members while orders 3. Warehousing: Warehousing refers 
flow in the reverse direction, from to the act of storing and assorting 

Nothing Beats Word of Mouth in India

Nothing sways an Indian buyer’s choice more than a word of reassurance from 
the people he knows. Even for the purchases like cars, mobile phones and home 
loans, majority of the consumers in India rely on the references from their friends 
and relatives while making their decisions.

The story is different in developed economies. Take the case of automobiles. 
In markets like the US, Canada and Japan, more people are influenced by 
conventional advertising by automobile companies, in developing markets like 
India, Malaysia and Thailand it’s the neighbour or the colleague who tips the 
scales one way or the other. “In case of luxury goods, the psyche of Indians has 
always been different. Buying a car is a family decision, so it is only natural that 
all the members of the family will talk to all the other users of a similar products, 
who they know”, General Motors India director P Balendran said.

When the whole world is going crazy with Internet and mobile marketing, it is 
interesting that for Indians it’s still conventional advertising and word of mouth 
campaigns that sways their choices. Unlike in the West, Indians come from a very 
closely-knit society where people get influenced by their peers, relatives and local 
celebrities. People are more than willing to accept a brand if it’s endorsed by their 
favourite superstar or is recommended by their close associates.

Reprint 2025-26



MARkETING

271

products in order to create time level of inventory, higher will be the 
utility in them. The basic purpose of level of service to customers but the 
warehousing activities is to arrange cost of carrying the inventory will also 
placement of goods and provide be high because lot of capital would be 
facilities to store them. The need for tied up in the stock. Thus, a balance is 
warehousing arises because there to be maintained in respect of the cost 
may be difference between the time a and customer satisfaction. 
product is produced and the time it is 
required for consumption. Generally 

Promotion
the efficiency of a firm in serving its 
customers will depend on where these A company may produce a good quality 
warehouses are located and where are product, price it appropriately and 
these to be delivered. make it available at the selling points, 

Generally larger the number which are convenient to customers. But 

of warehouses a firm has, lesser in spite of all this, the product may not 

would be the time taken in serving sell well in the market. There is a need 
customers at different locations for developing proper communication 
but greater would be the cost of with the market. In the absence of 
warehousing and vice-versa. Thus communication, the customers would 
the firm has to strike a balance not be able to know about the product 
between the cost of warehousing and and how it can satisfy their needs and 
the level of customer service. wants or may not be convinced about 

For products requiring long- its utility and benefits.
term storage (such as agricultural Promotion refers to the use of 
products) the warehouses are located communication with the twin objective 
near production sites. This helps in of informing potential customers 
minimising the charges on transportation about a product and persuading them 
of the goods. On the other hand, the to buy it. In other words, promotion 
products which are bulky and hard to is an important element of marketing 
ship (machinery, automobiles) as well mix by which marketers makes use 
as perishable products (bakery, meat, 

of various tools of communication 
vegetables) are kept at different locations 

to encourage exchange of goods and 
near the market.

services in the market.
4. Inventory Control: Linked to 
warehousing decisions are the 

Promotion mix
inventory decisions which hold key 
to success for many manufacturers, Promotion mix refers to combination 
especially those where the per unit of promotional tools used by an 
cost is high. A very important decision o r g a n i s a t i o n  t o  a c h i e v e  i t s 
in respect of inventory is deciding communication objectives. Various 
about the level of inventory. Higher the tools of communication are used 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

272

 M C
 A U
 R S

 ADVERTISING PERSONAL SELLING
 k T
 E O

 PUBLIC RELATIONS SALES PROMOTION
 T M
 E E
 R Promotion Mix R

Marketing Communications

by the marketers to inform and Advertising is perhaps the most 
persuade customers about their commonly used tool of promotion. It is 
firm’s products. These include: (i) an impersonal form of communication, 
Advertising, (ii) Personal Selling, (iii) which is paid for by the marketers 
Sales Promotion, and (iv) Publicity. (sponsors) to promote some goods 
These tools are also called elements or service. The most common modes 
of promotion mix and can be used of advertising are  ‘newspapers’, 
in different combinations, to achieve ‘magazines’, ‘television’, and ‘radio’. 
the goals of promotion. For example, The important distinguishing features 
consumer goods firms may use of advertising are as follows:
more of advertising through mass (i) Paid Form: Advertising is a paid 
media while the industrial goods form of communication. That 
firms may be using more of personal is, the sponsor has to bear the 
selling. What combination of these cost of communicating with the 
elements is used by a firm will prospects.
depend upon various factors such 

(ii) Impersonality: There is no direct 
as nature of market, nature product, 

face-to-face contact between 
the promotions budget, objectives 
of promotion, etc. Let us first know the prospect and the advertiser. 

about these elements in some details. It is therefore, referred to as 
impersonal method of promotion. 
Advertising creates a monologue 

aDvertising
and not a dialogue.

We generally come across hundreds of (iii) Identified Sponsor: Advertising 
advertising messages everyday, which is undertaken by some identified 
tell us about various products such individual or company, who 
as toilet soaps, detergent powder, soft makes the advertising efforts and 
drinks and services such as hotels, 

also bears the cost of it.
insurance policies, etc.

Reprint 2025-26



Marketing

273

Merits of advertising of goods and services, it attracts 
lot of criticism. the opponents of 

advertising, as a medium of communi-
advertising say that the expenditure 

cation, has the following merits: on advertising is a social waste as it 
(i)  Mass Reach: advertising is a adds to the cost, multiplies the needs 

medium through which a large of people and undermines social 
number of people can be reached values. the proponents, however, 
over a vast geographical area. argue that advertising is very useful 
For example, an advertisement as it increases the reach, brings the 
message placed in a national daily pay unit cost of production down and 
reaches lakhs of its subscribers. adds to the growth of the economy. it 

(ii) Enhancing Customer Satisfaction is therefore, important to examine the 
and Confidence:  advertising major criticisms against advertising 
creates confidence amongst and see the extent to which these are 
prospective buyers as they feel true. this is taken up as follows:
more comfortable and assured 1. Adds to Cost: the opponents of 
about the product quality and advertising argue that advertising 
hence feel more satisfied. unnecessarily adds to the cost of 

(iii) E x p r e s s i v e n e s s :  W i t h  t h e product, which is ultimately passed 
developments in art, computer on to the buyers in the form of high 

designs, and graphics, advertising prices. an advertisement on tV, for 

has  deve loped into  one  o f a few seconds, for example, costs the 

the most forceful medium of marketers several lakhs of rupees. 

communication. With the special Similarly an advertisement in print 

effects that can be created, even media say in a newspaper or a magazine 

simple products and messages can costs the marketers a large amount of 
money. the money spent adds to the 

look very attractive.
cost, which in an important factor in 

(iv) Economy: advertising is a very fixation of the price of a product.
economical mode of communication true, advertisement of a product 
if large number of people are to be costs lot of money but it helps to 
reached. Because of its wide reach, 

increase the demand for the product 
the overall cost of advertising 

as large number of potential buyers 
gets spread over numerous 

come to know about the availability 
communication links established. 

of the products, its features, etc. and 
as a result the per-unit cost of 
reach comes low. are persuaded to buy it. the increased 

demand leads to higher production, 
which brings with it the economies 

ObjectiOns tO Advertising of scale. as a result, the per unit cost 
though advertising is one of the most of production comes down as the 
frequently used medium of promotion total cost is divided by larger number 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

274

of units. Thus, the expenditure on of tooth or ‘feelings of freshness’ in 
advertisement adds to the total cost competing brands of toothpaste that 
but the per unit cost comes down, it is sometimes confusing to us as to 
which in fact lessens the burden which one to buy.
of consumers rather than adding The supporters of advertisement, 
to it. however, argue that we are all rational 

human beings who make our decisions 
2. Undermines Social Values: Another 
important criticism of advertising for purchase of products on factors 

is that it undermines social values such as price, style, size, etc. Thus the 

and promotes materialism. It breeds buyers can clear their confusion by 

discontent among people as they come analysing the information provided on 
to know about new products and feel the advertisements and other sources 
dissatisfied with their present state before taking a decision to purchase 
of affairs. Some advertisements show a product. However, this criticism 
new life styles, which don’t find social cannot be completely overruled.
approval. 4. Encourages Sale of Inferior 

This criticism is not entirely true. Products: Advertising does not 
Advertisement in fact helps buyers distinguish between superior and 
by informing them about the new inferior products and persuade 
products, which may be improvement people to purchase even the inferior 
over the existing products. If the products.
buyers are not informed about these In fact superiority and inferiority 
products, they may be using inefficient depends on the quality, which is 
products. Further, the job of an a relative concept. The desired 
advertisement is to inform. The final level of quality will depend on the 
choice to buy or not to buy anyway economic status and preferences of 
rests with the buyers. They will buy if the target customers. Advertisements 
the advertised product satisfies some sell products of a given quality and 
of their needs. They may be motivated the buyers will buy if it suits their 
to work harder to be able to purchase requirements. No advertisement 
these products. should however, make false claim 
3. Confuses the Buyers: Another about the quality of a product. If a 
criticism against advertisement is that firm makes a false claims it can be 
so many products are being advertised prosecuted for the same.
which makes similar claims that the 
buyer gets confused as to which one Personal selling
is true and which one should be relied 
upon. For example, we may note similar Personal  se l l ing involves oral 
claims of whiteness or stain removing presentation of message in the form 
abilities in competing brands of of conversation with one or more 
detergent powder or claims of whiteness prospective customers for the purpose 

Reprint 2025-26



MARkETING

275

of making sales. It is a personal form role of Personal selling

of communication. Companies appoint 
Personal selling plays a very important 

salespersons to contact prospective 
role in the marketing of goods and 

buyers  and create  awareness 
services. The importance of personal 

about the product and develop selling to businessmen, customers and 
product preferences with the aim of society may be described as below.
making sale.

Importance to Businessmen
Features of Personal selling

Personal selling is a powerful tool for 
(i)  Personal Form: In personal selling creating demand for a firm’s products 

a direct face-to-face dialogue takes and increasing their sale. The importance 
place that involves an interactive of personal selling to a business 
relationship between the seller and organisation may be described as follows:
the buyer. (i)   Effective Promotional Tool: Personal 

(ii)   Development of Relationship: Personal selling is very effective promotional 

selling allows a salesperson to tool, which helps in influencing 
develop personal relationships the prospects about the merits of 

with the prospective customers, a product and thereby increasing 

which may become important in its sale.

making sale. (ii) Flexible Tool: Personal selling is 
more flexible than other tools of 

Merits of Personal selling promotion such as advertising and 

(i) Flexibility: There is lot of flexibility sales promotion. It helps business 
persons in adopting their offer in 

in personal selling. The sales varying purchase situations.
presentation can be adjusted 
to fit the specific needs of the (iii) Minimises Wastage of Efforts: 

Compared with other tools of 
individual customers.

promotion, the possibility of 
(ii) Direct Feedback: As there is direct wastage of efforts in personal 

face-to-face communication in selling is minimum. This helps 
personal selling, it is possible the business persons in bringing 
to take a direct feed back from economy in their efforts.
the customer and to adapt the (iv) Consumer Attention: There is an 
presentation according to the opportunity to detect the loss of 
needs of the prospects. consumer attention and interest 

(iii) Minimum Wastage: The wastage in a personal selling situation. 
of efforts in personal selling can This helps a business person in 
be minimised as company can successfully completing the sale.
decide the target customers before (v) Lasting Relationship: Personal 
making any contact with them. selling helps to develop lasting 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

276

relationship between the sales identifying their needs and wants 
persons and the customers, which and in knowing how these can best 
is very important for achieving the be satisfied.
objectives of business. (ii) La tes t  Market  In fo r mat ion : 

(vi) Personal Rapport: Development of Customers get latest market 
personal rapport with customers information regarding price 
increases the competitive strength changes, product availability 
of a business organisation. and shortages and new product 

introduction, which help them in 
(vii) Role in Introduction Stage: Personal 

taking the purchase decisions in 
selling plays very important role 

a better way.
in the introduction stage of a new 
product as it helps in persuading (iii) Expert Advice: Customers get 

customers about the merits of the expert advice and guidance in 
purchasing various goods and 

product.
services, which help them in 

(viii) Link with Customers: Sales people making better purchase.
play three different roles, namely 

(iv) Induces Customers:  Personal selling 
persuasive role, service role and 

induces customers to purchase 
informative role, and thereby link 

new products that satisfy their 
a business firm to its customers.

needs in a better way and thereby 
helps in improving their standards 

Importance to Customers of living.

This role of personal selling becomes 
more important for the illiterate and Importance to Society

rural customers, who do not have Personal selling plays a very productive 
many other means of getting product role in the economic progress of a 
information. society. The more specific benefits of 

The customers are benefited by personal selling to a society are as 
personal selling in the following follows:
ways: (i) Converts Latest Demand: Personal 
(i) Help in Identifying Needs: Personal selling converts latest demand into 

selling helps the customers in effective demand. It is through this 

Personal Selling

‘Most people think ‘selling’ is the same as ‘talking’. But the most effective 
salespeople know that listening is the most important part of their job.’

—Roy Bartell

‘You don’t close a sale, you open a relationship if you want to build a long-term, 
successful enterprise.’

—Patricia Fripp

Reprint 2025-26



Marketing

277

cycle that the economic activity in efforts such as advertising and 
the society is fostered, leading to personal selling.
more jobs, more incomes and more Companies use sales promotion tools 
products and services. that is how specifically designed to promote to 
economic growth is influenced by customers (e.g., free samples, discounts, 
personal selling. and contests), tradesmen or middlemen 

(ii) Employment Opportunities: Personal (e.g., cooperative advertising, dealer 
selling offers greater income and discounts and dealer incentives and 
employment opportunities to the contests) and to sales person (e.g., 
unemployed youth. bonus, salesmen contests, special 

(iii) Career Opportunities: Personal offers). Sales promotions include only 

selling provides attractive career those activities that are used to provide 

with greater opportunities for short term incentives to boost the sales 
advancement and job satisfaction of a firm.
as well as security, respect, variety, 
interest and independence to Merits of Sales Promotion
young men and women. (i) Attention Value: Sales promotion 

(iv) Mobility of Sales People: there is a activities attract attention of 
greater degree of mobility in sales the people because of the use of 
people, which promote travel and incentives.
tourism in the country.

(ii) Useful in New Product Launch: 
(v) Product Standardisation: Personal 

Sales promotion tools can be very 
s e l l i n g  i n c r e a s e s  p r o d u c t 

effective at the time of introduction 
standardisation and uniformity 

of a new product in the market. it 
in consumption pattern in a 
diverse society. induces people to break away from 

their regular buying behaviour 
and try the new product.

SaleS Promotion
(iii) Synergy in Total  Promotional 

Sales promotion refers to short- Efforts: Sales promotion activities 
term incentives, which are designed are designed to supplement the 
to encourage the buyers to make personal selling and advertising 
immediate purchase of a product or efforts used by a firm and add to 
service. these include all promotional the over all effectiveness of the 
efforts other than advertising, promotional efforts of a firm.
personal selling and publicity, used 
by a company to boost its sales. Sales Limitation of Sales Promotion
promotion activities include offering 
cash discounts, sales contests, free gift (i) Reflects Crisis: If a firm frequently 
offers, and free sample distribution. rely on sales promotion, it may 
Sales promotion is usually undertaken give the impression that it is 
to supplement other promotional unable to manage its sales 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSineSS  StUDieS

278

or that there are no takers of Commonly used sales Promotion 
its product. activities

(ii) Spoils Product Image: Use of sales 
1. Rebate: Offering products at special 

promotion tools may affect the 
image of a product. the buyers prices, to clear off excess inventory. 

may start feeling that the product example, a car manufacturer’s offer 

is not of good quality or is not to sell a particular brand of car at a 

appropriately priced. discount of ̀  10,000, for a limited period.

Sales Promotion

Reprint 2025-26



MARkETING

279

2. Discount: Offering products at draw coupon on purchase of easy 
less than list price. Example, a shoe undergarment and win a car offer.
company’s offer of ‘Discount Up to 8.Usable Benefit: Purchase goods 
50%’ or a shirt marketer’s offer of worth ` 3000 and get a holiday 
‘50+40% Discount’. package worth ` 3000 free’ or ‘Get 
3. Refunds: refunding a part of price a Discount Voucher for Accessories 
paid by customer on some proof of on Apparel Purchase of ` 1000 and 
purchase, say on return of empty foils or above.’

wrapper. This is commonly used by food 9. Full finance @ 0%: Many marketers 
product companies, to boost their sales. of consumer durables such as 

4. Product combinations: Offering Electronic goods, automobiles etc 

another product as gift along with the offer easy financing schemes such as 
purchase of a product, say offer of a ‘24 easy instalments, Eight Up Front 

pack of ½ kg of rice with the purchase and 16 To Be Paid as Post Dated 

of a bag of Aatta (wheat flour), or Cheques’. However, one should be 
‘Get 128 kB Memory Card Free with careful about the file charges, which 
a Digicam’ or Buy a TV of 25+ and sometimes is nothing but interest 

recovered in advance.
Get a Vacuum Cleaner Free’ or ‘100 
Gm Bottle of Sauce Free With 1 kg 10. Sampling: Offer of free sample of 

Detergent.’ a product, say a detergent powder or 
tooth paste to potential customers at 

5. Quantity gift: Offering extra 
quantity of the product commonly the time of launch of a new brand.

used by marketer of toiletry products. 11.Contests: Competitive events 

For example, a shaving cream’s offer of involving application of skills or 

‘40% extra’ or A Hotel’s offer of “Take luck, say salving a quiz or answering 
a 2 Night 3 Days Package At the Hotel some questions.
and Get an extra Night Stay At Just 
` 500” or ‘Buy 2 Get 1 Free’ offer of a Public relations

marketer of shirts. Managing public opinion of an 
6. Instant Draws and Assigned organisation is an important task which 
Gift: For example, ‘Scratch a Card’ or can be performed by the marketing 
‘Burst a Cracker’ and instantly win a department. The business needs to 
refrigerator, Car, T-shirt, Computer, communicate effectively to customers, 
with the purchase of a TV. suppliers, and dealers, since they are 

7. Lucky Draw: For example, the offer instrumental in increasing the sales 
and profit. Besides those who come into 

of a bathing soap to win a gold coin 
direct contact with the organisation or 

on lucky draw coupon for free petrol 
on purchase of certain quantity of its products, there are other members 

of the general public whose voice 
petrol from given petrol pump or lucky 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

280

or opinion is equally important. like an emergency to improve public 
This public may be interested in the image. The public relations department 
company and its product and have then has to do something drastic so 
an impact on the business ability to that damage to company’s images 
achieve its objectives. Thus, it becomes is controlled and minimised. They 
imperative to manage public opinion also advise top management to adopt 
and the company’s relation with the certain programmes which will add 
public on a regular basis. Therefore, to their public image and ensure that 
public relations involve a variety of negative publicity does not take place 
programmes designed to promote or at all.

protect a company’s image and its 
Role of Public Relations

individual products in the eyes of the 
public. The role of public relations can 

The business relates with a be discussed with respect to the 
number of groups including suppliers, functions which the department 
shareholders, intermediaries, activist performs. Public relations itself is an 
groups, and the government. For important tool in the hands of the 
example, active support of middlemen marketing department, which can be 
is needed if the firm wants to survive used to the advantage of the business. 
in a competitive selling environment. The public relations department 
Similarly, consumer activist groups performs five functions:
need to be satisfied because they can 1. Publicity: Publicity is similar 
impose restriction on the sales of the to advertising, in the sense 
firm’s products directly by urging that it is a non-personal form 
customers to refrain from buying them of communication. However, as 
or through the imposition of laws. Most against advertising it is a non-
organisations, business or otherwise paid form of communication. 
nowadays, have a separate department Publicity generally takes place 
to manage public relations. They may when favourable news is presented 
also utilize the services of any outside in the mass media about a 
public relations agency. product or service. For example, 

Their main task is to disseminate if a manufacturer achieves a 
information and build goodwill about breakthrough by developing a 
the business. Concrete steps are to be car engine, which runs on water 
taken to monitor the attitude of the instead of petrol, and this news 
general public and generate positive is covered by television or radio 
publicity. They are especially useful or newspapers in the form of a 
when there is negative publicity about news item. It would be termed 
the company or its products. At that as publicity because the engine 
time, the situation has to be tackled manufacturer would benefit from 

Reprint 2025-26



MARkETING

281

such dissemination of information rely on these materials to reach 
about its achievement by the media and influence their target markets. 
but would not bear any cost for Speeches by the company’s 
the same. Thus, the two important executives at a meeting of trade 
features of publicity are that: associations or trade fairs can 

(i) Publicity is an unpaid form of really boost the company’s image. 
communication. It does not involve even interviews with TV channels 
any direct expenditure by the and responding to queries from the 
marketing firm; and media go a long way in promoting 

(ii) There is no identified sponsor for public relations.
the communication as the message 4. Lobbying: The organisation has 
goes as a news item. to deal with government officials 
In publicity, as the information and different ministers in charge of 

is disseminated by an independent corporate affairs, industry, finance 
source, e.g., the press in the form of with respect to policies relating 
news stories and features, the message to business and the economy. 
has more credibility than if that comes The government also seeks to 
as a sponsored message in advertising. maintain a healthy relationship 
2. Press release: Information about with associations of commerce 

the organisation needs to be and industry and solicits the 
presented in a positive manner opinion of major stakeholders while 
in the press. Generating news formulating industrial, telecom, 
requires skill in developing and taxation policies, etc. The public 
researching a story and getting the relations department then has to 
media to accept press releases is a be really proactive in promoting 
difficult task. The public relations or decoding regulations that affect 
department is in contact with the them.
media to present true facts and a 5. C o u n s e l l i n g :  T h e  p u b l i c 
correct picture about the company. relations department advises the 
Otherwise news can get distorted management on general issues 
if taken from other sources. which affect the public and the 

3. Corporate communication : position the company would like 
The image of the organisation to the take on a particular issue. 
needs to be promoted through The company can build goodwill 
communicating with the public by contributing money and time to 
and the employees within the certain causes like environment, 
organisation. This is usually done wildlife, children’s rights, education, 
with the help of newsletter, annual etc. Such cause-related activities 
reports, brochures, articles and help in promoting public relations 
audio-visual materials. Companies and building goodwill.

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

282

The major differences between advertising and personal selling are as follows:

Difference between Advertising and Personal Selling

S.  Advertising Personal Selling
No.

 1. Advertising is an impersonal form of Personal selling is a personal form of 
communication. communication.

 2. Advertising involves transmission of In personal selling, the sales talk is 
standardised messages, i.e., same adjusted keeping view customer’s 
message is sent to all the customers background and needs.
in a market segment.

 3. Advertising is inflexible as the message Personal selling is highly flexible. as 
can’ t be adjusted to the needs of the the message can be adjusted.
buyer.

 4. It reaches masses, i.e., a large number Only a limited number of people can 
of people can be approached. be contacted because of time and cost 

considerations.

 5. In advertising the cost per person The cost per person is quite high in 
reached is very low. the case of personal selling.

 6. Advertising can cover the market in a Personal selling efforts take a lot of 
short time. time to cover the entire market.

 7. Advertising makes use of mass media Personal selling makes use of sales 
such television, radio, newspaper, and staff, which has limited reach.
magazines.

 8. Advertising lacks direct feedback. Personal selling provides direct and 
Marketing research efforts are needed immediate feed back. Sales persons 
to judge customers’ reactions to come to know about the customers’ 
advertising. reactions immediately.

 9. Advertising is more useful in creating Personal selling plays important role 
and building interest of the consumers at the awareness stage of decision 
in the firms products. making. 

 10. Advertising is more useful in marketing Personal selling is more helpful in 
to the ultimate consumer’s who are selling products to the industrial 
large in numbers. buyers or to imtermediaries such as 

dealers and retailers who are relatively 
few in numbers.

Reprint 2025-26



Marketing

283

in addition, maintaining good (c) Stimulates sales force: it becomes 
public relations also helps in achieving easier for the sales force to deal 
the following marketing objectives: with the retailers and convince 
(a) Building awareness :  Public dealers if they have already heard 

relations department can place about the product in the news 
stories and dramatise the product before it is launched. retailers 
in the media. this will build and dealers also feel it is easier 
marketplace excitement before to sell the product to the ultimate 
the product reaches the market consumer.
or  media advert is ing takes (d) Lowers  promot ion  costs : 
place. this usually creates a Maintaining good public relations 
favourable impression on the costs much less than advertising 
target customer. and direct mail. However, it 

(b) Building credibility: if news about requires a lot of communication 

a product comes in the media and interpersonal  ski l ls  to 

whether print or electronic it always convince the media to give space 

lends credibility and people believe or time for the organisation and 

in the product since it is in the news. its product.

Key Terms

Marketing trade Mark  Labelling  
Marketing Management Marketing Mix advertising  
Channels of Distribution Physical Distribution Publicity  
Consumer Product Sales Promotion Promotion Mix 
Convenience Product Shopping Product Personal Selling 
Public relations Brand   

SUMMARY

in the traditional sense, the term ‘market’ refers to the place where buyers 
and sellers gather to enter into transactions involving the exchange of goods 
and services. But in modern marketing sense, it refers to a set of actual and 
potential buyers of a product or service.

Marketing: the term marketing has been described as performance of business 
activities that direct the flow of goods and services from producers to consumers. 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

284

Marketing is not merely a post-production activity. It includes many activities 
that are performed even before goods are actually produced and continue even 
after the goods have been sold.

Functions of Marketing: The important functions of marketing include 
Gathering and Analysing Market Information, Marketing Planning, Product 
Designing and Development, Standardisation and Grading, Packaging and 
Labelling, Branding, Customer Support Services, Pricing of Products, Promotion, 
Physical distribution, Transportation, Storage or Warehousing.

Role of Marketing: By adopting marketing orientation, an organisation whether 
profit making or non-profit making, can achieve its goals in the most effective 
manner. Also marketing acts as a catalyst in the economic development of a 
country and helps in raising the standards of living of people.

Marketing Mix: is a set of marketing tools that the firm uses to pursue its 
marketing objectives in a target market. The variables or elements of marketing 
mix have been classified in to four categories, popularly known as four Ps 
of marketing viz., Product, Price, Place and Promotion. These elements are 
combined to create an offer.

Product In common parlance, the word ‘product’, is used to refer only to the 
physical or tangible attributes of a product. In marketing, product is a mixture 
of tangible and intangible attributes, which are capable of being exchanged for a 
value, with ability to satisfy customer needs. It is anything that can be offered to 
a market to satisfy a want or need. Products may broadly be classified into two 
categories—industrial products and consumers’ products. Products, which are 
purchased, by the ultimate consumers or users for satisfying their personal needs 
and desires are referred to as consumer products. On the basis of shopping efforts 
involved, the products are classified as Convenience Product, Shopping Products 
and Speciality Products. On the basis of their durability, consumer products have 
been classified into categories—Durable, Non-durable, and Services.
Those activities, benefits or satisfactions, which are offered for sale, e.g., dry 
cleaning, watch repairs, hair cutting, are called services.
Industrial products are those products, which are used as inputs in producing 
other products. These are broadly classified in to (i) Materials and Parts, 
(ii) Capital Items, and (iii) Supplies and Business Services.

Packaging: The act of designing and producing the container or wrapper 
of a product is referred as packaging. There can be three different levels of 
packaging viz., Primary package, Secondary packaged, Transport package. 

Reprint 2025-26



MARkETING

285

Packaging performs a number of functions in the marketing of goods. Some 
of the important functions, include Product identification; Product protection; 
Facilitating the use of the product and Promotion of goods and services.

Labelling: A simple looking but important task in the marketing of goods 
relates to designing the label to be put on the package. The label may vary 
from a simple tag attached to the product to complex graphics that are part 
of the package. The most important functions of labels include i) describing 
the product ii) help in identifying the product or brand; iii) help in grading the 
products into different categories; and aids in promotion of the products.

Pricing: Price may be defined as the amount of money paid by a buyer or 
received by a seller in consideration of the purchase of a product or service. 
Generally, if the price of a product is increased, its demand comes down, and 
vice-versa. Pricing is considered to be an effective competitive weapon. It is also 
the single most important factor affecting the revenue and profits of a firm.
The factors affecting price determination are (i) Product Cost (ii) The Utility 
and Demand (iii) Competition (iv) Government and Legal regulations and (v) 
Marketing Methods Used.

Physical Distribution: There are two important decisions relating to this aspect- 
one regarding physical movement of goods and two, regarding the channels. 
Physical Distribution covers all the activities required to physically move 
goods from manufacturers to the customers. The main component of physical 
distribution are (i) Order Processing; (ii) Transportation; (iii) Warehousing; and 
(iv). Inventory Control: Just-in-Time-Inventory.

Promotion: Promotion refers to the use of communication with the twin 
objective of informing potential customers about a product and persuading 
them to buy it. There are four major tools, or elements of promotion mix, 
which are — (i) Advertising, (ii) Personal Selling, (iii) Sales Promotion, and (iv) 
Publicity. These tools are used in different combinations to achieve the goals 
of promotion.

Advertising is the most commonly used tool of promotion. It is an impersonal 
form of communication, which is paid for by the marketers (Sponsors) to 
promote some goods or service. The merits of advertising, as a medium of 
communication, include (i) Mass reach; (ii) Enhancing customer satisfaction 
and confidence; (iii) Expressiveness; and (iv) Economy.
The limitations of advertising are that it is (i) less forceful (ii) lacks Feedback (iii) 
inflexibility (iv) low effectiveness. The most common Objections to Advertising 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

286

are that it (i) adds to cost; (ii) undermines social Values; (iii) confuses the buyers; 
and (iv) encourages sale of Inferior Products.
Most of the criticisms against advertising are not fully true. Advertising is 
therefore considered an essential function of marketing.

Personal selling involves oral presentation of message in the form of 
conversation with one or more prospective customers for the purpose of making 
sales. Personal Selling plays important role for the business persons as well 
as for the society.

Sales Promotion refers to short-term incentives, which are designed to 
encourage the buyers to make immediate purchase of a product service. 
These include promotional efforts other than advertising, personal selling 
and publicity, used by a company to boost its sales. Commonly used Sales 
Promotion Activities include rebate, Discount, refunds, Product Combinations, 
Quantity Gift, Instant Draws and Assigned Gift, Lucky Draw, Usable Benefit, 
Full Finance @ 0%, sampling, and contests.

Publicity is similar to advertising, in the sense that it is a non-personal form 
of communication. However, as against advertising it is a non-paid form 
of communication. In publicity, as the information is disseminated by an 
independent source. However, an important limitation of publicity is that as a 
medium of promotion, it is not within the control of a marketing firm.

Public Relations: It is about managing organisations image in the eyes of all 
stake holders. It has five components publicity, public relations, corporate 
communication, lobbying and counselling.

EXERCISES

Very Short Answer Type

1. State any two advantages of branding to marketers of goods and services?

2. How does branding help in differential pricing?

3. What is the societal concept of marketing?

4. Enlist the advantages of packaging of consumer products.

5. List five shopping products purchased by you or your family during the 
last few months.

Reprint 2025-26



MArkETINg

287

6. A marketer of colour TV having 20% of the current market share of the 
country aims at enhancing the market share to 50 per cent in next three 
years. For achieving this objective he specified an action programme. Name 
the function of marketing being discussed above. (Ans. Marketing planning.)

Short Answer Type

1. What is marketing? What functions does it perform in the process of 
exchange of goods and services? Explain.

2. Distinguish between the product concept and production concept of 
marketing.

3. Product is a bundle of utilities. Explain.

4. What are industrial products? How are they different from consumer 
products? Explain.

5. Distinguish between convenience product and shopping product.

6. Describe the functions of labeling in the marketing of products.

7. Discuss the role of intermediaries in the distribution of consumer 
non-durable products.

8. Define advertising? What are its main features? Explain.
9. Discuss the role of ‘sales promotion’ as an element of promotion mix.

10. As the marketing manager of a big hotel located at an important  
tourist destination, what societal concerns would be faced by you and 
what steps would you plan to take care of these concerns? Discuss.

11. What information is generally placed on the package of a food product? 
Design a label for one of the food products of your choice.

12. For buyers of consumer durable products, what ‘customer care services’ 
would you plan as a manager of a firm marketing new brand of motorcycle. 
Discuss.

Long Answer Type

1. What is marketing concept? How does it help in the effective marketing 
ofgoods and services.

2. What is marketing mix? What are its main elements? Explain.

3. How does branding help in creating product differentiation? Does it help 
in marketing of goods and services? Explain.

4. What are the factors affecting determination of the price of a product or 
service? Explain.

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

288

5. Explain the major activities involved in the physical distribution of 
products.

6. ‘Expenditure on advertising is a social waste.’ Do you agree? Discuss.

7. Distinguish between advertising and personal selling.

8. Explain the factors determining the choice of channel of distribution.

Project Work

Identify a product or service for a new launch for attracting potential 
consumers for your product. Prepare a project file to—

(a) Advertise the product or service selected.

(b) Write a Press Release for the launch of new product or service.

(c) Publicity of your product as a PR tool.

Reprint 2025-26

##11##

chapter 
11

Consumer ProteCtion

Banks resPonsiBle for failed 
transaCtions and no Cash in atms 

In a landmark consumer forum judgement, 

Learning Objectives now, if you do not get money from ATMs, it 
would be considered as deficiency of services 
on part of bank,.On May 4, 2017, a petition in 

After studying this  the Consumer Forum in Raipur was filed where 
chapter, you should be the complainant submitted photos and video 
able to: recording of three failed ATM transactions due 

to non-availability of cash bank’s ATMs. 

¾ In front of the forum, the bank argued 
 state the importance of that ATM runs with Internet connectivity, so 

consumer protection; at the time when users use ATM, he/she is 
not directly the bank client. Hence, if the said 
money not withdrawn from the ATM, then it 

¾ briefly explain legal cannot be termed as a deficiency in service.
framework for consumer The forum rejected the bank’s logic 
protection in India; completely. The petitioner has presented 

photo and video recording at the time of 
withdrawal as evidence in front of forum. 

¾ descr ibe consumer Forum acknowledged that the consumers at 
rights in India; various times go to ATM to withdrawn money 

every time the message of ‘cash not available’ 
is the lack in service.

¾ briefly describe the ways The forum accepted the petition. After 

and means of consumer hearing the arguments of both the parties, the 
forum ordered that if the bank will not provide 

protection; and ATM service to the customer, then it will be 
considered a reduction in service Consumer 
Forum imposed a fine of Rs. 2,500 on the bank 
including Rs1,500 as compensation for mental 
harassment and Rs1,000 for legal expenses 
for non-availability of cash in its ATMs as 
deficiency in bank services. 

Source:http://dailypost.in/news/
consumer-forum-fines-sbi-ignoring-

customers/, 2017. 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

290

IntroductIon cheated and is exposed to many risks 
and health problems. 

Each one of us is a consumer in one 
Can business afford to ignore the 

way or another. It is important for us 
interests of consumers? The market 

to be an aware and informed consumer 
of goods and services available to us in forces have changed from a seller 

the market.The above case is just one market i.e., the earlier approach of 

of the examples of the many problems caveat emptor which means Let the 

that consumers face in the purchase, buyer beware, to a consumer market 

use and consumption of goods and i.e., caveat venditor which implies 

services. But, very few consumers are Let the seller beware. A consumer 
aware of their rights given to them by is said to be a KING in the free 
the Consumer Protection Act 2019. market economy. Hence, consumer 
The Consumer Protection Act 2019 protection has significance for both 
has replaced the Act 1986 and seeks consumers and business alike. Under 
to widen its scope in addressing the Consumer Protection Act 2019, the 
consumer concerns. Government of India has conferred a 

Have you ever thought what legal protection to safeguard interests 
would be the plight of consumers if of a consumer. 
adequate protection is not provided 
to them? With growing competition Importance of consumer protectIon

and in an attempt to increase 
The concept of consumer protection 

their sales and market share, 
is to safeguard the interests of the 

manufacturers, sellers and service-
consumers. It adopts measures to 

providers may be tempted to engage 
protect consumers from unethical 

in unscrupulous, exploitative and 
malpractices by businesses and 

unfair trade practices like defective 
provide a swift redressal of their 

and unsafe products, adulteration, 
false and misleading advertising, grievances with regard to:

hoarding, black-marketing, etc. 1. Sale of adulterated goods such as 
This means that a consumer might adding inferior substances to the 
be exposed to risks due to unsafe product being sold.
products, might suffer from bad 2. Sale of counterfeit goods such as 
health due to adulterated food selling a product of lesser value 
products, might be cheated because than the real product.
of misleading advertisements or sale 
of spurious products, might have 3. Sale of sub-standard goods such 

to pay a higher price when sellers as the sale of products that do 

engage in overpricing, hoarding or not meet the prescribed quality 

black-marketing, etc. As a result, standards.

consumer becomes unsafe, feels 4. Sale of duplicate goods.

Reprint 2025-26



cONSUMER pROTEcTION

291

5. Use of malfunctioning weights and from various types of exploitation and 
measures that lead to underweight should complain about it. Consumer 
of products. protection has a wide scope. It not only 

6. Black marketing and hoarding that includes educating consumers about 

eventually leads to scarcity of the their rights and responsibilities, but 

product and well as a rise in the also helps in getting their grievances 

price of the same. redressed. It not only requires a judicial 
machinery for protecting the interests 

7. Overcharging a product, i.e., 
of consumers but also requires the 

charging a product above its 
consumers to be united and form 

Maximum Retail Price.
themselves into consumer associations 

8. Supplying of defective goods. for protection and promotion of their 
9. Advertisements that are interests. 

misleading, i.e., advertisements 
that falsely claim a product or a From consumers’ point of view
service to be shown as superior The importance of consumer protection 
quality, grade or standard when from the consumers’ point of view can 
not in real. be understood from the following 

10. Supply of inferior services, i.e., points:
quality of service lesser than the  (i) Consumer Ignorance: In the 
condition agreed. light of widespread ignorance 

of consumers about their rights 
need for consumer Protection and reliefs available to them, it 

The need for consumer protection arises becomes necessary to educate 

from the need to protect consumers from them about the same so as to 
the loss or injury or other prevailing achieve consumer awareness.
malpractices and to ensure:  (ii) Unorganised Consumers: 

1. Physical safety of a consumer. Consumers need to be organised 

2. Access to information. in the form of  consumer 
organisations which would 

3. Corporate Social Responsibility 
to provide quality and quantity of take care of their interests. 

goods at fair prices. Though, in India, we do have 

4. Consumer satisfaction. consumer organisations which 
are working in this direction, 

5. Social justice and  Trusteeship
adequate protection is required 

6. Survival and the Growth of to be given to consumers till 
businesses.

these organisations become 
powerful enough to protect 

That is why we as an informed consumer and promote the interests of 
have to wake up and save our self consumers.

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

292

Compensation for impurities in cold drinks

 (iii) Widespread Exploitation of important because of the following 
Consumers: Consumers might reasons:
be exploited by unscrupulous,  (i) L o n g - t e rm  I n t e r e s t  o f 
exploitative and unfair trade B u s i n e s s :  E n l i g h t e n e d 
practices like defective and businesses realise that it is 
unsafe products, adulteration, in their long-term interest to 
false and misleading advertising, satisfy their customers. Satisfied 
hoarding, black-marketing, etc. customers not only lead to 
Consumers need protection repeat sales but also provide 
against such malpractices of the good feedback to prospective 
sellers. customers and thus, help in 

increasing the customer-base of 
From the point of view of Business business. Thus, business firms 
A business must also lay emphasis should aim at long-term profit 
on protecting the consumers and maximisation through customer 
adequately satisfying them. This is satisfaction.

Reprint 2025-26



cONSUMER pROTEcTION

293

 (ii) Business uses Society’s it is advisable that business 
R e s o u r c e s :  B u s i n e s s organisations voluntarily resort 
organisations use resources to such practices where the 
which belong to the society. customers’ needs and interests 
They, thus, have a responsibility will well be taken care of.
to supply such products and 
render such services which are the consumer protectIon act, 2019

in public interest and would 
The Consumer protection Act 2019 

not impair public confidence in 
seeks to protect and promote the 

them.
consumers’ interest through speedy 

 (iii) Social Responsibility:  A and inexpensive redressal of their 
b u s i n e s s  h a s  s o c i a l grievances. It extends to the whole of 
responsibilities towards various India. It is applicable to all types of 
interest groups. Business businesses whether a manufacturer 
organisations make money by or a trader and whether supplying 
selling goods and providing goods or providing servicesincluding 
services to consumers. Thus, e-commerce firms. The Act confers 
consumers form an important certain rights to consumers with a view 
group among the many stake- to empowering them and to protect 
holders of business and like their interests.
other stakeholders, their interest 
has to be well taken care of. Who Is a consumer?

 (iv) Moral Justification: It is the A ‘consumer’ is generally understood 
moral duty of any business to as a person who uses or consumes 
take care of consumer’s interest goods or avails of any service. Under 
and avoid any form of their the Consumer Protection Act 2019, 
exploitation. Thus, a business a consumer is a person who buys 
must avoid unscrupulous, any goods or avails services for a 
exploitative and unfair trade consideration, which has been paid 
practices like defective and or promised, or partly paid and partly 
unsafe products, adulteration, promised, or under any scheme of 
false and misleading advertising, deferred payment. It includes any 
hoarding, black marketing, etc. user of such goods or beneficiary of 

 (v) Government Intervention: A services if such use is made with the 
business engaging in any form approval of the buyer. It applies to 
of exploitative trade practices both offline and online transactions 
would inv i te  government through electronic means or by 
intervention or action. This teleshopping or direct selling or 
can impair and tarnish the multilevel marketing. However, any 
image of the company. Thus, person who obtains goods or avails 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

294

Protection against malpractices and exploitation

services for resale or commercial consumer rIghts

purpose is nottreated as a consumer 
and is outside the scope of Consumer The Consumer Protection Act 2019 

Protection Act 2019. provides for six rights of consumers. 

Terms & Definitions

1. Complaint: Any allegation in writing made by the complainant for obtaining relief 
w.r.t restrictive trade practice, defect in goods or deficiency in services provided, 
overcharging of price or offer of goods or service injurious to life and safety. 

2. Complainant: means one or more consumers, or any voluntary consumer 
association, central or state government or the central authority or a legal heir 
or legal representative or a parent or legal representative in case of a minor. 

3. Spurious goods: Goods that are falsely claimed to be genuine. 

4. Unfair trade practice: A trade practice for the purpose of promoting sale, use or 
supply of any goods or service falsely represents its quality, standard, quantity, 
composition, style or model. 

Reprint 2025-26



cONSUMER pROTEcTION

295

5. Restrictive trade practice: A trade practice which manipulates price or affect the 
flow of supplies in the market relating to goods and services in such a manner 
that an unjustified cost is imposed on the consumer. 

6. Defect: Any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in quality, nature 
and manner of performance in relation to goods or a product. 

7. Deficiency: Any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in quality, 
nature and manner of performance in relation to in relation to any service and 
includes act of negligence or omission or commission or withholding relevant 
information which causes loss or injury to the consumer. 

8. Injury: Any harm illegally caused to any person in body, mind or property. 

9. Product: Any article or goods or substance or raw material or any extended cycle 
of such product either in gaseous , liquid or solid state possessing intrinsic 
value capable of delivery either as assembled or a component produced or 
manufactured to trade. It does not include human tissues, blood, blood products 
and organs. 

10. Product Seller: Any person in the course of business imports, sells, distributes, 
leases, installs, prepares, labels, markets, repairs, maintains or otherwise 
involved in placing the product for commercial use or a service provider.  

11. Product Liability: Responsibility of a product manufacturer or seller of any 
product or service to compensate for any harm caused to a consumer by defective 
product manufactured or sold or by deficiency in services.

These rights include the following: complete information about 

 1. Right to Safety: The consumer the product he intends to buy 

has a right to be protected including its ingredients, date 

against goods and services which of manufacture, price, quantity, 

are hazardous to life, health directions for use, etc. It is 
because of this reason that the 

and property. For example, 
legal framework in India requires 

electrical appliances which are 
the manufactures to provide such 

manufactured with substandard 
information on the package and 

products or do not conform to 
label of the product.

the safety norms might cause 
serious injury. Thus, consumers  3. Right to be assured:  The 

are educated that they should consumer has the freedom to 

use electrical appliances which access variety of products at 

are ISI marked as this would be competitive prices. This implies 

an assurance of such products that the marketers should offer a 

meeting quality specifications. wide variety of products in terms 
of quality, brand, prices, size, etc. 

 2. Right to be informed: The and allow the consumer to make 
consumer has a right to have a choice from amongst these.

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

296

 4. Right to be heard: The consumer consumer responsIbIlItIes

has a right to file a complaint 
and to be heard in case of The Consumer Protect ion Act 

dissatisfaction with a good or empowers the consumer to fight 

a service. It is because of this against any unscrupulous, exploitative 

reason that many enlightened and unfair, restrictive trade practices 

business firms have set up adopted by sellers. Consumer rights, 

their own consumer service and by themselves, cannot be effective in 
achieving the objective of consumer 

grievance cells. Many consumer 
protection. Consumer protection can, 

organisations are also working 
in effect, be achieved only when the 

towards this direction and helping 
consumers also understand their 

consumers in redressal of their 
responsibilities. 

grievances.
A consumer should keep in mind 

 5. Right to seek redressal: The 
the following responsibilities while 

consumer has a right to get relief 
purchasing, using and consuming 

against unfair trade practice 
goods and services —

of restrictive trade practices or 
unscrupulous exploitation in  (i) Be aware about various goods 

and services available in the 
case the product or a service 

market so that an intelligent and 
falls short of his expectations. 

wise choice can be made.
The Consumer Protection Act 
2019 provides for redressal to the  (ii) Buy only standardised goods as 

consumers including replacement they provide quality assurance. 

of the product, removal of defect Thus, look for ISI mark on 

in the product, compensation paid electrical goods, FPO mark on 

for any loss or injury suffered by food products, Hallmark on 

the consumer, etc. jewelry, etc.

 6. Right to Consumer Education:  (iii) Learn about the risks associated 

The consumer has a right to with products and services, follow 
manufacturer’s instructions and 

acquire knowledge and to be 
use the products safely.

a  wel l  informed consumer 
throughout life. He should be  (iv) Read labels carefully so as to 

aware about his rights and the have information about prices, 

reliefs available to him in case net weight, manufacturing and 

of a product or service falling expiry dates, etc.

short of his expectations. Many  (v) Assert yourself to ensure that 
consumer organisations and you get a fair deal.
some enlightened businesses are  (vi) Be honest in your dealings. 
taking an active part in educating Choose only from legal goods 
consumers in this respect. and services and discourage 

Reprint 2025-26



cONSUMER pROTEcTION

297

unscrupulous practices like Ways and means of consumer 
black-marketing, hoarding, etc. protectIon

 (vii) Ask for a cash memo on purchase 
A consumers’ awareness about their 

of goods or services. This would 
rights and responsibilities is just one 

serve as a proof of the purchase 
of the ways in which the objective of 

made.
consumer protection can be achieved. 

 (viii) File a complaint in an appropriate There are other ways in which this 
consumer forum in case of a objective may be achieved. 
shortcoming in the quality of 

 1. Self-regulation by Business: 
goods purchased or services 

Socially responsible firms follow 
availed. Do not fail to take an 

ethical standards and practices in 
action even when the amount 

dealing with their customers Good 
involved is small.

and ethical practices encourage 
 (ix) Form consumer societies which firms to realise that it is in their 

would play an active part in long-term interest to serve the 
educating consumers and customers in a rightful manner. 
safeguarding their interests. Many firms have set up their 

 (x) Respect the environment. Avoid customer service and grievance 
waste, littering and contributing cells to redress the problems and 
to pollution. grievances of their consumers.

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

298

 2. Business Associations: The enable a consumer to safeguard 
associations of trade, commerce his interests. In this regard, the 
and business like Federation of Department of Consumer Affairs, 
Indian Chambers of Commerce of GOI, has been undertaking 
India (FICCI) and Confederation of Jago Grahak Jago campaign, 
Indian Industries (CII) have laid for generating awareness among 
down their code of conduct which consumers. 
lay down for their members the  4. Consumer Organisations: 
guidelines in their dealings with Consumer organisations play 
the customers. an important role in educating 

 3. Consumer  Awareness :  A consumers about their rights and 
consumer, who is well-informed providing protection to them. These 

about his rights and the reliefs organisations can force business 

available to him, would be in a firms to avoid malpractices and 
position to raise his voice against exploitation of consumers.

any unfair trade practices or  5. Government: The government 
unscrupulous exploitation. In can protect the interests of the 
addition to this, an understanding consumers by enacting various 
of his responsibilities would also measures. For example, the GOI 

Mark of Bureau of Indian 
Standards

Food Process Order Agmark

BIS Hallmark Eco-mark

Marks indicating quality in different products

Reprint 2025-26



CONSUMER PROTECTION

299

has set up a toll-free national RedRessal agencies UndeR The 
consumer Helpline Number consUmeR PRoTecTion acT

1800114000 for this purpose. 
The legal framework in India For the redressal of consumer 
encompasses various legislations grievances, the Consumer Protection 
which provide protection to Act 2019 provides for setting up 
consumers. The most important of of a three-tier enforcement machinery 
these regulations is the Consumer at the District, State, and the 
Protection Act, 2019. The Act National levels.
provides for a central authority As per the Consumer Protection 
to regulate matters relating to Rules 2021, the jurisdiction of District 
violation of rights of consumers, Commission, State Commission and 
unfair trade practices and false or the National Commission is as follow:
misleading advertisements which  1. District Commission:District 
are prejudicial to the interests commission has a jurisdiction 
of consumers.  This is known to entertain complaints where 
as Central Consumer Protection value of goods or services paid 
Authority (CCPA). A three-tier as consideration does not exceed 
machinery at the district, state fifty lakh rupees. Either on the 
and national levels for redressal first hearing or at any later stage, 
of consumer grievances. it appears to district commission 

Consumer Awareness

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

300

that there exists elements of consideration that exceeds rupees 
se t t l ement  which  may  be fifty lakh but does not exceed 
acceptable to the parties, it may two crore. If any of the parties 
direct them to give their consent are not satisfied by the order of 
for settlement of dispute through State Commission can appeal 
mediation within five days. In case against such order to the National 
the parties agree for settlement Commission within a period of 
by mediation and give written thirty days of such order. 
consent, the district commission  3. National Commission:  The 
refers the matter for mediation Nat iona l  Commiss ion  has 
and the provisions relating to territorial jurisdiction over 
mediation shall apply. However, in the whole country. National 
the event of failure of settlement Commission has a jurisdiction 
by mediation proceeds with the to entertain complaints where 
complaint. If the complaint alleges value of goods or services paid as 
defect in goods which cannot consideration exceeds two crores 
be determined without proper of rupees. If any of the parties 
analysis or test of goods, the are not satisfied by the order of 
commission obtains the sample National Commission can appeal 
of goods, seal it and refer to the against such order to the Supreme 
appropriate authority for analysis. Court of India within a period of 
In case of services, the dispute thirty days of such order. 
is settled based on the basis of 
evidence brought to its notice Relief Available
by the complainant and can ask Where District or State or National 
for any required information Commission is satisfied about defect 
document or records from the in goods, or deficiency in services on 
service provider for settlement. any unfair trade practice or claim for 

If any of the parties are compensation under product liability, 
not satisfied by the order of issues an order: 
District Commission can appeal  (i) To remove the defect in goods or 
against such order to the State deficiency in service.
Commission on the grounds of 

 (ii) To replace the defective product 
facts or law within a period of forty 
five days from the date of order. with a new one, free from any 

defect.
 2. S ta te  Commiss ion :  I t  i s 

 (iii) To refund the price paid for the 
established by the respective 

product, or the charges paid for 
state government and ordinarily 

the service.
function at the state capital. State 
Commission has a jurisdiction to  (iv) To pay a reasonable amount of 

entertain complaints where value compensation for any loss or 

of goods and services paid as injury suffered by the consumer 

Reprint 2025-26



CONSUMER PROTECTION

301

due to the negligence of the perform several functions for the 
opposite party. protection and promotion of interest 

 (v) To pay punitive damages in of consumers. These include:
are not satisfied by the order of appropriate circumstances.  (i) Educating the general public 

 (vi) To discontinue the unfair/ about consumer rights by 

restrictive trade practice and not organising training programmes, 

to repeat it in the future. seminars and workshops.

 (vii) Not to offer hazardous goods for  (ii) Publishing periodicals and 

sale. other publications to impart 
knowledge about consumer 

 (viii) To withdraw the hazardous 
problems, legal reporting, reliefs 

goods from sale.
available and other matters of 

 (ix) To cease manufacture of interest.
hazardous goods and to desist 

 (iii) Carrying out comparative 
from offering hazardous services.

testing of consumer products 
 (x) Compensate for any loss or injury in accredited laboratories to test 

suffered by consumer under 
are not satisfied by the order of relative qualities of competing 

product liability action and brands and publishing the 
withdraw hazardous products test results for the benefit of 
from being offered for sale etc. consumers.

However, every order of a district  (iv) Encouraging consumers to 
commission, the state commission or strongly protest and take an 
the national commission is deemed action against unscrupulous, 
final if no appeal for such order is exploitative and unfair trade 
made by any of the parties involved 

Commission is satisfied about defect practices of sellers. 
in dispute. 

in goods, or deficiency in services on  (v) Providing legal assistance to 
Role of Consumer Organisations consumers by way of providing 
And Ngos aid, legal advice etc. in seeking 

I n  I n d i a ,  s e v e r a l  c o n s u m e r legal remedy.

organisations and non-governmental  (vi) Filing complaints in appropriate 
organisations (NGOs) have been set consumer courts on behalf of the 

deficiency in service.
up for the protection and promotion consumers.
of  consumers ’  interests.  Non-  (vii) Taking an initiative in filing 
governmental organisations are non- cases in consumer courts in the 
profit organisations which aim at interest of the general public, 
promoting the welfare of people. They not for any individual.
have a constitution of their own and  (viii) Consumer unity and Trust 
are free from government interference. Society (CuTS), Jaipur.
Consumer organisations and NGOs 

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

302

Key TeRms 

Consumer protection Consumer Rights Consumer Responsibilities

Redressal mechanism Mediation

SUMMARY

Importance of Consumer Protection: From the point of consumers, consumer 
protection is important because consumers are ignorant, unorganised and 
exploited by sellers. Consumer Protection is also important for a business 
because (i) It is in the long-term interest of business, (ii) Business uses 
society’s resources, (iii) It is a social responsibility of business, (iv)It has moral 
justification, (v) It avoids government intervention in the functioning of business.
Legal Protection to Consumers: The Indian legal framework consists of a 
number of legislations which provide protection to consumers. These include 
(i) The Consumer protection Act, 1986, (ii) The Indian Contract Act, 1872, (iii) 
The Sale of Goods Act, 1930, (iv) The essential Commodities Act,1955, (v) The 
Agricultural produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937, (vi) The prevention of 
Food Adulteration Act, 1954, (vii) The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 
1976, (viii) The Trade Marks Act, 1999, (ix) The Competition Act, 2002,(x) The 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986.

Consumer Rights: The Consumer Protection Act, 1986, provides for six 
consumer rights. These are: (i) Right to safety, (ii) Right to be informed,  (iii) 
Right to choose, (iv) Right to be heard, (v) Right to seek redressal,(vi) Right to 
consumer education.

Consumer Responsibilities: In addition to exercising his rights, a consumer 
should also keep in mind his responsibilities while purchasing, using and 
consuming goods and services.

Ways and Means of Consumer Protection: There are various ways in which 
the objective of consumer protection can be achieved. These Include (i) Self 
regulation by business, (ii) Business associations, (iii) Consumer awareness, 
(iv)Consumer organisations, (v) Government.

Redressal Agencies under the Consumer Protection Act: The Consumer 
Protection Act provides for setting up of a three-tier enforcement machinery at 
the District, State, and the National levels. They are referred to as the ‘District 
Forum’, ‘State Commission’, and the ‘National Commission’. There are various 
reliefs available to a consumer under the Act. The appropriate consumer court 

Reprint 2025-26



CONSUMER PROTECTION

303

may pass an order for removal of defect in goods, replace a defective product, 
refund the price of the product, pay compensation for the loss suffered, etc.

Consumer Organisations and NGOs: In India, several consumer organisations 
and non-governmental organisations (nGOs) are playing an active role in 
protection and promotion of consumers’ interests.

EXERCISES

Very Short Answer Type

 1. Under which consumer right does a business firm set up consumer 
grievance cell?

 2. Which quality certification mark is used for agricultural products?
 3. What is the jurisdiction of cases that can be filed in a State Commission?
 4. State any two relief available to consumers under CPA.
 5. Name the component of product mix that helps the consumer to exercise 

the right to information.

Short Answer Type

 1. Enumerate the various Acts passed by the Government of India which help 
in protection of consumers’ interests.

 2. What are the responsibilities of a consumer?

 3. Who can file a complaint in a consumer court?
 4. FSSAI (Food Safety and Standards Authority of India) has made a proposal 

for hotels and other food outlets to declare the kind of oil/fat used in cooking 
each of the food items on their menus. Name and explain the Consumer 
Right being reinforced by this proposal.

 5. Who is a consumer as per CPA?

Long Answer Type

 1. Explain the importance of consumer protection from the point of view of 
a business.

 2. Explain the rights and responsibilities of consumer?

 3. What are various ways in which the objective of consumer protection can 
be achieved?

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS  STUDIES

304

 4. Explain the redressal mechanism available to consumers under the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019

 5. Explain the role of consumer organisations and NGOs in protecting and 
promoting consumer’s interest.

 6. Mrs. Mathur sent a jacket to a laundry shop in January 2018. The jacket 
was purchased at a price of `4,500. She had previously sent the jacket 
for dry cleaning with Shine Dry Cleaners and the jacket was cleaned well. 
However, she noticed that her jacket had white discoloration marks when 
she collected the jacket this time. On informing the dry cleaner, Mrs. Mathur 
received a letter confirming that discolouration indeed appeared after the 
jacket was dry cleaned. She contacted the dry cleaner multiple times and 
requested for compensation for discoloured jacket but to no avail.

  Upon Consumer court’s intervention, Shine Dry Cleaners agreed to 
compensate Rs. 2,500 to Mrs. Mathur for the discoloured jacket.

(a) Which right was exercised by Mrs. Mathur at the first instance.
(b) Name and explain the right which helped Mrs. Mathur to avail the 

compensation.

(c) State which consumer responsibility has been fulfilled by 
Mrs. Mathur in the above case.

(d) State any other two responsibilities to be assumed by the consumers.

Project work

1. Visit a consumer organisation in your town. List down the various functions 
performed by it.

2. Collect some newspaper cuttings of some consumer cases and the rulings 
given therein.

Reprint 2025-26