Business studies

Part i

PrinciPles and Functions 

oF ManageMent

Textbook for Class XII

Reprint 2025-26



12113 – BuSINeSS StudIeS Part I 
ISBN 81-7450-697-7 

Textbook for Class XII

First Edition   ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

May 2007  Chaitra 1928  No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 

Reprinted mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior 
permission of the publisher.

December 2007, March 2009
 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of 

January 2010, January 2011 trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without 
January 2012, January 2013, the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than 

November 2013, December 2014, that in which it is published.

January 2016, December 2016,  The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, 
Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or 

January 2018, March 2019,
by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.

October 2019, and January 2021  
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION  

Revised Edition  
DIVISION, NCERT

October 2022  Kartika 1944
NCERT Campus

Reprinted  Sri Aurobindo Marg

March 2024 Chaitra 1946 New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708

December 2024 Pausa 1946 108, 100 Feet Road 
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan 

PD 85T HK Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446

CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati

© National Council of Educational Kolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454

Research and Training, 2007, 2022
CWC Complex
Maligaon  
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :0361-2674869   

Publication Team

Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan 
Division  

Chief Editor  : Bijnan Sutar
` 105.00 

Chief Production : Jahan Lal
 

Officer (In charge)
 

 Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar 
 Manager  
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT 
watermark Assistant Editor  : Vijay Kumar
 Assistant Production  : Deepak Kumar 
Published at the Publication Division Officer
by the Secretary, National Council of 
Educational Research and Training, Cover

Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 Shweta Rao

016 and printed at Chandu Press, Layout and Illustrations
469, Patparganj Industrial Estate, Ashwani Tyagi
Delhi–110092 

Reprint 2025-26



Foreword

The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that 
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This 
principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which 
continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the school, 
home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of 
NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to 
discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between 
different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly 
further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in 
the National Policy on Education (1986).
 The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals 
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own 
learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must 
recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new 
knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults. 
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one 
of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored. 
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat 
children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of 
knowledge.
 These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode 
of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour 
in implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of 
teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for 
teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook 
proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than 
a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the 
problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at 
different stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time 
available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour 
by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and 
wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on 
experience.

The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) 
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee 

Reprint 2025-26



iv

responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory 
group in Social Sciences Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor 
for this book, Professor D.P.S. Verma (Retd.) Delhi School of Economics, 
University of Delhi and Dr. G.L. Tayal, Reader, Ramjas College, University of 
Delhi for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed 
to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for 
making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations 
which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material 
and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National 
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and 
Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the 
Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, 
for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed 
to the systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its 
products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable 
us to undertake further revision and refinement.
        Director
New Delhi   National Council of Educational
20 November 2006 Research and Training

Reprint 2025-26



ratIoNalISatIoN of CoNteNt IN the textBookS

In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content 

load on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises 

reducing the content load and providing opportunities for experiential 

learning with creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has 

undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. 

Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across classes 

have been taken into consideration in this exercise.

Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the 

following:

• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in 

the same class

• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same 

subject

• Difficulty level
• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much 

interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through 

self-learning or peer-learning

• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context

This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the 
changes given above.

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26



TexTbook developmenT CommiTTee

ChaIrPerSoN, AdvISory CommIttee for TextBookS IN SoCIal SCIeNCeS at SeNIor 

SeCoNdary level

Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta, 
Kolkata

ChIef AdvISor

D.P.S. Verma, Retired Professor, Department of Commerce, Delhi School 
of Economics, University of Delhi, Delhi.

AdvISor

G.L. Tayal, Reader, Ramjas College, University of Delhi, Delhi.

MemBerS

Anand Saxena, Reader, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya College, University of Delhi.

Davinder K. Vaid, Professor, Department of Education in Social Sciences 
and Humanities, NCERT, New Delhi.

M.M. Goyal, Reader, PG DAV College, University of Delhi.

Narsimha Murthy, Principal, University Post-Graduate College, Subedari, 
Anam Konda, Distt. Warangal, Andhra Pradesh.

Pooja Dasani, PGT (Commerce) Convent of Jesus and Mary, Gol Dakkhana, 
New Delhi.

R.B. Solanki, Principal, B.R. Ambedkar College, University of Delhi.

Ruchi Kakkar, Lecturer, Acharya Narendra Dev College, University of Delhi.

Shruti Bodh Aggarwal, Vice-Principal, Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, 
Kishanganj, Delhi.

Sumati Verma, Reader, Sri Aurobindo College, University of Delhi.

Y.V. Reddy, Reader, Department of Commerce, Goa University, Goa.

memBer CoordINator

Minoo Nandrajog, Reader, Department of Education in Social Sciences 
and Humanities, NCERT, New Delhi.

Reprint 2025-26



noTe To The TeaCher

As you read through this textbook, you will develop an understanding of 
the environment in which a business operates. The textbook discusses 
emerging modes of business in the context of entrepreneurship 
development, ethics in business and corporate social responsibility, small 
scale industries, intellectual property rights, goods and services tax, and 
many other contemporary issues in the conduct of internal and internal 
business scenarios. Due emphasis is laid on entrepreneurship and 
innovation in unorganised sector along with content from corporate world. 
This will enable the learners observant of their immediate surroundings 
and business environment.
 You will find additional reading material, interactive activities, stories 
of innovation and entrepreneurship, etc., as enrichment material for self 
learning. You will find newer e-resources under embedded QR codes 
(accessed via e-pathshala app) at various intervals.
 The textbook is updated in the light of The Companies Act 2013, and 
the content is modified in accordance to new provisions of the Act 2013 
in respective chapters.

aCknowledgemenTs

The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges 
the valuable contributions of the Textbook Development Commitee, which 
took considerable pain in the development and review of manuscript as 
well.
 Thanks are due to Savita Sinha Professor and Head, Department 
of Education in Social Science for her guidance and constant support 
at every stage of the textbook development process. The textbook has 
been reworked and updated at appropriate point of time in the context of 
recent development in business scenario and the Companies Act 2013. 
The contribution of practicing teachers of Business Studies is also duly 
acknowledged for developing e-resourses for QR Codes. 
 The contribution of APC Office, Administration, Publication Division, 
and Secretariat of NCERT are also duly acknowledged for bringing out the 
updated textbook of Business Studies.

Reprint 2025-26



Contents

  Foreword iii

 r ationalisation oF Content in the textbooks  v

Chapter 1 Nature aNd SigNificaNce of MaNageMeNt 1

Chapter 2 PriNciPleS of MaNageMeNt 30

Chapter 3 BuSiNeSS eNviroNMeNt 69

Chapter 4 PlaNNiNg 91

Chapter 5 orgaNiSiNg 109

Chapter 6 StaffiNg 139

Chapter 7 directiNg 169

Chapter 8 coNtrolliNg 201

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26


##1##
NATURE AND SIGNIFICANCE 

OF MANAGEMENT 1
CHAPTER

Management at Tata Steel

Founded in 1868, by Jamsetji Nusserwanji ,Tata the Tata Group L E A R N I N G 

is a global business conglomerate operating in over 100 countries O B J E C T I V E S

across 5 continents. His strong sense of values and spirit of 
innovation and entrepreneurship are a legacy that continues to After studying this 
guide Tata companies till date. He had four goals in life: setting chapter, you should 
up an iron and steel company, a world-class learning institution, a be able to:
unique hotel and a hydro-electric plant. Only the hotel became a 
reality during his lifetime, with the inauguration of the Taj Mahal n Describe the 
Hotel at Colaba waterfront in Mumbai on 3 December 1903 at characteristics of 
the cost of 11 million (worth 11 billion in 2015 prices). At that management and 
time it was the only hotel in India to have electricity. 

He believed that satisfied workers create satisfied workers and its importance in 
in lieu to this principle he paid all his workers gratuity, provident an organisation;
fund well before it was made mandatory. His management 
skills were clearly evident when minute details were chalked in n Explain the nature 
planning and building the entire city of Jamshedpur. The values of management 
and principles that have governed the business for a century are as an art, science 
enshrined in the Tata Code of Conduct (TCOC).

From an early foray into steel and automobiles, to staying and profession;
abreast of the latest technologies, the Tata Group today has n Explain the 
29 publicly-listed Tata enterprises, which include Tata Steel, 
Tata Motors, Tata Consultancy Services, Tata Power, Tata functions of 
Chemicals, Tata Global Beverages, Tata Teleservices, Titan, Tata management; and
Communications and Indian Hotels. The group has a combined 
market capitalisation of around $103.51bn (2016-17). n Appreciate 

Tata has a strong sense of social responsibility. They balance the nature and 
economic prosperity, environmental responsibility and social importance of  
benefits for the community. In India, they are a partner in progress coordination.
with Odisha, and believe in taking its stakeholders forward in 
its journey of growth. Tata Steel Thailand is one of the first 30 
companies that joined UNICEF in Child Friendly Business in 
“The Children Sustainability Forum” to make a commitment 
in protecting children’s rights. Tata Steel Europe’s Community 
Partnership Programme- ‘Future Generations’, with sub-themes 
of education, environment, health and Well-being works across 

Reprint 2025-26



2 Business Studies

the UK, assisting job and wealth creation by supporting small and 
medium businesses with finance and business premises.

They also play a constructive role in addressing climate change – 
both by reducing carbon footprint, and by creating high performance 
steels that lead to fuel-efficient vehicles and energy-efficient buildings. 
Their Environmental Management Systems meet the ISO 14001 
standards at all of their main manufacturing sites.

Shaped by a lineage of sound and straightforward business 
principles, the Tata Group is built on a foundation of trust and 
transparency. Building such huge enterprises, sustaining and running 
them profitably are possible only through effective and efficient 
management and co-ordination at all levels.  

Source: www.tatasteel.com; Accessed June, 2018

IntroductIon most were poor and jobless, so she 
The above case is an example of planned to do something to solve 
a successful organisation which their problems because she knew 
is amongst the top companies in that imparting skills for livelihood is 
India. It has risen to the top because needed but she had no idea of how to 
of its quality of management. implement her idea. 
Management is required in all In August 2012, she met Abishek 
kinds of organisations — those Lama, the Branch Manager of 
manufacturing handlooms, trading NEDFI, Namchi Branch, a financial 
in consumer goods or providing corporation which support local 
hairstyling services and even in people with skills development 
non-business organisations. Let us programs and also channelize 
take another example. them into revenue generating 

Smita Rai is a 38-year old activities. Smita got interested. “I 
entrepreneur who grew up in a love making candles, then, why not 
rural district called Namchi, South convert my hobby into a venture 
Sikkim. She was very good in art and involve these rural women 
and craft particularly, Wax moulds. also”, she thought. This led to the 
She loved to make candles, often she establishment of Namchi Designer 
make into toys and small pieces of art Candles with the help of NEDFI, 
with wax and used it as a gift for her some financial institutions and 
friends and relatives. She was loved support from different stakeholders 
and appreciated for these. Smita in various dimensions. 
was never happy with the conditions Since then, the women have never 
of the women in her district as looked back, despite challenges. The 

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 3

women also faced a lot of harassment delivery of goods are met. In the 
but they could overcome all course of the day, she meets 
those troubles. customers for a general feedback 

Namchi Designer Candles has and any suggestions that they 
100 per cent women as employees may have. 
and they also produce varieties of Smita is managing Namchi Designer 
candles. During Diwali, they produce Candles. So is the Principal managing 
customized candles meant for the your school. They all manage 
occasion. These Diwali themed candle organisations. Schools, hospitals, 
has been a success in Sikkim as its shops and large corporations are all 
demand increases on a yearly basis. organisations with diverse goals that 

Namchi Designer Candles has been are aimed at achieving something. 
receiving numerous awards such as No matter what the organisation is or 
North East Women Entrepreneur what its goals might be, they all have 
of the year 2015-2016 for Sikkim something in common-management 
and Sreemanta Shankar Mission and managers.
of Guwahati on 26th April 2018 at You have observed that Smita’s 
New Delhi. work as a manager consists of 

A typical day in Smita’s life a series of different activities or 
consists of a series of interrelated functions aimed at achieving the 
and continuous functions. She has goals of the organisation. These 
to plan a special festive collection interconnected and interdependent 
for Diwali. This means organising functions are part of management. 
more funds and recruiting more Successful organisations do not 
workers. She also has to regularly achieve their goals by chance but 
communicate with her suppliers by following a deliberate process 
to ensure that deadlines regarding called ‘management’.

Definitions of Management
“Management is the process of designing and maintaining an environment in which 

individuals, working together in groups, efficiently accomplish selected aims.”
 Harold Koontz and Heinz Weihrich

“Management is defined as t he process of planning, organising, actuating and controlling 
an organisation’s operations in order to achieve coordination of the human and material 
resources essential in the effective and efficient attainment of objectives.” 

Robert L. Trewelly and M. Gene Newport
“Management is the process of working with and through others to effectively achieve 

organisational objectives by efficiently using limited resources in the changing environment.”
Kreitner

Reprint 2025-26



4 Business Studies

Management is essential for all Management, has therefore, been 
organisations big or small, profit or defined as a process of getting things 
non-profit, services or manufacturing. done with the aim of achieving goals 
Management is necessary so that effectively and efficiently. We need 
individuals make their best contri- to analyse this definition. There 
bution towards group objectives. are certain terms which require 

Management consists of a series elaboration. These are (a) process, (b) 
of interrelated functions that are effectively, and (c) efficiently.
performed by all managers. Later in Process in the definition means the 
this chapter you will understand that primary functions or activities that 
although both of them are managers, management performs to get things 
they function at different levels in done. These functions are planning, 
the organisation. The time spent organising, staffing, directing and 
by managers in different functions controlling which we will discuss later 
however is different. Managers at the in the chapter and the book.
top level spend more time in planning Being effective or doing work 
and organising than managers at effectively basically means finishing 
lower levels of the organisation. the given task. Effectiveness in 

management is concerned with doing 
concept the right task, completing activities 
Management is a very popular term and achieving goals. In other words, 
and has been used extensively for it is concerned with the end result.
all types of activities and mainly for But it is not enough to just 
taking charge of different activities in complete the tasks. There is another 
any enterprise. As you have seen from aspect also, i.e., being efficient or as 
the above example and case study we say doing work efficiently.
that management is an activity which Efficiency means doing the task 
is necessary wherever there is a group correctly and with minimum cost. 
of people working in an organisation. There is a kind of cost-benefit 
People in organisations are performing analysis involved and the relationship 
diverse tasks but they are all working between inputs and outputs. If 
towards the same goal. Management by using less resources (i.e., the 
aims at guiding their efforts towards inputs) more benefits are derived 
achieving a common objective — a (i.e., the outputs) then efficiency has 
goal. Thus, management has to see increased. Efficiency is also increased 
that tasks are completed and goals when for the same benefit or outputs, 
are achieved (i.e., effectiveness) with fewer resources are used and less 
the least amount of resources at a costs are incurred. Input resources 
minimum cost (i.e., efficiency). are money, materials, equipment and 

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 5

persons required to do a particular This is a case of being efficient but 
task. Obviously, management is not effective since the goods did not 
concerned with the efficient use reach the market.
of these resources, because they Therefore, it is important for 
reduce costs and ultimately lead to management to achieve goals 
higher profits. (ef fectiveness) with minimum 

resources i.e., as efficiently as possible 
Effectiveness versus while maintaining a balance between 
Efficiency effectiveness and efficiency. Usually 
These two terms are different but they high efficiency is associated with 
are interrelated. For management, high effectiveness which is the aim of 
it is important to be both effective all managers. But undue emphasis 
and efficient. Effectiveness and on high efficiency without being 
efficiency are two sides of the same effective is also not desirable. Poor 
coin. But these two aspects need management is due to both ineffi-
to be balanced and management ciency and ineffectiveness. 
at times, has to compromise with 

characterIstIcs of 
efficiency. For example, it is easier 
to be effective and ignore efficiency ManageMent

i.e., complete the given task but at After going through some of the 
a high cost. Suppose, a company’s definitions we find some elements 
target production is 5000 units in that may be called the basic 
a year. To achieve this target the characteristics of management:
manager has to operate on double  (i) Management is a goal-oriented 
shifts due to power failure most of the process: An organisation has a 
time. The manager is able to produce set of basic goals which are the 
5000 units but at a higher production basic reason for its existence. 
cost. In this case, the manager was These should be simple and 
effective but not so efficient, since for clearly stated. Different organ-
the same output, more inputs (labour isations have different goals. For 
cost, electricity costs) were used. example, the goal of a retail store 

At times, a business may con- may be to increase sales, but the 
centrate more on producing goods goal of The Spastics Society of 
with fewer resources i.e., cutting India is to impart education to 
down cost but not achieving the children with special needs. 
target production. Consequently, the Management unites the efforts 
goods do not reach the market and of different individuals in the 
hence the demand for them declines organisation towards achieving 
and competitors enter the market. these goals.

Reprint 2025-26



6 Business Studies

The Management Mantra from GE
Jack Welch was appointed CEO of GE in 1981. At that time the firm had a market 
capitalisation of $13 billion. In 2000 when he stepped down the firm’s turnover had 
increased multifold to $500 billion. What was the secret of Welch’s success? He has laid 
down the following pointers for managers to be successful: 
n Create a vision and then ignite your organisation to make this vision a reality. 

Get people so passionate about what they are doing that they cannot wait to execute 
this plan. Have great energy, competitive spirit and the ability to spark excitement and 
achieve results. Search for leaders who have the same qualities.

n Focus on strategic issues. Your job is to understand the vital issues within each of your 
businesses. Recognise the talent needed to win in those markets. 

n Focus on the main issue . Your job is to see the big picture. Don’t manage every detail. 
Don’t get caught up in the minute details, but instead inspire others to execute some 
of your vision. Surround yourself with great people and trust them to do their job and 
contribute their best to the organisation.

n Involve everyone and welcome great ideas from everywhere. Anyone can be a 
leader, just so long as they contribute, and the most meaningful way for anyone to 
contribute is to come up with a good idea. Business is all about getting the best ideas 
from everyone. New ideas are the lifeblood of the organisation, the fuel that makes it 
run. “The hero is the person with a new idea.” There is simply nothing more important 
to an organisation than expressing ideas and creating a vision.

n Lead by example. To spark others to perform, you must lead by example. Jack Welch’s 
mastery of the four E’s of leadership – Energy, Energise, Edge, and Execution – was 
always in evidence. “He had great energy, sparked others, had incredible competitive 
spirit, and had a record of execution that was second to none. This is a key of the 
Welch phenomenon. Had he been lacking in any of the traits he espoused, he would 
not have commanded such acclaim.”

Source: www.ge.co.in

 (ii) Management is all pervasive:  (iii) Management is multidimen-
The activities involved in managing sional: Management is a 
an enterprise are common to all complex activity that has three 
organisations whether economic, main dimensions. These are:
social or political. A petrol pump (a) Management of work: All 
needs to be managed as much organisations exist for the 
as a hospital or a school. What performance of some work. In 
managers do in India, the USA, a factory, a product is 
Germany or Japan is the same. manufactured, in a garment 
How they do it may be quite store a customer’s need is 
different. This difference is due satisfied and in a hospital a 
to the differences in culture, patient is treated. Management 
tradition and history. translates this work in terms 

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 7

of goals to be achieved and (i) it implies dealing with 
assigns the means to achieve employees as individuals with 
it. This is done in terms of diverse needs and behavior; 
problems to be solved, (ii) it also means dealing with 
decisions to be made, plans to individuals as a group of people. 
be established, budgets to be The task of management is to 
prepared, responsibilities to make people work towards 
be assigned and authority to achieving the organisation’s 
be delegated. goals, by making their 

(b) Management of people: Human strengths effective and their 
resources or people are an weaknesses irrelevant.
organisation’s greatest asset. (c) Management of operations: No 
Despite all developments in matter what the organisation, 
technology “getting work done it has some basic product or 
through people” is still a major service to provide in order to 
task for the manager. Managing survive. This requires a prod-
people has two dimensions uction process which entails 

Together Everyone 
Achieves More as 

a TEAM

Reprint 2025-26



8 Business Studies

the flow of input material and day. Some days she may spend 
the technology for transfor- more time in planning a future 
ming this input into the desired exhibition and on another day, 
output for consumption. This she may spend time in sorting 
is interlinked with both the out an employee’s problem. The 
management of work and the task of a manager consists of an 
management of people. ongoing series of functions.

 (iv) Management is a continuous  (v) Management is a group activity: 
process: The process of manage- An organisation is a collection of 
ment is a series of continuous, diverse individuals with different 
composite, but separate functions needs. Every member of the 
(planning, organising, directing, group has a different purpose 
staffing and controlling). These for joining the organisation but 
functions are simultaneously as members of the organisation 
performed by all managers they work towards fulfilling 
all the time. You may have the common organisational 
observed that Smita at Namchi goal. This requires team work 
Designer Candles performs and coordination of individual 
several different tasks in a single effort in a common direction. 

Management –  
a multidimensional 
activity

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 9

At the same time management organisation there are different 
should enable all its members to objectives and management has to 
grow and develop as needs and achieve all objectives in an effective 
opportunities change. and efficient manner. Objectives 

 (vi) Management is a dynamic can be classified into organisational 
function: Management is a objectives, social objectives and 
dynamic function and has to personal or individual objectives.
adapt itself to the changing  (i) Organisational Objectives: 
environment. An organisation Management is responsible for 
interacts with its external envi- setting and achieving objectives 
ronment which consists of for the organisation. It has to 
various social, economic and achieve a variety of objectives in 
political factors. In order to be all areas considering the interest 
successful, an organisation must of all stakeholders including, 
change itself and its goals shareholders, employees, cust-
according to the needs of the omers and the government. The 
environment. You probably know main objective of any organisation 
that McDonalds, the fast food should be to utilise human 
giant made major changes in its and material resources to the 
menu to be able to survive in the maximum possible advantage, 
Indian market. i.e., to fulfill the economic 

 (vii) Management is an intangible objectives of a business. These 
force: Management is an intangi- are survival, profit and growth. 
ble force that cannot be seen but   Survival: The basic objectives 
its presence can be felt in the of any business is survival. 
way the organisation functions. Management must strive to 
The effect of management is ensure the survival of the 
noticeable in an organisation organisation. In order to survive, 
where targets are met according to an organisation must earn 
plans, employees are happy and enough revenues to cover costs.
satisfied, and there is orderliness   Profit: Mere survival is not enough 
instead of chaos. for business. Management has 

to ensure that the organisation 
objectIves of ManageMent makes a profit. Profit provides a 
Management seeks to achieve vital incentive for the continued 
certain objectives which are the successful operation of the 
desired result of any activity. They enterprise. Profit is essential for 
must be derived from the basic covering costs and risks of the 
purpose of the business. In any business.

Reprint 2025-26



10 Business Studies

  Growth: A business needs to add the number of products or the 
to its prospects in the long run, increase in capital investment, 
for this it is important for the etc. There can be other indicators 
business to grow. To remain in of growth. 
the industry, management must  (ii) Social objectives: It involves 
exploit fully the growth potential the creation of benefit for 
of the organisation. Growth of society. As a part of society, 
a business can be measured in every organisation whether it is 
terms of sales volume increase business or non-business, has 
in the number of employees, a social obligation to fulfill. This 

ITC – Empowering Rural India

A quiet digital revolution is reshaping the lives of farmers in remote Indian villages.
In these villages, farmers grow soyabeans, wheat and coffee in small plots of land, 
as they have done for thousands of years. A typical village has no reliable electricity 
and has antiquated telephone lines. The farmers are largely illiterate and have never 
seen a computer. But farmers in these villages are conducting e-business through an 
initiative called E-Choupal, created by ITC, one of India’s largest consumer product 
and agribusiness companies.

ITC’s E-Chaupal initiative is a fine example of a business organisation fulfilling 
corporate social responsibility. The basic aim of the programme is to provide 
farmers in rural India with the opportunity to make use of a direct marketing 
channel eliminating multiple intermediation and wasteful handling and unnecessary 
transaction costs. It is the single-largest information technology-based intervention 
by a corporate entity in rural India, transforming the Indian farmer into a progressive 
knowledge-seeking citizen, enriching him with knowledge and elevating him to a 
new order of empowerment.

E-Choupal delivers real-time information and customised knowledge to improve 
the farmer’s decision-making ability, thereby better aligning farm output to market 
demands; securing better quality, productivity and improved price discovery. Given 
the low levels of literacy in the rural sector, the role of the Choupal Sanchalak, the 
lead farmer of the village, in facilitating physical interface between the computer 
terminal and the farmers is central to the project. E-Choupal Smart Cards enable 
farmer identification to provide customised information on the E-Choupal website. 
Online transactions are captured to reward farmers for volume and value of usage.

The E-Chaupal initiative has found its way into the Harvard Business School as a 
leading case study illustarating the use of modern technology by a leading business 
house for the benefit of the rural poor.

Source: Mohanbir Sawhney, McCormick Tribune Professor of 
Technology, Kellogg School of Management, USA.

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 11

refers to consistently creating for achieving the goals of the 
economic value for various organisation. The task of a manager 
constituents of society. This is to give a common direction to 
includes using environmental the individual effort in achieving 
friendly methods of production, the overall goal of the organisation.
giving employment opportunities  (ii) Management increases effici­
to the underpreviledged sections ency: The aim of a manager is 
of society and providing basic to reduce costs and increase 
amenities like schools and productivity through better 
healthcare, etc., for community. planning, organising, directing, 
The box given below illustrates staffing and controlling the 
how a company can fulfill its activities of the organisation.
social responsibility.  (iii) Management creates a dynamic 

 (iii) Personnel objectives: Organi- organisation: All organisations 
sations are made up of people have to function in an environment 
who have different personalities, which is constantly changing. It 
backgrounds, experiences and is generally seen that individuals 
objectives. They all become part in an organisation resist change 
of the organisation to satisfy as it often means moving from a 
their diverse needs. These vary familiar, secure environment into 
from financial needs such as a newer and more challenging 
competitive salaries and perks, one. Management helps people 
social needs such as peer adapt to these changes so that 
recognition and higher level the organisation is able to 
needs such as personal growth maintain its competitive edge. 
and development. Management  (iv) Management helps in achieving 
has to reconcile personal goals personal objectives: A manager 
with organisational objectives for motivates and leads his team in 
harmony in the organisation. such a manner that individual 

members are able to achieve 
Importance of management personal goals while contributing 
Having understood that management to the overall organisational 
is a universal activity that is integral objective. Through motivation 
to any organisation we now examine and leadership the management 
some of the reasons that have made helps individuals to develop 
management so important: team spirit, cooperation and 
 (i) Management helps in achieving commitment to group success. 

group goals: Management  (v) Management helps in the 
is required not for itself but development of society: An orga-

Reprint 2025-26



12 Business Studies

nisation has multiple objectives relationships. Over a period of time, 
to serve the purpose of the it has grown into a dynamic subject 
different groups that constitute it. with its own special characteristics. 
In the process of fulfilling all However, one question that needs 
these, management helps in the to be addressed pertaining to the 
development of the organisation nature of management is whether 
and through that it helps in the it is a science or an art or both? 
development of society. It helps to In order to answer this let us 
provide good quality products examine the features of both science 
and services, creates employment and art to see how far management 
opportunities, adopts new fulfills them.
techno-logy for the greater good 
of the people and leads the path ManageMent as an art

towards growth and development. What is art? Art is the skillful and 
personal application of existing 

nature of ManageMent knowledge to achieve desired 
Management is as old as civilisation. results. It can be acquired through 
Although modern organisations are study, observation and experience. 
of recent origin, organised activity has Since art is concerned with personal 
existed since the time of the ancient application of knowledge some kind 
civilisations. In fact, organisations of ingenuity and creativity is required 
may be considered the distinguishing to practice the basic principles learnt. 
feature that separated civilised society The basic features of an art are 
from uncivilised ones. The earliest as follows:
management practices were a set of  (i) Existence of theoretical 
rules and regulations that grew out knowledge: Art presupposes the 
of the experiences of governmental existence of certain theoretical 
and commercial activities. The knowledge. Experts in their 
development of trade and commerce respective areas have derived 
gradually led to the development of certain basic principles which 
management principles and practices. are applicable to a particular 

The term ‘management’ today has form of art. For example, 
several different connotations that literature on dancing, public 
highlight the different aspects of its speaking, acting or music is 
nature. The study of management has widely recognised. 
evolved over a period of time along  (ii) Personalised application: The 
with the modern organisations; based use of this basic knowledge varies 
both on the experience and practice from individual to individual. 
of managers and a set of theoretical Art, therefore, is a very person-

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 13

alised concept. For example, two manner. A good manager works 
dancers, two speakers, two actors, through a combination of 
or two writers will always differ practice, creativity, imagination, 
in demonstrating their art. initiative and innovation. A 

 (iii) Based on practice and manager achieves perfection 
creativity: All art is practical. Art after long practice. Students of 
involves the creative practice of management also apply these 
existing theoretical knowledge. principles differently depending 
We know that all music is based on how creative they are.
on seven basic notes. However,  (iii) A manager applies this acquired 
what makes the composition of knowledge in a personalised 
a musician unique or different and skillful manner in the light 
is his use of these notes in a of the realities of a given situation. 
creative manner that is entirely He is involved in the activities of 
his own interpretation. the organisation, studies critical 

Management can be said to be situations and formulates his 
an art since it satisfies the following own theories for use in a given 
criteria: situation. This gives rise to 
 (i) A successful manager practices different styles of management

the art of management in the The best managers are committed 
day-to-day job of managing and dedicated individuals; highly 
an enterprise based on study, trained and educated, with personal 
observation and experience. qualities such as ambition, self- 
There is a lot of literature motivation, creativity and 
available in various areas of imagination, a desire for development 
management like marketing, of the self and the organisation 
finance and human resources they belong to. All management 
which the manager has to practices are based on the same set 
specialise in. There is existence of principles; what distinguishes 
of theoretical knowledge. a successful manager from a less 

 (ii) There are various theories of successful one is the ability to put 
management, as propounded these principles into practice. 
by many management thinkers, 
which prescribe certain ManageMent as a scIence

universal principles. A manager Science is a systematised body of 
applies these scientific methods knowledge that explains certain 
and body of knowledge to a general truths or the operation of 
given situation, an issue or a general laws. The basic features of 
problem, in his own unique science are as follows:

Reprint 2025-26



14 Business Studies

Some Interesting Cross-disciplinary Perspectives
Anthropology – Anthropology is the study of societies, which helps us learn 
about human beings and their activities. Anthropologists’ work on cultures and 
environments, for instance, has helped managers to better understand differences 
in fundamental values, attitudes, and behavior between people in different 
countries and within different organisations.
Economics – Economics is concerned with the allocation and distribution of 
scarce resources. It provides us with an understanding of the changing economy 
as well as the role of competition and free markets in a global context. An 
understanding of free trade and protectionist policies is absolutely essential to any 
manager operating in the global marketplace, and these topics are addressed by 
economists.
Philosophy – Philosophy courses inquire into the nature of things, particularly 
values and ethics. Ethics are standards that govern human conduct. These ethics 
have shaped today’s organisations by providing a basis for legitimate authority, 
linking rewards to performance, and justifying the existence of business and the 
corporate form.
Political Science – Political science is the study of the behavior of individuals and 
groups within a political environment. Management is affected by a nation’s form 
of government – by whether it allows its citizens to hold property, by its citizens’ 
ability to engage in and enforce contracts, and by the appeal mechanisms available 
to redress grievances. A nation’s stand on property, contracts, and justice, in turn, 
shapes the type, form, and policies of its organisations.
Psychology – Psychology is the science that seeks to measure, explain, 
and sometimes change the behaviour of humans and other animals. Today’s 
managers confront both a diverse customer base and a diverse set of employees. 
Psychologists’ efforts to understand gender and cultural diversity provide 
managers with a better perception of the needs of their changing customer and 
employee populations. Psychology courses are also relevant to managers in terms 
of gaining a better understanding of motivation, leadership, trust, employee 
selection, performance appraisals, and training techniques.
Sociology – Sociology is the study of people in relation to their fellow human 
beings. What are some of the sociological issues that have relevance to managers? 
Here are a few. How are societal changes such as globalisation, increasing 
cultural diversity, changing gender roles, and varying forms of family life affecting 
organisational practices? What are the implications of schooling practices and 
education trends on future employees’ skills and abilities? Answers to questions 
such as these have a major effect on how managers operate their businesses.

Source: Fundamentals of Management
Stephen P. Robbins
David A. DeCenzo

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 15

 (i) Systematised body of knowledge: of a common vocabulary for a 
Science is a systematic body better understanding of their 
of knowledge. Its principles are work situation.
based on a cause and effect  (ii) The principles of management 
relationship. For example, the have evolved over a period 
phenomenon of an apple falling of time based on repeated 
from a tree towards the ground experimentation and observation 
is explained by the law of gravity. in different types of organisations. 

 (ii) Principles based on experimen- However, since management 
tation: Scientific principles are deals with human beings and 
first developed through observation human behaviour, the outcomes 
and then tested through of these experiments are not 
repeated experimentation under capable of being accurately 
controlled conditions. predicted or replicated. Therefore, 

 (iii) Universal validity: Scientific management can be called an 
principles have universal validity inexact science. Despite these 
and application. limitations, management scholars 

Based on the above features, we have been able to identify general 
can say that management has some principles of management. For 
characteristics of science. example, scientific management 
 (i) Management has a systematised principles by F.W. Taylor 

body of knowledge. It has its and Functional Management 
own theory and principles that principles by Henri Fayol which 
have developed over a period you will study in the next chapter.
of time, but it also draws on  (iii) Since the principles of mana-
other disciplines such as gement are not as exact as 
Economics, Sociology, the principles of science, their 
Psychology and Mathematics. application and use is not universal. 
Like all other organised They have to be modified according 
activity, management has its to a given situation. However, they 
own vocabulary of terms and provide managers with certain 
concepts. For example, all of standardised techniques that 
us discuss sports like cricket can be used in dif ferent 
and soccer using a common situations. These principles 
vocabulary. The players also are also used for training and 
use these terms to communicate development of managers. 
with each other. Similarly You must have understood from the 
managers need to communicate foregoing discussion that manage-
with one another with the help ment has features of both art and 

Reprint 2025-26



16 Business Studies

science. The practice of management degree. For example, to become 
is an art. However, managers can a chartered accountant in 
work better if their practice is based on India a candidate has to 
the principles of management. These clear a specified examination 
principles constitute the science of conducted by the Institute of 
management. Management as an Chartered Accountants of India.
art and a science are therefore not  (iii) Professional association: All 
mutually exclusive, but complement professions are affiliated to a 
each other. professional association which 

regulates entry, grants certificate 
ManageMent as a professIon of practice and formulates and 
You have understood so far that enforces a code of conduct. To be 
all forms of organised activity need able to practice in India lawyers 
to be managed. You would also have to become members of the 
have observed that organisations Bar Council which regulates 
look for individuals with specific and controls their activities.
qualifications and experience to  (iv) Ethical code of conduct: All 
manage them. It has also been professions are bound by a code 
observed that there has been an of conduct which guides the 
increase in the corporate form of behaviour of its members. All 
business on the one hand and doctors, for example, take the 
increasing emphasis on managed oath of ethical practice at the 
business concerns. Does this imply time they enter the profession. 
that management is a profession? To  (v) Service motive: The basic 
answer this question let us examine motive of a profession is to 
the salient features of a profession serve their client’s interests 
and see whether management by rendering dedicated and 
satisfies them. committed service. The task of 

A profession has the following a lawyer is to ensure that his 
characteristics: client gets justice.
 (i) Well-defined body of know- Management does not meet 

ledge: All professions are based the exact criteria of a profession. 
on a well-defined body of However, it does have some of the 
knowledge that can be acquired features of a profession:
through instruction.  (i) All over the world there is 

 (ii) Restricted entry: The entry to a marked growth in management 
profession is restricted through as a discipline. It is based on a 
an examination or through systematic body of knowledge 
acquiring an educational comprising well-defined 

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 17

principles based on a variety Association) that has laid down a code 
of business situations. This of conduct to regulate the activities 
knowledge can be acquired of their members. There is, however, 
at different colleges and professional no compulsion for managers to be 
institutes and through a number members of such an association nor 
of books and journals. The does it have any statutory backing. 
subject of management is taught  (iv) The basic purpose of manage-
at different institutions. Some ment is to help the organisation 
of these have been set up with achieve its stated goal. This may 
the specific purpose of providing be profit maximisation for a 
management education such business enterprise and service 
as the Indian Institutes of for a hospital. However, profit 
Management (IIMs) in India. maximisation as the objective 

Entry to different institutes is of management does not hold 

usually through an examination. true and is fast changing. 

 (ii) There is no restriction on anyone Therefore, if an organisation 

being designated or appointed has a good management team 

as manager in any business that is efficient and effective it 

enterprise. Anyone can be automatically serves society by 

called a manager irrespective of providing good quality products 

the educational qualifications at reasonable prices.

possessed. LeveLs of ManageMent
  Unlike professions such as Management is a universal term 

medicine or law which require used for certain functions performed 
a practicing doctor or lawyer to 

by individuals in an enterprise who 
possess valid degrees, nowhere 
in the world is it mandatory are bound together in a hierarchy of 

for a manager to possess any relationships. Every individual in the 
such specific degree. But hierarchy is responsible for successful 
professional knowledge and completion of a particular task. To be 
training is considered to be a able to fulfill that responsibility he is 
desirable qualification, since assigned a certain amount of authority 
there is greater demand for those or the right to take a decision. This 
who possess degrees or diplomas 

authority-responsibility relationship 
from reputed institutions. 

binds individuals as superiors and 
Therefore, as such the second 
criterion has not been strictly met. subordinates and gives rise to different 

 (iii) There are several associations of levels in an organisation. Generally 
practising managers in India, like speaking there are three levels in the 
the AIMA (All India Management hierarchy of an organisation.

Reprint 2025-26



18 Business Studies

 (i) Top Management: They consist production manager. Middle 
of the senior-most executives of the management is responsible for 
organisation by whatever name implementing and controlling 
they are called. They are usually plans and strategies developed 
referred to as the chairman, by top management. At the 
the chief executive officer, chief same time they are responsible 
operating officer, president and for all the activities of first line 
vice-president. Top management managers. Their main task is to 
is a team consisting of managers carry out the plans formulated 
from different functional levels, by the top managers. For this they 
heading finance, marketing etc. need to: (i) interpret the policies 
For example chief finance officer, framed by top management, 
vice president (marketing). Their (ii) ensure that their department 
basic task is to integrate diverse has the necessary personnel, 
elements and coordinate the (iii) assign necessary duties 
activities of different departments and responsibilities to them, 
according to the overall objectives (iv) motivate them to achieve 
of the organisation. These top desired objectives, and (v) co-
level managers are responsible operate with other departments 
for the welfare and survival of for smooth functioning of the 
the organisation. They analyse 
the business environment and 
its implications for the survival of 
the firm. They formulate overall 
organisational goals and strategies 
for their achievement. They are 
responsible for all the activities of 
the business and for its impact 
on society. The job of the top 
manager is complex and stressful, 
demanding long hours and 
commitment to the organisation. 

 (ii) Middle Management: is the 
link between top and lower level 
managers. They are subordinate 
to top managers and superior 
to the first line managers. 
They are usually known as “You don’t learn management 
division heads, for example from books alone...”

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 19

organisation. At the same time management to the workers. 
they are responsible for all the Through their efforts quality of 
activities of first line managers. output is maintained, wastage 

 (iii) Supervisory or Operational of materials is minimised and 
Management: Foremen and safety standards are maintained. 
supervisors comprise the lower The quality of workmanship and 
level in the hierarchy of the the quantity of output depends 
organisation. Supervisors on the hard work, discipline and 
directly oversee the efforts of loyalty of the workers.
the workforce. Their authority 
and responsibility is limited functIons of ManageMent

according to the plans drawn Management is described as the 
by the top management. process of planning, organising, 
Supervisory management plays directing and controlling the efforts 
a very important role in the of organisational members and of 
organisation since they interact using organisational resources to 
with the actual work force and pass achieve specific goals. 
on instructions of the middle Planning is the function of 

determining in advance what is to 
be done and who is to do it. This 
implies setting goals in advance 
and developing a way of achieving 
them efficiently and effectively. In 
Smita’s organisation the objective 

TOP is production and sale of candles. 
MANAGEMENT Smita has to decide quantities, variety 

MIDDLE
MANAGEMENT

OPERATIONAL  
MANAGEMENT

Managerial 
Levels

Reprint 2025-26



20 Business Studies

and colour and then allocate resources important aspect of management is 
for their purchase from different to make sure that the right people 
suppliers. Planning cannot prevent with the right qualifications are 
problems, but it can predict them available at the right places and 
and prepare contingency plans to times to accomplish the goals of 

deal with them if and when they the organisation. This is also known 

occur. as the human resource function 

Organising is the management and it involves activities such as 

function of assigning duties, recruitment, selection, placement 

grouping tasks, establishing and training of personnel. Infosys 
Technologies which develops 

authority and allocating resources 
software needs systems analysts and 

required to carry out a specific 
programmers. 

plan. Once a specific plan has been 
Directing involves leading, influ-

established for the accomplishment 
encing and motivating employees 

of an organisational goal, the 
to perform the tasks assigned to 

organising function examines the 
them. This requires establishing 

activities and resources required to 
an atmosphere that encourages 

implement the plan. It determines 
employees to do their best. Motivation 

what activities and resources are 
and leadership are two key 

required. It decides who will do a components of direction. Directing 
particular task, where it will be also involves communicating 
done, and when it will be done. effectively as well as supervising 
Organising involves the grouping of employees at work. Motivating 
the required tasks into manageable workers means simply creating an 
departments or work units and the environment that makes them want 
establishment of authority and to work. Leadership is influencing 
reporting relationships within the others to do what the leader wants 
organisational hierarchy. Proper them to do. A good manager directs 
organisational techniques help through praise and criticism in 
in the accomplishment of work such a way that it brings out the 
and promote both the efficiency of best in the employee. 
operations and the effectiveness of Controlling is the management 
results. Different kinds of business function of monitoring organisational 
require different structures performance towards the attainment 
according to the nature of work. of organisational goals. The task 
You will read more about this in a of controlling involves establishing 
later chapter. standards of performance, measuring 
Staffing simply stated, is finding the current performance, comparing 
right people for the right job. A very this with established standards and 

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 21

taking corrective action where any and finance to ensure continuity 
deviation is found. Here management in the working of the organisation. 
must determine what activities and Coordination is sometimes considered 
outputs are critical to success, how a separate function of management. 
and where they can be measured It is however, the essence of 
and who should have the authority management, for achieving harmony 
to take corrective action. among individual efforts towards 

The various functions of a the accomplishment of group goals. 
manager are usually discussed in Each managerial function is an 
the order given above, suggesting exercise contributing individually to 
that a manager first plans, then coordination. Coordination is implicit 
organises, puts staff in position, and inherent in all functions of an 
then directs, and finally controls. organisation.
In reality, managers are rarely The process of coordinating the 
able to carry out these functions activities of an organisation begins 
in isolation. The activities of a at the planning stage itself. Top 
manager are interrelated and it is management plans for the entire 
often difficult to pinpoint where one organisation. According to these 
ended and the other began. plans the organisational structure 

c is developed and staffed. In order to 
oordInatIon — the 

ensure that these plans are executed 
essence of ManageMent

according to plans directing is 
You have understood by now that required. Any discrepancies between 
a manager has to perform five actual and realised activities are 
interrelated functions in the process then taken care of at the stage of 
of managing an organisation which controlling. It is through the process 
is a system made up of different 

of coordination that a manager 
interlinked and interdependent 

ensures the orderly arrangement of 
subsystems. A manager has to link 

individual and group efforts to ensure 
these diverse groups towards the 
achievement of a common goal. unity of action in the realisation of 

The process by which a manager common objectives. Coordination 

synchronises the activities of therefore involves synchronisation 

different departments is known as of the different actions or efforts of 
coordination. the various units of an organisation. 

Coordination is the force that This provides the requisite amount, 
binds all the other functions of quality, timing and sequence of 
management. It is the common efforts which ensures that planned 
thread that runs through all activities objectives are achieved with a 
such as purchase, production, sales, minimum of conflict.

Reprint 2025-26



22 Business Studies

characterIstIcs of the goals of the organisation. 
At Namchi Designer Candles, 

coordInatIon the production and sales 
The definitions given above department have to coordinate 
highlight the following features of their work, so that production 
coordination: takes place according to the 
 (i) Coordination integrates group demand in the market.

efforts: Coordination unifies  (iii) Coordination is a continuous 
unrelated or diverse interests process: Coordination is not 
into purposeful work activity. a one-time function but a 
It gives a common focus to continuous process. It begins at 
group effort to ensure that the planning stage and continues 
performance is as it was planned till controlling. Smita plans her 
and scheduled. dewali collection in the month 

 (ii) Coordination ensures unity of June itself. She has to then 
of action: The purpose of ensure that there is adequate 
coordination is to secure unity workforce and continuously 
of action in the realisation of monitor whether production is 
a common purpose. It acts proceeding according to plans. 
as the binding force between Her marketing department also 
departments and ensures that has to be briefed in time to 
all action is aimed at achieving prepare their promotional and 

advertising campaigns.
In the absence of coordination  (iv) Coordination is an all pervasive 
what results is chaos function: Coordination is required 

at all levels of management due 
to the interdependent nature of 
activities of various departments. 
It integrates the efforts of different 
departments and different levels. 
The purchase, production and 
sales departmental efforts have 
to be coordinated by Smita for 
achieving organisational objectives 
harmoniously. The purchase 
department is responsible for 
procuring fabric. This then 
becomes the basis of the activities 
of the production department 

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 23

and finally sales can take place. If and deliberate manner. 
fabric purchased is of an inferior Even where members of a 
quality or is not according to the department willingly cooperate 
specifications of the production and work, coordination gives a 
department, further sales will direction to that willing spirit. 
also decline. In the absence of Cooperation in the absence 
coordination there is overlapping of coordination may lead to 
and chaos instead of harmony wasted effort and coordination 
and integration of activities. without cooperation may 

 (v) Coordination is the responsibi- lead to dissatisfaction among 
lity  of  all managers: Coordi- employees.
nation is the function of every Coordination, therefore, is not a 
manager in the organisation. Top separate function of management, 
level managers need to coordinate but its very essence. For an 
with their subordinates to ensure organisation to effectively and 
that the overall policies for the efficiently achieve its objectives 
organisation are duly carried coordination is required. Like a 
out. Middle level management thread in a garland, coordination is 
coordinates with both the top a part of all management functions. 
level and first line managers. 
Operational level management IMportance of coordInatIon
coordinates the activities of its 
workers to ensure that work Coordination is important as it 
proceeds according to plans. integrates the efforts of individuals, 

 (vi) Coordination is a deliberate departments and specialists. The 
function: A manager has primary reason for coordination is 
to coordinate the efforts of that departments and individuals in 
different people in a conscious the organisation are interdependent, 

Definitions of Coordination
Coordination is balancing and keeping together the team by ensuring suitable allocation of 

tasks to the various members and seeing that the tasks are performed with harmony among 
the members themselves.  E.F.L. Brech

Coordination is the process whereby an executive develops an orderly pattern of 
group efforts among his subordinates and secures unity of action in the pursuit of common 
purpose.  McFarland

Coordination is the orderly synchronising of efforts of subordinates to provide proper 
amount, timing and quality of execution so that their united efforts lead to the stated 
objectives, namely, the common purpose of the enterprise.  Theo Haimann

Reprint 2025-26



24 Business Studies

i.e. they depend on each other their habits of work, background, 
for information and resources to approaches to situations and 
perform their respective activities. relationships with others. It 
Thus, managers need to reconcile becomes necessary to ensure that 
differences in approach, timing, all individuals work towards the 
effort or interest. At the same common goals of the organisation. 
time, there is a need to harmonise But employees may have their own 
individual goals and organisational individual goals also. Therefore, 
goals. for organisational efficiency, it is 

(i) Growth in size: As organisations important to harmonise individual 
grow in size, the number of people goals and organisational goals 
employed by the organisation also through coordination.
increases. At times, it may become (ii) Functional differentiation: 
difficult to integrate their efforts and Functions of an organisation are 
activities. All individuals differ in divided into departments, divisions 

‘DABBAWALLAS’ – Excellence through Coordination
The Dabbawallas of Mumbai is the story of a SIX SIGMA business enterprise. The success 
of the business lies in the complex yet well coordinated exercise that is carried out on the 
streets of Mumbai day after day. What is the secret behind the efficiency with which their 
business is conducted? 

The story of the dabbawallas begins in the kitchens of Mumbai. After they step out of their 
door, someone begins the time-consuming process of preparing the worker a fresh, home-
cooked lunch. What happens next for demonstrates the coordination of the dabbawallas 
system. The first dabbawalla picks up the tiffin from home and takes it to the nearest railway 
station.The second dabbawalla sorts out the dabbas at the railway station according to 
destination and puts them in the luggage carriage. The third one travels with the dabbas to 
the railway stations nearest to the destinations. The fourth one picks up dabbas from the 
railway station and drops them off at the offices.

By mid-morning, thousands of dabbawallas are bicycling through the streets of Mumbai, 
ensuring a hot home cooked lunch for their customers. The whole tiffin distribution requires 
negligible technology. The dabbawallas rely on low capital and use cycles, wooden carriages 
and local trains to achieve their target.There are several groups that work independently and 
network with each other to achieve their goal.

Each area is divided into several small distribution sectors and each sector is handled by 
a particular person. This person understands the address in that locality very well. Also, this 
perfection comes with practice. Many new employees work for months under the guidance 
of their seniors. 

Punctuality and time management are on top of the agenda for dabbawallas. Whatever be 
the circumstances, the dabbawallas never get delayed even by a few minutes.

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 25

and sections. In an organisation However, all departments and 
there may be separate departments individuals are interdependent 
of finance, production, marketing and they have to depend on each 
or human resources. All these other for information to perform 
departments may have their own their activities. The activity of 
objectives, policies and their own each department needs to be 
style of working. For example, the focused on attainment of common 
marketing department’s objective organisational goals. The process 
may be to increase sales by 10 per of linking the activities of various 
cent by offering discounts. But, the departments is accomplished 
finance department may not approve by coordination.
of such discounts as it means loss of (iii) Specialisation: Modern 
revenue. These kinds of conflict arise organisations are characterised 
in organisations because each unit/ by a high degree of specialisation. 
department is performing activities Specialisation arises out of the 
in isolation from others and barriers complexities of modern technology 
between departments are becoming and the diversity of tasks to be 
more rigid. performed. Organisations, therefore, 

Management in the Twenty-first Century
Even as you read this chapter, the organisation and its management are changing. As boundaries 
between cultures and nations get blurred and new communication technology makes it 
possible to think of the world as a ‘global village’, the scope of international and intercultural 
relationships is rapidly expanding. The modern organisation is a global organisation that has 
to be managed in a global perspective. What does this imply?

A global manager today is one who possesses what can be termed as ‘hard’ types of skills 
as well as ‘softer’ types of skills. Managers who understand analysis, strategy, engineering, 
and technology are still going to be needed, but extremely critical to global success are  
people who understand how teams work, how organisations work, how people are 
motivated.

A manager who really understands different cultures should be able to work in a West 
European, non-English speaking country, then move to a developing country like Malaysia 
or Kenya, and then be transferred to an office based in New York, USA, and be almost 
immediately productive in all three places. 

It can thus be understood that the role of a global manager has evolved in much the same 
way that the global industry and economy have evolved. It has changed from being a single 
dimensional role in a defined business context, to being a multi-faceted role that calls for a 
diverse combination of technical skills, soft management and people skills, and the ability to 
imbibe and learn different cultural experiences.

Reprint 2025-26



26 Business Studies

need to employ a number of ManageMent In the 
specialists. Specialists usually 

twenty-fIrst century
think that they only are qualified to 
evaluate, judge and decide according Even as you read this chapter, the 
to their professional criteria. They organisation and its management are 
do not take advice or suggestions changing. As boundaries between 
from others in matters pertaining cultures and nations get blurred and 
to their area of specialisation. This new communication technology makes 
often leads to conflict amongst it possible to think of the world as a 
different specialists as well as others ‘global village’, the scope of international 
in the organisation. Therefore, and intercultural relationships is 
some coordination is required by an rapidly expanding. The modern 
independent person to reconcile the organisation is a global organisation 
differences in approach, interest or that has to be managed in a global 
opinion of the specialists. perspective. What does this imply?

Key Terms

Management  Process  Efficiency  Effectiveness  Art 

Science  Profession  Planning  Organising  Staffing 

Directing  Controlling  Coordination

Summary
Concept
Management is the process of planning, organising, staffing, 
directing and controlling the enterprise resources efficiently and 
effectively for achieving the goals of the organisation. Effectiveness 
in management is concerned with doing the right task, completing 
activities and achieving goals. Efficiency means doing the task 
correctly and with minimum cost.
Characteristics 
The key features of management are: (i) goal oriented process 
(ii) all pervasive (iii) multidimensional (iv) continuous process 
(v) group activity (vi) dynamic function (vii) tangible force. 
Objectives
Management fulfills three basic objectives: organisational, social 
and personal.

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 27

Importance
Management is important because it helps in achieving group 
goals, increases efficiency, creates a dynamic organisation, helps 
achieve personal objectives and contributes to the development 
of society. 
Nature
Management is a combination of an organised body of knowledge 
(science) and its skillful application (art). Although it does not 
satisfy all the requirements of a profession, it is to a large extent 
professional in character.
Levels
Management is considered a three-tier activity. The top management 
focuses on determination of objectives and policies, middle 
management attempts to achieve these objectives through the effort 
of other managers and supervisory or operational management 
directly oversees the efforts of the workforce.
Functions
All managers perform the following interrelated functions: Planning, 
Organising, Staffing, Directing and Controlling.
Coordination
Coordination is the essence of management. It is the process of 
achieving unity of action among interdependent activities and 
departments of an organisation.

Exercises

Very Short Answer Type:

 1.  What is meant by management?

 2. Name any two important characteristics of management.

 3. Identify and state the force that binds all the other functions 
of management.

 4. List any two indicators of growth of an organisation.

 5. Indian Railways has launched a new broad gauge solar 
power train which is going to be a path breaking leap towards 
making trains greener and more environment friendly. The 
solar power DEMU (Diesel Electric Multiple Unit) has 6 
trailer coaches and is expected to save about 21,000 liters 
of diesel and ensure a cost saving of Rs 12, 00,000 per year. 
Name the objectives of management achieved by Indian 
Railways in the above case.

Reprint 2025-26



28 Business Studies

Short Answer Type:

 1. Ritu is the manager of the northern division of a large corporate 
house. At what level does she work in the organisation? What 
are her basic functions?

 2. State the basic features of management as a profession.

 3. Why is management considered to be a multi-dimensional 
concept?

 4. Company X is facing a lot of problems these days. It 
manufactures white goods like washing machines, microwave 
ovens, refrigerators and air conditioners. The company’s 
margins are under pressure and the profits and market 
share are declining. The production department blames 
marketing for not meeting sales targets and marketing 
blames production department for producing goods, which 
are not of good quality meeting customers’ expectations. The 
finance department blames both production and marketing 
for declining return on investment and bad marketing. State 
the quality of management that the company is lacking? What 
quality of management do you think the company is lacking? 
Explain briefly. What steps should the company management 
take to bring the company back on track?

 5. Coordination is the essence of management. Do you agree? 
Give reasons.

 6. Ashita and Lakshita are employees working in Dazzling 
enterprises dealing in costume jewellery. The firm secured 
an urgent order for 1,000 bracelets that were to be delivered 
within 4 days. They were assigned the responsibility of 
producing 500 bracelets each at a cost of Rs 100 per bracelet. 
Ashita was able to produce the required number within the 
stipulated time at the cost of Rs 55,000 whereas, Lakshita 
was able to produce only 450 units at a cost of Rs 90 per unit. 
State whether Ashita and Lakshita are efficient and effective. 
Give reasons to justify your answer.

Long Answer Type:

 1. Management is considered to be both an art and science. 
Explain.

 2. Do you think management has the characteristics of a full-
fledged profession?

Reprint 2025-26



Nature and Significance of Management 29

 3. “A successful enterprise has to achieve its goals effectively 
and efficiently.” Explain.

 4. Management is a series of continuous interrelated functions. 
Comment.

 5. A company wants to modify its existing product in the market 
due to decreasing sales. You can imagine any product about 
which you are familiar. What decisions/steps should each 
level of management take to give effect to this decision? 

 6. A firm plans in advance and has a sound organisation 
structure with efficient supervisory staff and control system 
but on several occasion it finds that plans are not being 
adhered to. It leads to confusion and duplication of work. 
Advise remedy.

Reprint 2025-26



PRINCIPLES OF 

MANAGEMENT 2
CHAPTER

Guiding Principles of Toyota Motor Corporation

Toyota follows certain well-defined business principles guiding L E A R N I N G 

its functioning. These are: O B J E C T I V E S
1. Honour the language and spirit of law of every nation and After studying this 

undertake open and fair corporate activities to be a good 
corporate citizen around the world. chapter, you should 

2. Respect the culture and customs of every nation and be able to:
contribute to economic and social development through 
corporate activities in local communities. n State the 

3. To provide clean and safe products and to enhance the meaning, nature 
quality of life everywhere. and significance 

4. Create and develop advanced technologies and provide 
outstanding products and services that fulfil the needs of of principles of 
customers worldwide. management;

5. Foster a corporate culture that enhances individual creativity 
and teamwork value, while honouring mutual trust and n	Explain Taylor’s 
respect between management and labour. principles and 

6. Pursue growth and harmony with global community through techniques 
innovative management. of Scientific 

7. Work with business partners in research and creativity to 
achieve stable, long-term growth and mutual benefits and be Management; and
open to new partnerships. These principles, will guide the 

n Explain Fayol’s 
company in its global vision 2010. This global vision envisages 
continuous innovations in future, use of environment friendly principles of 
technologies, respecting and working with different sections of management.
society and establishing an interactive relationship with society.

http://www.toyotaglobal.com/company/history of toyota/ 
75years/data/conditions/philosophy/guiding principles.html/

It is clear from the foregoing case that stating the vision as well as the ways 
managerial pursuits at Toyota Motor to achieve it. Similarly, many other 
Corporation are driven by principles business enterprises have followed 
that serve as broad guidelines for various principles in their working 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 31

over a period of time. A number of fascinating. In this chapter we will 
management thinkers, and writers study the contributions of Fredrick 
have also studied principles of Winslow Taylor and Henri Fayol who 
management from time-to-time. as you have read are associated with 
In fact, there is a long history of the classical management theory. 
management thought. Management Both of them contributed immensely 
principles have evolved and are in towards the study of management as 
the continuous process of evolution. a discipline. Whereas F.W. Taylor was 
(see box.) an American mechanical engineer, 

You can see that the evolution of Henri Fayol was a French mining 
management thought has been very engineer. Taylor gave the concept 

Evolution of Management Principles

In tracing the history of management, one comes across various schools of thought 
that have outlined principles to guide management practices. These schools of 
thought may be divided into 6 distinctive phases: 1. Early Perspectives; 2. Classical 
Management Theory; 3. Neo Classical Theory — Human Relations Approach;  
4. Behavioural Science Approach — Organisational Humanism; 5. Management 
Science/Operational Research; 6. Modern Management.
EARLY PERSPECTIVES
 The first known management ideas were recorded in 3000-4000 B.C. One 

Pyramid built by Egyptian ruler Cheops required work to be done by 100,000 
men for over twenty years in 2900 B.C. It covered 13 acres of land and measured 
481 meters in height. The stone slabs had to be moved thousands of kilometres 
of distance. As folklore goes, even the sound of a hammer was not heard in the 
villages in the vicinity of the site of these pyramids. Such monumental work could 
not be completed without adherence to principles of sound management.

CLASSICAL MANAGEMENT THEORY
 Rational economic view, scientific management, administrative principles, and 

bureaucratic organisation characterise this phase. While the rational economic 
view assumed that people are motivated by economic gains primarily; scientific 
management of F.W. Taylor and others emphasised one best way of production 
etc; administrative theorists personified by Henri Fayol etc looked at the best 
way to combine jobs and people into an efficient organisation; bureaucratic 
organisation theorists led by Max Weber looked at ways to eliminate managerial 
inconsistencies due to abuse of power which contributed to ineffectiveness. 
This was the era of the industrial revolution and factory system of production. 
Large scale production would not have been possible without adherence to 
the principles governing organising production based on division of labour and 
specialisation, relationship between man and the machine, managing people 
and so on.

Reprint 2025-26



32 Business Studies

NEO CLASSICAL THEORY — HUMAN RELATIONS APPROACH
 This school of thought developed between 1920s to 1950s felt that employees 

simply do not respond rationally to rules, chains of authority and economic 
incentives alone but are also guided by social needs, drives and attitudes. 
Hawthorne Studies at GEC etc., were conducted then. It was quite natural that 
in the early phases of the industrial revolution, the emphasis was on development 
of techniques and technology. The attention to the human factor was the salient 
aspect of this school of thought. This attention was to serve as a precursor to the 
development of behavioural sciences. 

BEHAVIOURAL SCIENCE APPROACH — ORGANISATIONAL HUMANISM 
 Organisational behaviourists like Chris Argyris; Douglas McGregor, Abraham 

Maslow and Fredrick Herzberg used the knowledge of psychology, sociology 
and anthropology to develop this approach. The underlying philosophy of 
organisational humanism is that individuals need to use all of their capacities and 
creative skills at work as well as at home. 

MANAGEMENT SCIENCE/OPERATIONAL RESEARCH
 It emphasises research on operations and use of quantitative techniques to aid 

managers to take decisions.
MODERN MANAGEMENT 
 It sees modern organisations as complex systems and underlies contingency 

approach and use of modern techniques to solve organisational and human 
problems.

Source: Adapted from Internet modern history source book on www.fordham.edu

of ‘Scientific Management’ whereas seniority, whereas the other may 
Fayol emphasised ‘Administrative follow the principle of merit.
Principles’. One may distinguish principles 

But before we go into the details of management from those of pure 
of their contributions let us study science. Management principles are 
the meaning of the principles of not as rigid as principles of pure 
management. science. They deal with human 

P behaviour and, thus, are to be 
rinciPles of ManageMent: 

applied creatively given the demands 
the concePt of the situation. Human behaviour is 
A managerial principle is a broad never static and so also technology, 
and general guideline for decision- which affects business. Hence all 
making and behaviour. For example the principles have to keep pace 
while deciding about promotion of an with these changes. For example, 
employee one manager may consider in the absence of Information and 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 33

Communications Technology (ICT), a cannot be neglected, as businesses 
manager could oversee only a small have to fulfil social and ethical 
work force that too within a narrow responsibilities towards society.
geographical space. The advent of 
ICT has expanded the capability of nature of PrinciPles of 
the managers to preside over large ManageMent
business empires spread across 

By nature is meant qualities and 
the globe. Infosys headquarters in 

characteristics of anything. Principles 
Bangalore boast of the Asia’s largest 
flat screen in their conference room are general propositions, which are 

from where their managers can applicable when certain conditions 

interact with their employees and are present. These have been 

customers in all parts of the world. developed on the basis of observation 

In developing an understanding and experimentation as well as 

of the meaning of principles of personal experiences of the managers. 

management, it is also useful to Depending upon how they are 
know what these are not. The derived and how effective they are in 
principles of management should explaining and predicting managerial 
be distinguished from techniques behaviour, they contribute towards 
of management. Techniques are the development of management both 
procedures or methods, which as a science and as an art. Derivation 
involve a series of steps to be taken to of these principles may be said to be 
accomplish desired goals. Principles a matter of science and their creative 
are guidelines to take decisions or application may be regarded as an 
actions while practicing techniques. art. These principles lend credibility 
Likewise, principles should also be of a learnable and teachable discipline 
understood as being distinct from to the practice of management. As 
values. Values are something, which such, ascent to managerial position 
are acceptable or desirable. They may not be a matter of birth, but a 
have moral connotations. Principles matter of requisite qualifications. 
are basic truths or guidelines for Clearly, management principles have 
behaviour. Values are general rules gained importance with increasing 
for behaviour of individuals in society professionalisation of management. 
formed through common practice These principles are guidelines 
whereas principles of management to action. They denote a cause and 
are formed after research in work effect relationship. While functions 
situations, which are technical in of management viz., Planning, 
nature. However, while practicing Organising, Staffing, Directing and 
principles of management values Controlling are the actions to be 

Reprint 2025-26



34 Business Studies

taken while practising management, but do not provide readymade, 
Principles help managers to take straitjacket solutions to all 
decisions while performing these managerial problems. This 
functions. The following points is so because real business 
summarise the nature of principles situations are very complex 
of management. and dynamic and are a result 
 (i) Universal applicability: The of many factors. However, the 

principles of management are importance of principles cannot 
intended to apply to all types of be underestimated because even 
organisations, business as well as a small guideline helps to solve 
non-business, small as well large, a given problem. For example, 
public sector as well as private in dealing with a situation 
sector, manufacturing as well as of conflict between two 
the services sectors. However, departments, a manager may 
the extent of their applicability emphasise the primacy of the 
would vary with the nature of the overall goals of the organisation. 
organisation, business activity,  (iii) Formed by practice and experi­
scale of operations and the like. For mentation: The principles 
example, for greater productivity, of management are formed 
work should be divided into small by experience and collective 
tasks and each employee should wisdom of managers as well as 
be trained to perform his/her experimentation. For example, it 
specialised job. This principle is is a matter of common experience 
applicable to a government office that discipline is indispensable 
where there is a diary/despatch for accomplishing any purpose. 
clerk whose job is to receive and This principle finds mention 
send mail or documents, a data in management theory. On the 
entry operator whose task is to other hand, in order to remedy 
input data on the computer, a peon the problem of fatigue of workers 
and an officer etc. This principle in the factory, an experiment 
is also applicable to a limited may be conducted to see the 
company where there are separate effect of improvement of physical 
departments like Production, conditions to reduce stress.
Finance, Marketing and Research  (iv) Flexibile: The principles of 
and Development etc. Extent of management are not rigid 
division of work, however, may prescriptions, which have to be 
vary from case to case. followed absolutely. They are 

 (ii) General guidelines: The prin- flexible and can be modified by 
ciples are guidelines to action the manager when the situation 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 35

so demands. They give the number of cases. As such, they 
manager enough discretion to tell us if a particular principle 
do so. For example, the degree was applied in a particular 
of concentration of authority situation, what would be its 
(centralisation) or its dispersal likely effect. The principles 
(decentralisation) will depend of management are less than 
upon the situations and perfect since they mainly apply 
circumstances of each enterprise. to human behaviour. In real 
Moreover individual principles life, situations are not identical. 
are like different tools serving So, accurate cause and effect 
different purposes, the manager relationships may be difficult 
has to decide which tool to use to establish. However,principles 
under what circumstances. of management assist 

 (v) Mainly behavioural: Manage- managers in establishing 
ment principles aim at these relationships to some 
influencing behaviour of human extent and are therefore useful. 
beings. Therefore, principles In situations of emergencies, 
of management are mainly it is desirable that someone 
behavioural in nature. It is takes charge and others 
not that these principles do just follow. But in situations 
not pertain to things and requiring cross-functional 
phenomenon at all, it is just a expertise, such as setting up of 
matter of emphasis. Moreover, a new factory, more participative 
principles enable a better approach to decision-making 
understanding of the relationship would be advisable. 
between human and material  (vii) Contingent: The application 
resources in accomplishing of principles of management is 
organisational purposes. For contingent or dependent upon 
example, while planning the the prevailing situation at a 
layout of a factory, orderliness particular point of time. The 
would require that workflows are application of principles has to 
matched by flow of materials and be changed as per requirements. 
movement of men. For example, employees deserve 

 (vi)  Cause and effect relationships: fair and just remuneration. 
The principles of management But what is just and fair is 
are intended to establish determined by multiple factors. 
relationship between cause and They include contribution of the 
effect so that they can be used employee, paying capacity of the 
in similar situations in a large employer and also prevailing 

Reprint 2025-26



36 Business Studies

wage rate for the occupation in the accompanying box. You should 
under consideration. be able to see how she was able to 

Having described the inherent transform a little known sector of 
qualities and characteristics of biotechnology into a very profitable 
management principles, it should company and earn titles which any 
be easy for you to appreciate the one would dream of. 
significance of these principles in From the foregoing story it is 
managerial decision-making. But clear that success of Biocon due to 
before that you can read the following the efforts of Dr. Kiran Mazumdar 
case study of ‘Kiran Mazumdar Shaw was not a mere chance. It 
Shaw’ a highly successful Indian was a sincere effort, which involved 
businesswoman and CEO of ‘Biocon’ application of qualities, which are 

The story of Dr. Kiran Mazumdar Shaw is very inspiring. She foresaw the tremendous 
potential of bio technology when no one dared to think about it. She started her own 
company Biocon India in her garage with a meagre capital of ` 10,000 in collaboration with 
Biocon Bio Chemical’s Limited of Ireland. 

The Company is a pioneer in bringing the benefit of high quality, yet affordable, novel 
biologics and biosimilars to patients in India and other emerging markets. Today, it is India’s 
largest and fully-integrated biopharmaceutical company that develops, manufactures and 
supplies advanced, life-saving biopharmaceuticals for diabetes, cancer and autoimmune 
conditions at price points that make them affordable and thus accessible.

As an innovation-led organization focused on providing affordable access, we have 
leveraged our inherent strengths in advanced science to develop, manufacture and deliver 
a rich portfolio of Small Molecules APIs & Formulations and Complex Biologics - both 
Novels and Biosimilars – including Monoclonal Antibodies (MAbs), rh-insulin and Insulin 
Analogs.

The company’s global scale capacities for manufacturing high quality, affordable biologics 
have positioned the company as the world’s fourth largest insulins producer, enabling us 
to address the growing needs of diabetes patients across the globe. As one of the leading 
oncology companies in India, the company has brought safe, efficacious and affordable 
medicines for cancer to cater to the needs of patients, caregivers and medical practitioners 
in the country.

http://biocon.com/https://www.biocon.com/biocon_aboutus_people_bod.asp

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 37

a part of management principles such management principles 
directly or indirectly. Now you can see increase managerial efficiency. 
the significance of these principles. For example, a manager can 

leave routine decision-making 
significance of PrinciPles 

to his subordinates and deal 
of ManageMent with exceptional situations 
The principles of management derive which require her/his expertise 
their significance from their utility. They by following the principles of 
provide useful insights to managerial delegation. 
behaviour and influence managerial 

 (ii) Optimum utilisation of resources 
practices. Managers may apply these 

and effective administration: 
principles to fulfil their tasks and 

Resources both human and 
responsibilities. Principles guide 

material available with the 
managers in taking and implementing 

company are limited. They have 
decisions. It may be appreciated that 

to be put to optimum use. By 
everything worthwhile is governed by 

optimum use we mean that the 
an underlying principle. The quest 

resources should be put to use 
of the management theorists has 

in such a manner that they 
been and should be to unearth the 

should give maximum benefit 
underlying principles with a view to 

with minimum cost. Principles 
using these under repetitive circums-

equip the managers to foresee 
tances as a matter of management 

the cause and effect relationships 
habit. The significance of principles 

of their decisions and actions. 
of management can be discussed in 

As such the wastages associated 
terms of the following points:

with a trial-and-error approach 
 (i) Providing managers with useful can be overcome. Effective 

insights into reality: The principles administration necessitates 
of management provide the impersonalisation of managerial 
managers with useful insights conduct so that managerial 
into real world situations. power is used with due discretion. 
Adherence to these principles will Principles of management limit 
add to their knowledge, ability the boundary of managerial 
and understanding of managerial discretion so that their decisions 
situations and circumstances. may be free from personal 
It will also enable managers prejudices and biases. For 
to learn from past mistakes example, in deciding the annual 
and conserve time by solving budgets for different departments, 
recurring problems quickly. As rather than personal preferences, 

Reprint 2025-26



38 Business Studies

managerial discretion is bounded Limited in divesting non-core 
by the principle of contribution businesses of chemicals and 
to organisational objectives. seeds. Some companies are 

 (iii) Scientific decisions: Decisions outsourcing their non-core 
must be based on facts, thoughtful activities like share-transfer 
and justifiable in terms of the management and advertising to 
intended purposes. They must outside agencies. So much so, that 
be timely, realistic and subject even core processes such as R&D, 
to measurement and evaluation. manufacturing and marketing 
Management principles help in are being outsourced today. 
thoughtful decision-making. Haven’t you heard of proliferation 
They emphasise logic rather of ‘Business Process Outsourcing’ 
than blind faith. Management (BPO) and ‘Knowledge Process 
decisions taken on the basis of Outsourcing’ (KPO)?
principles are free from bias and  (v) Fulfilling social responsibility: 
prejudice. They are based on The increased awareness of 
the objective assessment of the the public, forces businesses 
situation. especially limited companies to 

 (iv) Meeting changing environment fulfill their social responsibilities. 
requirements: Although the Management theory and 
principles are in the nature management principles have 
of general guidelines but they also evolved in response to 
are modified and as such help these demands. Moreover, the 
managers to meet changing interpretation of the principles 
requirements of the environment. also assumes newer and 
You have already studied that contemporary meanings with 
management principles are the change in time. So, if one 
flexible to adapt to dynamic were to talk of ‘equity’ today, it 
business environment. For does not apply to wages alone. 
example, management principles Value to the customer, care for 
emphasise division of work and the environment, dealings with 
specialisation. In modern times business associates would all 
this principle has been extended come under the purview of this 
to the entire business whereby principle. As an application 
companies are specialising in of this principle, we find that 
their core competency and Public Sector Undertakings 
divesting non-core businesses. have developed entire townships 
In this context, one may cite as, for example, BHEL has 
the decision of Hindustan Lever developed Ranipur in Hardwar 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 39

(Uttaranchal). One may also cite    These principles enable 
the story of Shri Mahila Griha refinement of management 
Udyog Lijjat Papad as can be practices as well by facilitating the 
seen in the accompanying box development of new management 
on page 41. techniques. Thus, we see that 

 (vi) Management training, education techniques like Operations 
and research: Principles of Research (OR), cost accounting, 
management are at the core of ‘Just in Time’, ‘Kanban’ and ‘Kaizen’ 
management theory. As such have developed due to further 
these are used as a basis for research on these principles. 
management training, education In conclusion it can be said that 
and research. You must be aware understanding the meaning, nature 
that entrance to management and significance of principles 
institutes is preceded by of management will help us to 
management aptitude tests. Do appreciate their applicability in real 
you think that these tests could life situations. 
have been developed without an As stated at the beginning of the 
understanding of management chapter, management principles have 
principles and how they may be undergone a long history of evolution. 
applied in different situations? And, they continue to evolve. What 
These principles provide basic follows is a description of the 
groundwork for the development management principles pertaining to 
of management as a discipline. the classical school; more precisely, 
Professional courses such those propounded by F.W. Taylor and 
as MBA (Master of Business Henri Fayol.
Administration), BBA (Bachelor taylor’s scientific 
of Business Administration) also 
teach these principles as part ManageMent 
of their curriculum at the Scientific management refers to an 
beginner’s level. important stream of one of the earlier 

Test Your Understanding
1. Do you think innovativeness evident from the 

examples of Toyota and Kiran Mazumdar Shaw can be 
linked to the nature of management principles? 

2. To what aspects of the significance of management 
principles would you attribute the endeavours of 
BHEL and Shri Mahila Griha Udyog Lijjat Papad?

Reprint 2025-26



40 Business Studies

Shri Mahila Griha Udyog Lijjat Papad- Combining 
business with social responsibility (An organization of 

the women, by the women and for the women)

The story of Shri Mahila Griha Udyog lijjat Papad is very inspiring for would-be 
managers. It shows how an organisation can combine business with social 
responsibility and make its stakeholders self-reliant. The stakeholders are 
various women who, numbering over 45,000, are given the task of making 
lijjat papads, which are famous for their quality throughout the world.    The 
organisation started with a modest loan of Rs 80 and is now worth around Rs 
650 crores. Its exports exceed Rs 60 crores. Their exports are made through 
Merchant Exporters to countries like UK, USA, Middle East Countries, 
Thailand, Singapore, Hongkong, Holland, Japan, Australia and other Countries.

One of the main reasons for their success can be attributed to their core 
values to which they have stuck to since its inception in 1959. It has shown 
how it is possible to combine Gandhian values with business. Shri Mahila Griha 
Udyog Lijjat Papad is a synthesis of three different concepts (core values) 
namely: 

1. The concept of business 

2. The concept of family 

3. The concept of devotion 
All these concepts are uniformly followed in this institution. As a result of 

this synthesis, a peculiar Lijjat way of thinking has developed therein.

Besides the concept of business, the institution along with all its member 
sisters has adopted the concept of mutual family affection, concern and trust. 
All the affairs of the institution are dealt with in a manner similar to that of a 
family carrying out its own daily household chores. But the most important 
concept adopted by the institution is the concept of devotion. For the member-
sisters, employees and well-wishers, the institution is never merely a place to 
earn one’s livelihood — it is a place of worship to devote one’s energy not for 
his or her own benefits but for the benefit of all. Lijjat’ provides scholarships 
to the children of the papad roller sister members who pass out in 10th and 
12th standard every year so as to enable the Lady Members to encourage their 
children for education. 

Source: Adapted from http/www.lijjat.com

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 41

schools of thought of management who sought to improve industrial 
referred to as the ‘Classical’ school. efficiency. In 1874, he became an 
The other two streams belonging apprentice mechanist, learning 
to the classical school are Fayol’s factory conditions at the grass 
Administrative Theory and Max roots level. He earned a degree in 
Weber’s Bureaucracy. We will not mechanical engineering. He was 
be describing bureaucracy here. one of the intellectual leaders of 
A discussion of Fayol’s principles, the efficiency movement and was 
however, will follow the discussion of highly influential in reshaping the 
scientific management. factory system of production. You 

Fredrick Winslow Taylor (March must appreciate that he belonged to 
20,1856 – March 21, 1915) was the era of the industrial revolution 
an American mechanical engineer characterised by mass production. 

Fredrick Winslow Taylor – 
Founder of Scientific Management Movement

LIFE TIME: March 20,1856 to March 21, 1915
PROFESSION: American mechanical engineer
EDUCATION: Degree in Mechanical  Engineering from Stevens Institute 
of  Technology in 1883. 
POSITIONS HELD— 
1. Apprentice Machinist in 1874.
2. Executive at Midville Steel Company in 1884.
3. At Bethlehem Iron Company in 1898, which later became Bethlehem 

Steel Company.
4. Professor at ‘Tuck School of Business’ founded in 1900.
5. President of ‘American Society of Mechanical Engineers’ from 1906 to 

1907.
WRITINGS:1. ‘The Principles of Scientific Management’ series of articles 
published in ‘The American Magazine’
During march-may 1911, later published in book form.
1. ‘Concrete, Plain and Reinforced’ in 1906.
2. ‘Notes on Belting’ in 1893
3. ‘On the Art of Cutting Metals’ December 1906.
4. ‘A Piece Rate System’ in June 1895.
5. ‘The making of a putting green’ a series of articles published in 1915.
6. ‘Not for the genius but for the average man’ published in ‘The 

American Magazine’ in March 1918.

Adapted from www.wikipedia.org and www.stevens.edu/library

Reprint 2025-26



42 Business Studies

You must also appreciate that every abilities. He instructed his fellow 
new development takes some time to workers to work in phases. He joined 
be perfected. Taylor’s contribution the Bethlehem Iron Company in 
must be seen in the light of the efforts 1898, which later became Bethlehem 
made to perfect the factory system of Steel Company. He was originally 
production. employed to introduce piece rate 

Taylor thought that by scientifically wage system. After setting up 
analysing work, it would be possible the wage system, he was given 
to find ‘one best way’ to do it. authority and more responsibilities 
He is most remembered for his time in the company. Using his newfound 
and motion studies. He would break resources he increased the staff and 
a job into its component parts and made Bethlehem a show place for 
measure each to the second. inventive work. Unfortunately, the 

Taylor believed that contemporary company was sold to another group 
management was amateurish and and he was discharged.
should be studied as a discipline. In 1910 his health started to fall. 
He also wanted that workers should He died in 1915 due to pneumonia. A 
cooperate with the management and synoptic view of his contribution can 
thus there would be no need of trade be had from the accompanying box 
unions. The best results would come on the next page. 
from the partnership between a trained PrinciPles of scientific 
and qualified management and a 
cooperative and innovative workforce. ManageMent
Each side needed the other. In the earlier days of the Industrial 

He is known for coinage of the Revolution, in the absence of 
term ‘Scientific Management’ in his an established theory of factory 
article ‘The Principles of Scientific organisation, factory owners or 
Management’ published in 1911. managers relied on personal judgment 
After being fired from Bethlehem Steel in attending to the problems they 
Company he wrote a book ‘Shop floor’ confronted in the course of managing 
which sold well. He was selected to be their work. This is what is referred to 
the president of the American Society as ‘rule of thumb’. Managing factories 
of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) from by rule of thumb enabled them to 
1906 to 1907. He was a professor at handle the situations as they arose 
Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth but suffered from the limitation of a 
College founded in 1900. trial and error approach. For their 

In 1884 he became an executive experiences to be emulated, it was 
at Midvale Steel Company by important to know what works and 
demonstrating his leadership why does it work. For this, there was 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 43

Taylor’s Contribution to Scientific Management

The following extracts are taken from Taylor’s testimony before the U.S. 
House of Representatives Special Committee in 1912 and also from his most 
important work “THE PRINCIPLES OF SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT” 
published in 1911.

“Scientific management requires first, a careful investigation of each of the 
many modifications of the same implement, developed under rule of thumb; 
and second, after time and motion study has been made of the speed attainable 
with each of these implements, that the good points of several of them shall be 
unified in a single standard implementation, which will enable the workman to 
work faster and with greater ease than he could before. This one implement, 
then is adopted as standard in place of the many different kinds before in use and 
it remains standard for all workmen to use until superseded by an implement 
which has been shown, through motion and time study, to be still better.” 
(Scientific management, page 119)

The main elements of the Scientific Management are: (page 129-130  
sci-mgt) “Time Studies”

Functional or specialised supervision 
Standardisation of tools and implements 
Standardisation of work methods
Separate Planning function
Management by exception principle
The use of ‘slide-rules and similar time-saving devices’ 
Instruction cards for workmen
Task allocation and large bonus for successful performance 
The use of the ‘differential rate’
Mnemonic systems for classifying products and implements 
A routing system
A modern costing system etc. etc. 
Taylor called these elements “merely the elements or details of the 

mechanisms of management” He saw them as extensions of the four principles 
of management. (Page 130, scientific management)
1. The development of a true science.
2. The scientific selection of the workman.
3. The scientific education and development of the workman.
4. Intimate and friendly cooperation between the management and the 

employees.

Adapted from Taylorism (F.W. Taylor & Scientific Management) at 
http://www.quality.org/TQM-MSI/taylor.html

Reprint 2025-26



44 Business Studies

a need to follow an approach that indigenous rules of thumb, it is 
was based on the method of science- but a statement of the obvious 
defining a problem, developing that all would not be equally 
alternative solutions, anticipating effective. Taylor believed that 
consequences, measuring progress there was only one best method 
and drawing conclusions. to maximise efficiency. This 

In this scenario, Taylor emerged as method can be developed through 
the ‘Father of Scientific Management’. study and analysis. The method 
He proposed scientific management so developed should substitute 
as opposed to rule of thumb. He ‘Rule of Thumb’ throughout 
broke up human activity into small the organisation. Scientific 
parts and found out how it could be method involved investigation 
done effectively, in less time and with of traditional methods through 
increased productivity. It implies work-study, unifying the best 
conducting business activities practices and developing a 
according to standardised tools, standard method, which would 
methods and trained personnel in be followed throughout the 
order to increase the output, improve organisation. According to 
its quality and reduce costs and Taylor, even a small production 
wastes. activity like loading pigs of iron 

In the words of Taylor, “Scientific into boxcars can be scientifically 
management means knowing exactly planned and managed. This can 
what you want men to do and seeing result in tremendous saving of 
that they do it in the best and cheapest human energy as well as wastage 
way. The Bethlehem Steel company of time and materials. The more 
where Taylor himself worked achieved sophisticated the processes, 
three-fold increase in productivity by greater would be the savings.
application of scientific management    In the present context, the 
principles. Therefore, it would be in use of Internet has brought 
order to discuss these principles. about dramatic improvements 
 (i) Science not Rule of Thumb: in internal efficiencies and 

Taylor pioneered the introduction customer satisfaction. 
of the method of scientific  (ii) Harmony, Not Discord: Factory 
inquiry into the domain of system of production implied that 
management practice. We have managers served as a link between 
already referred to the limitations the owners and the workers. 
of the rule of thumb approach Since as managers they had the 
of management. As different mandate to ‘get work done’ from 
managers would follow their the workers, it should not be 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 45

difficult for you to appreciate that state, Taylor called for complete 
there always existed the possibility mental revolution on the part of 
of a kind of class-conflict, the both management and workers. 
mangers versus workers. Taylor It means that management and 
recognised that this conflict workers should transform their 
helped none, the workers, the thinking. In such a situation 
managers or the factory owners. even trade unions will not think 
He emphasised that there should of going on strike etc.
be complete harmony between    Management should share the 
the management and workers. gains of the company, if any, with 
Both should realise that each the workers. At the same time 
one is important. To achieve this workers should work hard and 

Sharing of gains between management and 
workers leading to complete harmony

Reprint 2025-26



46 Business Studies

be willing to embrace change for their suggestions which results 
the good of the company. Both in substantial reduction in 
should be part of the family. costs. They should be part 
According to Taylor, ‘Scientific of management and, if any 
management has for its important decisions are taken, 
foundation the firm conviction workers should be taken into 
that the true interests of the confidence.
two are one and the same; that    At the same time workers 
prosperity for the employer should desist from going on 
cannot exist for a long time unless strike and making unreasonable 
it is accompanied by prosperity demands on the management. 
for the employees and vice In fact when there will be open 
versa’. communication system and 

   Japanese work culture is a goodwill there will be no need for 
classic example of such a even a trade union. Paternalistic 
situation. In Japanese companies, style of management, whereby 
paternalistic style of management the employer takes care of the 
is in practice. There is complete needs of employees, would 
openness between the manage- prevail as in the case of Japanese 
ment and workers. If at all companies.
workers go to strike they wear a    According to Taylor, there 
black badge but work more than should be an almost equal division 
normal working hours to gain the of work and responsibility between 
sympathy of the management. workers and management. All the 

 (iii) Cooperation, Not Individualism: day long the management should 
There should be complete work almost side by side with the 
cooperation between the labour workers helping, encouraging and 
and the management instead smoothing the way for them.
of individualism. This principle is  (iv) Development of Each and Every 
an extension of principle of Person to His or Her Greatest 
‘Harmony not discord’. Competition Efficiency and Prosperity: 
should be replaced by cooperation. Industrial efficiency depends 
Both should realise that they need to a large extent on personnel 
each other. competencies. As such, 

   For this, management should scientific management also 
not close its ears to any stood for worker development. 
constructive suggestions Worker training was essential 
made by the employees. also to learn the ‘best method’ 
They should be rewarded for developed as a consequence of 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 47

the scientific approach. Taylor planning, implementation and 
was of the view that the concern control. Thus, Taylor concentrated 
for efficiency could be built on improving the performance of this 
in right from the process of role in the factory set-up. In fact, he 
employee selection. Each person identified a list of qualities of a good 
should be scientifically selected. foreman/supervisor and found that no 
Then work assigned should single person could fit them all. This 
suit her/his physical, mental prompted him to suggest functional 
and intellectual capabilities. To foremanship through eight persons.
increase efficiency, they should Taylor advocated separation of 
be given the required training. planning and execution functions. 
Efficient employees would This concept was extended to the 
produce more and earn more. lowest level of the shop floor. It was 
This will ensure their greatest known as functional foremanship. 
efficiency and prosperity for both Under the factory manager there was 
company and workers. a planning incharge and a production 

From the foregoing discussion it incharge. Under planning incharge 
is clear that Taylor was an ardent four personnel namely instruction 
supporter of use of scientific method card clerk, route clerk, time and cost 
of production in business. clerk and a disciplinarian worked. 

These four personnel would draft 
techniques of scientific instructions for the workers, specify 

M the route of production, prepare 
anageMent

time and cost sheet and ensure 
Let us now discuss techniques as discipline respectively.
specified by him. These are based on Under Production incharge, 
the various experiments he conducted personnel who would work were 
during his career. speed boss, gang boss, repair boss, 

and inspector. These respectively 
functional foreManshiP were responsible for timely and 
In the factory system, the foreman accurate completion of job, keeping 
represents the managerial figure with machines and tools etc., ready for 
whom the workers are in face-to-face operation by workers, ensure proper 
contact on a daily basis. In the first working condition of machines and 
chapter of the book, you have seen tools and check the quality of work.
that the foreman is the lowest ranking Functional foremanship is an 
manager and the highest ranking extension of the principle of division 
worker. He is the pivot around of work and specialisation to the 
whom revolves the entire production shop floor. Each worker will have to 

Reprint 2025-26



48 Business Studies

Factory Manager

Planning Incharge Production Incharge

Instruction Route Time and Speed Gang Repairs Inspector
Card Clerk Clerk Cost Clerk Boss Boss Boss

Disciplinarian

Workman

take orders from these eight foremen prevalent under the rule of thumb. 
in the related process or function of The best practices can be kept and 
production. Foremen should have further refined to develop a standard 
intelligence, education, tact, grit, which should be followed throughout 
judgment, special knowledge, manual the organisation. This can be done 
dexterity, and energy, honesty and through work-study techniques which 
good health. Since all these qualities include time study, motion study, 
could not be found in a single person fatigue study and method study, and 
so Taylor proposed eight specialists. which are discussed further in this 
Each specialist is to be assigned chapter. It may be pointed out that 
work according to her/his qualities. even the contemporary techniques 
For example, those with technical of business process including 
mastery, intelligence and grit may reengineering, kaizen (continuous 
be given planning work. Those with improvement) and benchmarking are 
energy and good health may be aimed at standardising the work. 
assigned execution work. Standardisation refers to the process 

of setting standards for every business 
standardisation and activity; it can be standardisation of 

process, raw material, time, product, 
siMPlification of Work machinery, methods or working 
Taylor was an ardent supporter of conditions. These standards are the 
standardisation. According to him benchmarks, which must be adhered 
scientific method should be used to during production. The objectives of 
to analyse methods of production standardisation are: 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 49

 (i) To reduce a given line or Company used this concept very 
product to fixed types, sizes and successfully. Even now auto 
characteristics. companies are using it.

 (ii) To establish interchange ability The objective of the whole exercise is 
of manufactured parts and to minimise the cost of production and 
products. maximise the quality and satisfaction 

 (iii) To establish standards of exce­ of the customer. For this purpose 
llence and quality in materials. many techniques like process charts 

 (iv) To establish standards of perfor­ and operations research etc are used.
mance of men and machines. For designing a car, the assembly 

Simplification aims at eliminating line production would entail deciding 
superfluous varieties, sizes and dim­ the sequence of operations, place for 
ensions while standardisation implies men, machines and raw materials 
devising new varieties instead of the etc. All this is part of method study.
existing ones. Simplification aims at 
eliminating unnecessary diversity of Motion Study

products. It results in savings of cost of Motion study refers to the study of 
labour, machines and tools. It implies movements like lifting, putting objects, 
reduced inventories, fuller utilisation of sitting and changing positions, etc., 
equipment and increasing turnover. which are undertaken while doing a 

Most large companies like Nokia, typical job. Unnecessary movements 
Toyota and Microsoft, etc. have are sought to be eliminated so that 
successfully implemented standardi­ it takes less time to complete the job 
sation and simplification. This is efficiently. For example, Taylor and his 
evident from their large share in their associate Frank Gailberth were able to 
respective markets. reduce motions in brick layering from 

18 to just 5. Taylor demonstrated that 
Method Study productivity increased to about four 
The objective of method study is to times by this process.
find out one best way of doing the job. On close examination of body 
There are various methods of doing motions, for example, it is possible to 
the job. To determine the best way find out:
there are several parameters. Right  (i) Motions which are productive
from procurement of raw materials  (ii) Motions which are incidental 
till the final product is delivered to (e.g., going to stores)
the customer every activity is part  (iii) Motions which are unproductive.
of method study. Taylor devised Taylor used stopwatches and various 
the concept of assembly line by symbols and colours to identify 
using method study. Ford Motor different motions. Through motion 

Reprint 2025-26



50 Business Studies

studies, Taylor was able to design rest intervals will help one to regain 
suitable equipment and tools to stamina and work again with the same 
educate workers on their use. The capacity. This will result in increased 
results achieved by him were truly productivity. Fatigue study seeks to 
remarkable. determine the amount and frequency 

of rest intervals in completing a task. 
tiMe study For example, normally in a plant, 
It determines the standard time taken work takes place in three shifts of 
to perform a well-defined job. Time eight hours each. Even in a single 
measuring devices are used for each shift a worker has to be given some 
element of task. The standard time rest interval to take her/his lunch 
is fixed for the whole of the task by etc. If the work involves heavy manual 
taking several readings. The method labour then small pauses have to be 
of time study will depend upon frequently given to the worker so that 
volume and frequency of the task, the she/he can recharge her/his energy 
cycle time of the operation and time level for optimum contribution. 
measurement costs. The objective There can be many causes for 
of time study is to determine the fatigue like long working hours, 
number of workers to be employed; doing unsuitable work, having 
frame suitable incentive schemes uncordial relations with the boss or 
and determine labour costs. bad working conditions etc. Such 

For example, on the basis of hindrances in good performance 
several observations it is determined should be removed.
that standard time taken by the 
worker to make one cardboard box is differential Piece Wage 
20 minutes. So in one hour she/he 
will make 3 boxes. Assuming that a systeM

worker has to put in 8 hours of work Taylor was a strong advocate of 
in a shift and deducting one hour for piece wage system. He wanted to 
rest and lunch, it is determined that differentiate between efficient and 
in 7 hours a worker makes 21 boxes inefficient workers. The standard 
@ 3 boxes per hour. Now this is the time and other parameters should be 
standard task a worker has to do. determined on the basis of the work-
Wages can be decided accordingly. study discussed above. The workers 

can then be classified as efficient 
fatigue study or inefficient on the basis of these 
A person is bound to feel tired standards. He wanted to reward 
physically and mentally if she/he efficient workers. So he introduced 
does not rest while working. The different rate of wage payment for 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 51

those who performed above standard rather than quarrelling over the 
and for those who performed share in the resultant surplus, the 
below standard. For example, it is workers and managers should work 
determined that standard output per in harmony for maximising the output 
worker per day is 10 units and those rather than restricting it. Clearly the 
who made standard or more than sum and substance of Taylor’s ideas 
standard will get Rs. 50 per unit and lies not in the disjointed description of 
those below will get Rs. 40 per unit. principles and techniques of scientific 
Now an efficient worker making 11 management, but in the change of 
units will get 11�50= Rs. 550 per day the mindset, which he referred to as 
whereas a worker who makes 9 units mental revolution. Mental revolution 
will get 9××�40 = Rs. 360 per day. involves a change in the attitude of 

According to Taylor, the difference workers and management towards 
of Rs. 190 should be enough for the one another from competition to 
inefficient worker to be motivated cooperation. Both should realise that 
to perform better. From his own they require one another. Both should 
experience, Taylor gives the example of aim to increase the size of surplus. 
a worker named Schmidt who was able This would eliminate the need for any 
to earn 60% more wages from $1.15 to agitation. Management should share a 
$1.85 on increasing pig iron loading part of surplus with workers. Workers 
from 12.5 tons per man per day to 47 should also contribute their might 
tons per man per day in box cars at so that the company makes profits. 
Bethlehem Steel works by following This attitude will be good for both of 
scientific management techniques. them and also for the company. In the 

It is important to have a relook at the long run only worker’s well-being will 
techniques of scientific management ensure prosperity of the business. 
as comprising a unified whole of Now, having studied the elements, 
Taylor’s prescription of efficiency. principles and techniques of scientific 
Search for efficiency requires the management we can consider the 
search for one best method and the practical applications of the same at the 
chosen method must lead to the time of F.W. Taylor and in the present.
determination of a fair day’s work. We can also examine the present 
There must be a compensation system status of scientific management. 
that differentiates those who are able Today, many new techniques have 
to accomplish/exceed the fair day’s been developed as a sequel to scientific 
work. This differential system must be management. Operations research 
based on the premise that efficiency was developed in the second World 
is the result of the joint efforts of the War to optimise the deployment of war 
managers and the workers. Thus, material. Similarly assembly line was 

Reprint 2025-26



52 Business Studies

also discovered by F.W. Taylor, which fayol’s PrinciPles of 
was used very successfully by Ford 
motor company for manufacturing ManageMent

‘Model T’ car for the masses. This In the development of classical school 
concept is much used now. The latest of management thought, Fayol’s 
development in scientific management administrative theory provides 
is ‘LEAN MANUFACTURING’. Now an important link. While Taylor 
a days robotics and computers are succeeded in revolutionising the 
being used in production and other working of factory shop-floor in terms 
business activities. This is part of devising the best method, fair day’s 
of scientific management of these work, differential piece-rate system 
activities. It has increased productivity and functional foremanship; Henri 
levels. The techniques of operation Fayol explained what amounts to a 
research have also been developed managers work and what principles 
and are being used as a result of should be followed in doing this work. 
scientific management. The box below If workers’ efficiency mattered in the 
gives meanings of some terms used in factory system, so does the managerial 
modern manufacturing. efficiency. Fayol’s contribution must 

Applications of Scientific Management 
by Taylor and his Contemporaries

1. Taylor found out the optimum-shovelling load of 21 pounds per shovel per 
worker through a series of experiments in work-study at Bethlehem Steel 
Company. The implementation saved the company $ 75000 to $80000 per 
year.

2. Pig iron handling per person per day was increased from 12.5 tons to  
47 tons. This also resulted in the wages increase to labourers by 60% but 
also savings to the company on account of less number of labourers from 
500 to 140.

3. He had published a paper “The Art of cutting metals” which turned it into 
a science.

4. He designed a Piece Rate Wage System including incentives for Bethlehem 
Steel Company.

5. Taylor’s associate Frank Gilbreth applied scientific management to the art 
of ‘brick layering’ and through motion study was able to eliminate certain 
motions which were considered by the brick layers to be necessary 
(reduced motions from 18 to 5), designed simple apparatus like adjustable 
scaffold and its packets to hold the bricks and finally also taught brick 
layers to use both the hands at the same time. This is a classic example of 
application of Scientific Management to the simple art of brick layering.

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 53

be interpreted in terms of the impact theories concerning scientific 
that his writings had and continue organisation of labour were widely 
to have improvement in managerial influential in the beginning of 
efficiencies. twentieth century. He graduated from 

Henri Fayol (1841-1925) was a the mining academy of St. Etienne 
French management theorist whose in 1860 in mining engineering. The 

Glossary of Some Terms of Modern 
Production/Scientific Management
1. Just In Time Manufacturing: It is an inventory management strategy to 

improve return on investment by reducing in process inventory and its 
associated costs. The system is implemented by the use of visual signals or 
KANBAN, which tells whether the replenishment is required at any level 
of production process, or not.

2. Lean Manufacturing: It is a management philosophy focusing on reduction of 
seven wastes of overproduction, waiting time, transportation, processing, 
motion, inventory and scrap in any type of manufacturing process or any 
type of business. By eliminating waste, quality is improved, production 
time is reduced and cost is reduced.

3. Kaizen: It is a Japanese word, which means ‘change for better’ or 
‘improvement’. It is an approach to improvement of productivity through 
application of works of American experts such as F.W. Taylor by Japanese 
after World War II. The goals of kaizen include elimination of waste (which 
is defined as those activities which add cost but not value to the product 
or service), just in time delivery, production load levelling of amount and 
types, standardised work, paced moving lines, right sized equipment and 
others. A closer Japanese use of the word means ‘to take apart and put it 
in a better way’. What is taken apart is usually a process, system, product 
or service. It is a daily activity which humanizes the workplace, eliminates 
hard work both physical and mental, teaches people how to do rapid 
experiments using scientific method and how to learn to see and eliminate 
waste in business processes.

4. Six Sigma: It is a data driven approach that can help any organisation- 
whatever sector or field it might be operating in, to bring down inefficiencies 
and save time and money by reducing ‘quality variations’. It has a strong 
customer oriented approach that relies on data to create more efficient 
processes or refine existing processes. There should not be more than 3-4 
defects per million opportunities according to prescribed norms. It can be 
applied to any process but needs unstilted organisational support.

Reprint 2025-26



54 Business Studies

19 year old engineer started at English as ‘General and Industrial 
the mining company ‘Compagnie Management’ in 1949 and is widely 
de commentary-Fourchambean- considered a foundational work in 
Decazeville, ultimately acting classical management theory. For his 
as its managing director from contribution he is also known as the 
1888 to 1918. ‘Father of General Management’

His theories deal with The 14 principles of management 
organisation of production in the given by him are:
context of a competitive enterprise  (i) Division of Work: Work is 
that has to control its production divided into small tasks/
costs. Fayol was the first to identify jobs. A trained specialist who 
four functions of management – is competent is required to 
Planning, Organising, Directing and perform each job. Thus, division 
Controlling although his version of work leads to specialisation. 
was a bit different – Plan, Organise, According to Fayol, “The intent 
Command, Coordinate and Control. of division of work is to produce 
According to Fayol, all activities more and better work for the 
of an industrial undertaking same effort. Specialisation is 
could be divided into: Technical; the most efficient way to use 
Commercial; Financial; Security; human effort.” 
Accounting and Managerial. He    In business work can be 
also suggested that qualities a performed more efficiently if it 
manager must possess should is divided into specialised tasks; 
be — Physical, Moral, Education, each performed by a specialist 
Knowledge and experience. He or trained employee. This 
believed that the number of results in efficient and effective 
management principles that might output. Thus, in a company we 
help to improve an organisation’s have separate departments 
operation is potentially limitless. for  f inance,  market ing, 

Based largely on his own production and human resource 
experience, he developed his development etc. All of them have 
concept of administration. The specialised persons. Collectively 
14 principles of management they achieve production and 
propounded by him were discussed sales targets of the company. 
in detail in his book published in Fayol applies this principle of 
1917, ‘Administration industrielle division of work to all kinds 
et generale’. It was published in of work – technical as well as 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 55

Henri Fayol
1. Life Time: 1841 TO 1925
2. Profession: Mining Engineer and Management 

Theorist (French national)
3. Education: Graduated from Mining Academy at St. 

Entinne. in 1880.
4. Positions Held: Founded the mining company 

‘Cmpagnie de Commentry- Fourchambeau-
Decazeville’ and became its Managing Director in 
1888 and remained till 1918.

5. Writings: Administration industrielle et générale. It 
was published in English as General and Industrial 
Management in 1949 and is widely considered a 
foundational work in classical management theory.

6. Contributions: Mainly 14 Management Principles, which are referred to as 
administrative in nature in that they have Top-Down approach concerning 
top management and other manager’s conduct. 

Source: www.en.wikipedia.org 
Image source: www.image.google.com

managerial. You can observe Authority is both formal and 
this principle at work in any informal. Managers require authority 
organisation like hospital or commensurate with their responsibility. 
even a government office. There should be a balance between 

 (ii) Authority and Responsibility: authority and responsibility. An 
According to Fayol, “Authority organisation should build safeguards 
is the right to give orders against abuse of managerial power. At 
and obtain obedience, and the same time a manager should have 
responsibility is the corollary necessary authority to carry out his 
of authority. The two types of responsibility. For example, a sales 
authority are official authority, manager has to negotiate a deal with 
which is the authority to a buyer. She finds that if she can offer 
command, and personal credit period of 60 days she is likely to 
authority which is the authority clinch the deal which is supposed to 
of the individual manager.” fetch the company net margin of say 

Reprint 2025-26



56 Business Studies

` 50 crores. Now the company gives orders from two superiors at the 
power to the manager to offer a credit same time the principle of unity 
period of only 40 days. This shows of command is violated. The 
that there is an imbalance in authority principle of unity of command 
and responsibility. In this case the states that each participant in 
manager use authority of offering a formal organisation should 
credit period of 60 days in the interest receive orders from and be 
of the company. Discuss in your Class responsible to only one superior. 
as to ‘why’ and ‘why not’ Fayol gave a lot of importance to 
 (iii) Discipline: Discipline is the this principle. He felt that if this 

obedience to organisational rules principle is violated “authority 
and employment agreement which is undermined, discipline is 
are necessary for the working of in jeopardy, order disturbed 
the organisation. According to and stability threatened”. The 
Fayol, discipline requires good principle resembles military 
superiors at all levels, clear and organisation. Dual subordination 
fair agreements and judicious should be avoided. This is to 
application of penalties. prevent confusion regarding 

   Suppose management and tasks to be done. Suppose a 
labour union have entered into sales person is asked to clinch 
an agreement whereby workers a deal with a buyer and is 
have agreed to put in extra hours allowed to give 10% discount 
without any additional payment by the marketing manager. But 
to revive the company out of finance department tells her/
loss. In return the management him not to offer more than 5% 
has promised to increase wages discount. Now there is no unity 
of the workers when this mission of command. This can be avoided 
is accomplished. Here discipline if there is coordination between 
when applied would mean that various departments.
the workers and management  (v) Unity of Direction: All the 
both honour their commitments units of an organisation should 
without any prejudice towards be moving towards the same 
one another. objectives through coordinated 

 (iv) Unity of Command: According and focussed efforts. Each group 
to Fayol there should be one and of activities having the same 
only one boss for every individual objective must have one head 
employee. If an employee gets and one plan. This ensures 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 57

unity of action and coordination. get maximum output from its 
For example, if a company is employees at a competitive cost 
manufacturing motorcycles as (salary). On the other hand, 
well as cars then it should have an employee may want to get 
two separate divisions for both maximum salary while working 
of them. Each division should the least. In another situation an 
have its own incharge, plans individual employee may demand 
and execution resources. On no some concession, which is not 
account should the working of admissible to any other employee 
two divisions overlap. Now let like working for less time. 
us differentiate between the two    In all the situations the 
principles of unity of command interests of the group/company 
and unity of direction. will supersede the interest of 

 (vi) Subordination of Individual any one individual. This is 
Interest to General Interest: so because larger interests of 
The interests of an organisation the workers and stakeholders 
should take priority over the are more important than the 
interests of any one individual interest of any one person. For 
employee according to Fayol. example, interests of various 
Every worker has some stakeholders, i.e., owners, 
individual interest for working in shareholders, creditors, debtors, 
a company. The company has got financers, tax authorities, 
its own objectives. For example, customers and the society at 
the company would want to large cannot be sacrificed for 

Difference betweeen Unity of Command and Unity of Direction

Basis Unity of Command Unity of Direction

One subordinate should Each group of activities 
receive orders from and having same objective must 

1. Meaning
should be responsible to have one head and one 
only one superior. plan.

It prevents dual It prevents overlapping of 
2. Aim

subordination. activities.

It affects an individual It affects the entire 
3. Implications

employee. organisation.

Reprint 2025-26



58 Business Studies

one individual or a small group subordinate involvement through 
of individuals who want to exert decentra lisation with managers’ 
pressure on the company. A retention of final authority 
manager can ensure this by through centralisation.” The 
her/his exemplary behaviour. degree of centralisation will 
For example, she/he should not depend upon the circumstances 
fall into temptation of misusing in which the company is working. 
her/his powers for individual/ In general large organisations 
family benefit at the cost of larger have more decentralisation than 
general interest of the workers/ small organisations. For example, 
company. This will raise her/his panchayats in our country have 
stature in the eyes of the workers been given more powers to 
and at the same time ensure decide and spend funds granted 
same behaviour by them. to them by the government 

 (vii) Remuneration of Employees: for the welfare of villages. 
The overall pay and compensation This is decentralisation at the 
should be fair to both employees national level.
and the organisation. The  (ix) Scalar Chain: An organisation 
employees should be paid fair consists of superiors and 
wages, which should give them subordinates. The formal lines of 
at least a reasonable standard of authority from highest to lowest 
living. At the same time it should ranks are known as scalar chain.
be within the paying capacity of    According to Fayol, “Organisa-
the company. In other words, tions should have a chain of 
remuneration should be just authority and communication 
and equitable. This will ensure that runs from top to bottom and 
congenial atmosphere and good should be followed by managers 
relations between workers and and the subordinates.”
management. Consequently, the    Let us consider a situation where 
working of the company would there is one head ‘A’ who has 
be smooth. two lines of authority under her/

 (viii)Centralisation and Decentr­ him. One line consists of B-C-
alisation: The concentration of D-E-F. Another line of authority 
decision-making authority is under ‘A’ is L-M-N-O-P. If ‘E’ has 
called centralisation whereas to communicate with ‘O’ who is 
its dispersal among more at the same level of authority 
than one person is  known as then she/he has to traverse the 
decentralisation. According to route E-D-C-B-A-L-M-N-O. This 
Fayol, “There is a need to balance is due to the principle of scalar 

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 59

A  (x) Order: According to Fayol, 
“People and materials must be 
in suitable places at appropriate 

B L time for maximum efficiency.” 
The principle of order states that 
‘A place for everything (everyone) 

C M and everything (everyone) in its 
(her/his) place’. Essentially it 

D N means orderliness. If there is a 
fixed place for everything and it 
is present there, then there will 

E O be no hindrance in the activities 
of business/ factory. This will 

F P lead to increased productivity 
and efficiency.

 (xi) Equity: Good sense and 
Fayol’s Scalar Chain experience are needed to ensure 

fairness to all employees, who 
chain being followed in this should be treated as fairly as 
situation. According to Fayol, possible,” according to Fayol. 
this chain should not be violated This principle emphasises 
in the normal course of formal kindliness and justice in the 
communication. However, if there behaviour of managers towards 
is an emergency then ‘E’ can workers. This will ensure 
directly contact ‘O’ through ‘Gang loyalty and devotion. Fayol 
Plank’ as shown in the diagram. does not rule out use of force 
This is a shorter route and sometimes. Rather he says that 
has been provided so that lazy personnel should be dealt 
communication is not delayed. with sternly to send the message 
In practice you find that a worker that everyone is equal in the 
cannot directly contact the CEO eyes of the management. There 
of the company. If at all she/he should be no discrimination 
has to, then all the formal levels against anyone on account 
i.e., foreman, superintendent, of gender, religion, language, 
manager, director etc have caste, belief or nationality etc. 
to know about the matter. In practice we can observe that 
However, in an emergency it can now a days in multinational 
be possible that a worker can corporations people of various 
contact CEO directly. nationalities work together in a 

Reprint 2025-26



60 Business Studies

discrimination free environment. position for a minimum fixed 
Equal opportunities are available tenure. They should have stability 
for everyone in such companies of tenure. They should be given 
to rise. reasonable time to show results. 

 (xii) Stability of Personnel: “Employee Any adhocism in this regard 
turnover should be minimised will create instability/insecurity 
to maintain organisational among employees. They would 
efficiency”, according to Fayol. tend to leave the organisation. 
Personnel should be selected and Recruitment, selection and 
appointed after due and rigorous training cost will be high. So 
procedure. But once selected stability in tenure of personnel 
they should be kept at their post/ is good for the business.

Employee suggestion system: Encourage 
initiative among trainee managers

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 61

Fayol: Then and Now
Now let us see what Fayol’s principles means in the contemporary business situations 
especially service based and high tech economies like USA. Carl A. Rodrigues of 
Mont Clair State University, Upper Montclair, New Jersey, USA has come out with 
the following conclusions in his paper “Fayol’s 14 Principles of Management. Then 
and Now- A Framework For Managing Today’s Organisations Effectively” published 
in Journal “Management Decision” 39/10(2001) PP 880-889.

Name of Principle THEN NOW

1. Division of Work Specialisation in workers Generalisation in workers’ 
Job design Job design

2. Authority & Managers are empowered Employees are 
Responsibility empowered

3. Discipline Formalised Controls Informal, Peer pressure 
controls

4. Unity of Command Subordinates report to only Subordinates report to 
one boss multiple bosses

5. Unity of Direction Functions have only one Functions have multiple 
plan and one boss plans and multiple bosses

6. Subordination of Employees are committed Organisation is committed 
individual interest to the organisation to the employees and vice 
to common good versa

7. Remuneration of Reasonable Pay reward Performance based reward 
personnel system system

8. Centralisation Trickle down decision Task relevant ad hoc 
making decision making

9. Scalar Chain Hierarchical, formalised Less formalised, flatter 
communication channel communication structure.

10. Order Internal information system Internal information 
for control purposes system for coordination 

purposes.
11. Equity Commitment obtained Commitment obtained 

through kindness through a sense of 
ownership

12. Stability of tenure Train employees and On-going employee 
of personnel encourage them to remain training and development

13. Initiative Managers conceive and Workers conceive and 
implement new ideas implement new ideas

14. Espirit de corps Maintaining high morale Maintaining high morale 
among employees is among employees is 
imperative desirable.

Reprint 2025-26



62 Business Studies

 (xiii)Initative: Workers should be From the foregoing discussion it 
encouraged to develop and carry is clear that Fayol’s 14 principles of 
out their plans for improvements management are widely applicable to 
according to Fayol. Initiative managerial problems and have cast 
means taking the first step with a profound impact on management 
self-motivation. It is thinking thinking today. But with the change of 
out and executing the plan. It is environment in which business is done, 
one of the traits of an intelligent the interpretation of these principles 
person. Initiative should be has changed. For example, authority 
encouraged. But it does not mean and responsibility meant empowering 
going against the established of managers but now it means 
practices of the company for empowerment of employees because 
the sake of being different. A of flat organisational structures that 
good company should have an are gaining ground. We are now in a 
employee suggestion system position to understand the current 
whereby initiative/suggestions connotations of Fayol’s principles 

which result in substantial discussed in the accompanying box.

cost/time reduction should be 
rewarded. Fayol Versus Taylor — 

 (xiv) Esprit De Corps: Management a Comparison
should promote a team spirit 
of unity and harmony among We are now in a position to compare 

employees, according to Fayol. the contributions of both Fayol and 

Management should promote Taylor. Both of them have contributed 

teamwork especially in large immensely to the knowledge of 

organisations because otherwise management, which has formed a 

objectives would be difficult to basis for further practice by managers. 

realise. It will also result in a It must be pointed out that their 

loss of coordination. A manager contributions are complementary 

should replace ‘I’ with ‘We’ in all to each other. We can make out the 

his conversations with workers following points of difference between 

to foster team spirit. This will their contributions.

give rise to a spirit of mutual You may also like to have some 

trust and belongingness among knowledge of contributions of 

team members. It will also Indians to the growth of management 

minimise the need for using knowledge which can be seen in the 

penalties. accompanying box item.

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 63

Sl. No. Basis of difference Henri Fayol F. W. Taylor

Top level of Shop floor level of a 
1. Perspective

management factory

Did not feel that 
it is important as 
under functional 

2. Unity of Command Staunch Proponent
foremanship a worker 
received orders from 
eight specialists.

Applicable Applicable to 
3. Applicability

universally specialised situations

Observations and 
4. Basis of formation Personal experience

experimentation

Improving overall 
5. Focus Increasing Productivity

administration

6. Personality Practitioner Scientist

General Theory of 
7. Expression Scientific Management

Administration

Key Terms

Functional Foremanship  Standardisation of Work

Time Study  Motion Study  Fatigue Study  Method Study

Differential Piece Wage System  Mental Revolution

Unity of Command  Unity of Direction

Scalar Chain Gang Plank   Espirit De Corps

Reprint 2025-26



64 Business Studies

Summary

Meaning
Principles of management are general guidelines, which can be 
used for conduct in work places under certain situations. They help 
managers to take and implement decisions.
Nature
The nature of management principles can be discussed under the 
heads- formed by practice; general guidelines; universal; flexible; 
behavioural; contingent; and cause and effect relationship 
Significance
Proper understanding of significance of management principles is 
essential to make sound decisions by managers. The significance 
can be discussed under the following heads- Increase in efficiency; 
Optimum utilisation of resources; Scientific decision making; 
Adaptation to changing environment; Fulfilling social responsibilities; 
Proper research and development; Training managers; and Effective 
administration.
Scientific Management
Taylor’s principles of scientific management are — Science, not the 
rule of thumb; Harmony not discord; Cooperation not individualism; 
Maximum not restricted output; Development of each person to her/
his greatest efficiency and prosperity. The techniques of scientific 
management as per Taylor were — Functional foremanship; 
Standardisation and simplification of work; Fatigue Study; Method 
Study; Time Study; Motion Study; and Differential Wage System. We 
can also point out differences between the contributions of Taylor 
and Fayol but essentially they were complementary in nature.
Fayol’s Principles of Management
According to Fayol, the functions of management are to plan, to 
organise, to command, to coordinate and to control. The activities 
of an industrial undertaking could be divided into; Technical; 
Commercial; Financial; Security; Accounting and Managerial. He 
also suggested that managers should have the following qualities- 
Physical; Moral; Education; Knowledge; and Experience. Fayol 
listed 14 principles of management — Division of work; Authority 
and responsibility; Discipline; Unity of command; Unity of 
direction; Subordination of individual interest to general interest; 
Remuneration of Personnel; Centralisation and decentralisation; 
Scalar Chain; Order; Equity; Stability in the tenure of Personnel; 
Initiative; and Espirit De corps.
We can also point out differences between the contributions of Taylor 
and Fayol but essentially they were complementary in nature.

Reprint 2025-26



Principles of Management 65

Exercises

Very Short Answer Type:

 1. What makes principles of management flexible?
 2. State the main objective of time study.
 3. Name the principle that is an extension of the ‘harmony, not 

discord’.
 4. State any two causes of fatigue that may create hindrance in 

the employee’s performance.
 5. SanakLal and Gagan started their career in Wales Limited 

(a printing press) after going through a rigorous recruitment 
process. Since they had no prior work experience, the firm 
decided to give them one year to prove themselves. Name the 
principle of management followed by Wales Limited.

 6. Which technique is used by Taylor for distinguishing efficient 
and inefficient workers?

Short Answer Type:

 1. How is the Principle of ‘Unity of Command’ useful to 
management? Explain briefly.

 2. Define scientific management. State any three of its 
principles.

 3. If an organisation does not provide the right place for physical 
and human resources in an organisation, which principle is 
violated? What are the consequences of it?

 4. Explain any four points regarding significance of principles 
of management.

 5. Explain the principle of ‘Scalar Chain’ and gang plank.
 6. A production manager at top level in a reputed corporate, 

Mr. Rathore holds the responsibility for ordering raw 
material for the firm. While deciding on the supplier for the 
financial year 2017-18, he gave the order to his cousin at 
a higher price per unit instead of the firm’s usual supplier 
who was willing to lower the rates for the order. Which 
principle of management was violated by Mr. Rathore? What 
are the positive impacts of following the above identified 
principle?

Reprint 2025-26



66 Business Studies

 Long Answer Type/ Essay Type:

 1. Explain the Principles of Scientific management given by 
Taylor.

 2. Explain the following Principles of management given by 
Fayol with examples:

  a. Unity of direction

  b. Equity

  c. Espirit de corps

  d. Order

  e. Centralisation and decentralisation

  f. Initiative

 2. Explain the technique of ‘Functional Foremanship’ and the 
concept of ‘Mental Revolution’ as enunciated by Taylor.

 3. Discuss the following techniques of Scientific Work Study:

  a. Time Study

  b. Motion Study

  c. Fatigue Study

  d. Method Study

  e. Simplification and standardisation of work

 4. Discuss the differences between the contributions of Taylor 
and Fayol.

 5. Discuss the relevance of Taylor and Fayol’s contribution in 
the contemporary business environment.

 6. ‘Bhasin’ limited was engaged in the business of food 
processing and selling its products under a popular brand. 
Lately the business was expanding due to good quality 
and reasonable prices. Also with more people working the 
market for processed food was increasing. New players were 
also coming to cash in on the new trend. In order to keep 
its market share in the short run the company directed its 
existing workforce to work overtime. But this resulted in many 
problems. Due to increased pressure of work the efficiency 
of the workers declined. Sometimes the subordinates had 
to work for more than one superior resulting in declining 
efficiency. The divisions that were previously working on one 
product were also made to work on two or more products. 

Reprint 2025-26

##2##

Principles of Management 67

This resulted in a lot of overlapping and wastage. The workers 
were becoming indisciplined. The spirit of teamwork, which 
had characterized the company, previously was beginning 
to wane. Workers were feeling cheated and initiative was 
declining. The quality of the products was beginning to 
decline and market share was on the verge of decrease.
Actually the company had implemented changes without 
creating the required infrastructure.
a. Identify the Principles of Management (out of 14 given by 

Henry Fayol) that were being violated by the company.
b. Explain these principles in brief.
c. What steps should the company management take in 

relation to the above principles to restore the company 
to its past glory?

 7. (Further information related to the above question 6) The 
management of company Bhasin Limited now realised 
its folly. In order to rectify the situation it appointed a 
management consultant -Mukti Consultants - to recommend 
a restructure plan to bring the company back on the rails. 
Mukti Consultants undertook a study of the production 
process at the plant of the company Bhasin Limited and 
recommended the following changes —
• The company should introduce scientific management 

with regard to production.
• Production Planning including routing, scheduling, 

dispatching and feedback should be implemented.
• In order to separate planning from operational 

management ’Functional foremanship’ should be 
introduced.

• ‘Work study’ should be undertaken to optimise the use 
of resources.

• ‘Standardisation’ of all activities should be implemented 
to increase efficiency and accountability.

• To motivate the workers ‘Differential Piece Rate System’ 
should be implemented.

  (The above changes should be introduced apart from the 
steps recommended as an answer to Part c - case problem 
6 above.)

Reprint 2025-26



68 Business Studies

  It was expected that the changes will bring about a radical 
transformation in the working of the company and it will 
regain its pristine glory.
a. Do you think that introduction of scientific management 

as recommended by M consultants will result in intended 
outcome?

b. What precautions should the company undertake to 
implement the changes?

c. Give your answer with regard to each technique 
separately as enunciated in points 1 through 6 in the 
case problem.

Reprint 2025-26



BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT 3
CHAPTER

How a Rickshaw Puller became an entrepreneur

L E A R N I N G 
On what seemed like a regular day at work Dharamveer Kamboj, 
a rickshaw puller, was riding through the streets of Delhi when O B J E C T I V E S

he met with a terrible accident. This was an event that would 
After studying this 

change his life forever. Knowing that he wouldn’t be able to go 
back to his work, he made the decision of returning to his native chapter you will be 
village in the Yamunanagar district of Haryana to begin life anew. able to: 
Being a school dropout with no technical training of any kind 
further restricted his scope in terms of employment. n Explain the 

The desire to do something out of the ordinary kept stirring meaning 
in his heart time and again. He was on the lookout for the right of business 
inspiration and opportunity. Such an opportunity crossed his 
path during one of his visits to the outskirts of Jaipur, Ajmer and environment;
Pushkar regions of Rajasthan, where he observed a number of 

n Discuss the 
women self help groups at work. A common sight was women 
in the process of making gooseberry laddoos. While this process importance 
appeared to be rather simple, the grating of gooseberries of business 
on slabs of stone manually with hands was an excruciatingly  environment;
painful exercise. There were machines available that could 
process the gooseberrys but none of them proved to be cost n Describe the 
effective. The industry was so small in scale and the owners so various elements 
modest in means that it was impossible for them to buy machines 

of business 
and put them in use.  Dharamveer Kamboj began to think of 
ways of making fruit and vegetable processing machines not only environment; and
affordable, but also free of accidental health hazards. Observing 

n Examine the 
that cutting, grating, juicing and pulverizing involved similar 
techniques made him come up with the idea of a multipurpose economic 
processing machine that could work equally well for all of these environment 
tasks. There was however a big hurdle in the way of Dharamveer. in India and 
His limited education would prove his task to be an uphill battle. 
He however was not deterred. He knew problems would come the impact of 
his way, but to challenge and overcome them was his motto in Government 
life. “Sangharsh hi sabse badi kaamyaabi hai. Agar badhna hai toh policies on 
peeche mud kar nahin dekhna hai.” 

business and 
industry.

Reprint 2025-26



70 Business Studies

This is the truism that Dharamveer Singh Kamboj has always 
lived by and was able to somehow convince him and obtain a 
funding of ` 25,000 for his project. He began work immediately. 
The first prototype of his machine was ready in March 2005. 
An unexpected problem of overheating however cropped up. 
Even after Dharamveer’s constant trials for the elimination of 
this problem, the issue still persisted in the second prototype.  
But the thought of giving up never crossed Dharamveer’s mind. 
In his third prototype, he had successfully solved the problem of 
overheating at last. This prototype was bought by GIAN North 
and sent to Kenya on a pilot basis. Based on the feedback, GIAN 
asked him to modify it further incorporating provisions that 
would make it portable, including the incorporation of foldable 
legs. In the fourth machine he also incorporated a sieve to 
manage the flow of juice from the machine during the extraction 
process. The machine that Dharamveer developed is unique in a 
way  that it has the capacity to process a wide variety of products 
without damaging the seed of the fruit or vegetable. 

Source: The National Innovation Foundation 
(NIF) – India (nif.org.in)

The above example shows how a universe, subtract from it the subset 
machine invented by Dharamveer that represents the organisation, 
Kamboj made life easier for women and the remainder is environment”. 
workers in unorganised sector. This Thus, the economic, social, political, 
innovation resulted in a positive technological and other forces which 
impact on food processing business operate outside a business enterprise 

i.e., social, economic and technological are part of its environment. So 

in addition to enhancing quality also, the individual consumers 
or competing enterprises as well 

of life.
as the governments, consumer 
groups, competitors, courts, media 

Meaning of Business 
and other institutions working 

environMent outside an enterprise constitute its 
The term ‘business environment’ environment. The important point is 
means  the sum total of all that these individuals, institutions 
individuals, institutions and other and forces are likely to influence the 
forces that are outside the control performance of a business enterprise 
of a business enterprise but that although they happen to exist 
may affect its performance. As one outside its boundaries. For example, 
writer has put it– “Just take the changes in government’s economic 

Reprint 2025-26



Business Environment 71

policies, rapid technological  (iii) Inter-relatedness: Different 
developments, political uncertainty, elements or parts of business 
changes in fashions and tastes environment are closely inter­
of consumers and increased related. For example, increased 
competition in the market — all life expectancy of people and 
influence the working of a business increased awareness for health 
enterprise in important ways. care have increased the demand 
Increase in taxes by government for many health products and 
can make things expensive to buy. services like soft drinks, fat­free 
Technological improvements may cooking oil, and health resorts. 
render existing products obsolete. New health products and 
Political uncertainty may create fear services have, in turn, changed 
in the minds of investors. Changes people’s life styles.
in fashions and tastes of consumers  (iv) Dynamic nature: Business 
may shift demand in the market environment is dynamic in that 
from existing products to new it keeps on changing whether 
ones. Increased competition in the in terms of technological imp­
market may reduce profit margins rovement, shifts in consumer 
of firms. preferences or entry of new 

On the basis of the foregoing competition in the market.
disc ussion, it can be said business  (v) Uncertainty: Business envir­
environment, has the following onment is largely uncertain as it 
features: 

is very difficult to predict future 
 (i) Totality of external forces: 

happenings, especially when 
Business environment is the 

environment changes are taking 
sum total of all things external 

place too frequently as in the 
to business firms and, as such, 
is aggregative in nature. case of information tech nology 

 (ii) Specific and general forces: or fashion industries.

Business environment includes  (v i ) Complexity: Since business 

both specific and general forces. envi ronment consists of 

Specific forces (such as investors, numerous interrelated and 
customers, competitors and supp­ dynamic conditions or forces 
liers) affect individual enterprises which arise from different 
directly and immediately in sources, it becomes difficult 
their day­to­day working. to comprehend at once what 
General forces (such as social, exactly constitutes a given 
political, legal and technological environment. In other words, 
conditions) have impact on all environment is a complex 
business enterprises and thus phenomenon that is relatively 
may affect an individual firm easier to understand in parts 
only indirectly. but difficult to grasp in its 

Reprint 2025-26



72 Business Studies

totality. For example, it may  (i) It enables the firm to identify 
be difficult to know the extent opportunities and getting 
of the relative impact of the the first mover advantage: 
social, economic, political, Opportunities refer to the positive 
technological or legal factors on external trends or changes that 
change in demand of a product will help a firm to improve its 
in the market. performance. Environment prov­

(vii) Relativity: Business environment ides numerous opportunities for 
is a relative concept since it business success. Early identi­
differs from country to country fication of opportunities helps an 
and even region to region. enterprise to be the first to exploit 
Political conditions in the USA, them instead of losing them to 
for instance, differ from those competitors. For example, Maruti 
in China or Pakistan. Similarly, Udyog became the leader in the 
demand for sarees may be fairly small car market because it was 
high in India whereas it may be the first to recognise the need 
almost non­existent in France. for small cars in an environment 

of rising petroleum prices and 
iMportance of Business a large middle class population 

in India.
environMent  (ii) It helps the firm to identify 
Just like human beings, business threats and early warning 
enterprises do not exist in isolation. signals: Threats refer to the 
Each business firm is not an external environment trends and 
island unto itself; it exists, survives changes that will hinder a firm’s 
and grows within the context performance. Besides oppor­
of the element and forces of its tunities, environment happens 
environment. While an individual to be the source of many threats. 
firm is able to do little to change Environmental awareness can 
or control these forces, it has help managers to identify various 
no alternative to responding or threats  on time and serve as an 
adapting according to them. A good early warning signal. For 
understanding of environment by example, if an Indian firm finds 
business managers enables them not that a foreign multinational is 
only to identify and evaluate, but also entering the Indian market with 
to react to the forces external to their new substitutes, it should act as 
firms. The importance of business a warning signal. On the basis of 
environment and its understanding this information, the Indian 
by managers can be appreciated if we firms can prepare themselves to 
consider the following facts: meet the threat by adopting such 

Reprint 2025-26



Business Environment 73

measures as improving the  (iv) It helps in coping with rapid 
quality of the product, reducing changes: Today’s business envir­
cost of the production, engaging onment is getting increasingly 
in aggr essive advertising, and dynamic where changes are 
so on. taking place at a fast pace. It is not 

 (iii) It helps in tapping useful the fact of change itself that is so 
resources: Environment is a important as the pace of change. 
source of various resources Turbulent market conditions, 
for running a business. less brand loyalty, divisions and 
To engage in any type of sub­divisions (fragmentation) 
activity, a business enterprise of markets, more demanding 
assembles various resources customers, rapid changes in 
called inputs like finance, technology and intense global 
machines, raw materials, competition are just a few of the 
power and water, labour, etc., images used to describe today’s 
from its environment including business environment. All sizes 
financiers, government and 

and all types of enterprises are 
suppliers. They decide to provide 

facing increasingly dynamic 
these resources with their own 

environment. In order to eff­
expectations to get something in 

ectively cope with these signifi­
return from the enterprise. The 

cant changes, managers must 
business enterprise supplies the 
environment with its outputs understand and examine the 

such as goods and services for environment and develop suit­

customers, payment of taxes to able courses of action.

government, return on financial  (v) It helps in assisting in planning 

investment to investors and and policy formulation:   Since 

so on. Because the enterprise environment is a source of 
depends on the environment as both opportunities and threats 
a source of inputs or resources for a business enterprise, its 
and as an outlet for outputs, understanding and analysis 
it only makes sense that the can be the basis for deciding 
enterprise designs policies that the future course of action 
allow it to get the resources (planning) or training guidelines 
that it needs so that it can for decision making (policy). For 
convert those resources into instance, entry of new players 
outputs that the environment in the market, which means 
desires. This can be done better more competition may make an 
by understanding what the enterprise think afresh about 
environment has to offer. how to deal with the situation.

Reprint 2025-26



74 Business Studies

 (vi) It helps in improving energy efficient light bulb that lasts 
performance: The final reason at least twenty times as long as a 
for underst anding business standard bulb. Senior managers 
environment relates to whether or in the lighting divisions at General 
not it really makes a difference in Electric and Phillips recognised that 
the performance of an enterprise. this discovery had the potential to 
The answer is that it does appear significantly affect their unit growth 
to make a difference. Many and profitability, So they have 
studies reveal that the future of carefully followed the progress on 
an enterprise is closely bound this research and profitably used 
up with what is happening in its findings. A brief discussion of 
the environment. And, the enter­ the various factors constituting the 
prises that continuously monitor general environment of business is 
their environment and adopt given below:
suitable business practices are 

 (i) Economic Environment: Int­
the ones which not only improve 

erest rates, inflation rates, 
their present performance but 

changes in disposable income 
also continue to succeed in the 

of people, stock market indices 
market for a longer period.

and the value of rupee are some 
of the economic factors that can 

DiMensions of Business affect management practices 

e in a business enterprise. 
nvironMent

Short and long term interest 
Dimensions of, or the factors cons­ rates significantly affect the 
tituting the business environment demand for product and 
include economic, social, techno­ services. For example, in case 
logical, political and legal conditions of construction companies and 
which are considered relevant for automobile manufacturers, low 
decision­making and improving the longer­term rates are beneficial 
performance of an enterprise. In because they result in increased 
contrast to the specific environment, spending by consumers for 
these factors explain the general buying homes and cars on 
environment which mostly influences borrowed money. Similarly, a 
many enterprises at the same time. rise in the disposable income 
However, management of every of people due to increase in 
enterprise can benefit from being the gross domestic product of 
aware of these dimensions instead a country creates increasing 
of being disinterested in them. demand for products. High 
For instance, scientific research inflation rates generally result 
has discovered a technology that in constraints on business 
makes it possible to produce an enterprises as they increase 

Reprint 2025-26



Business Environment 75

Economic Social 
Environment Environment

Business 
Legal Environment Technological 

Environment Environment

Political 
Environment Dimensions of 

Business Environment

the various costs of business  (ii) Social Environment: The social 
such as the purchase of raw environment of business include 
materials or machinery and the social forces like customs 
payment of wages and salaries 
to employees. and traditions, values, social 

Components of Economic Environment
n Existing structure of the economy in terms of relative role of private 

and public sectors. 

n The rates of growth of GNP and per capita income at current and 
constant prices

n Rates of saving and investment

n Volume of imports and exports of different items

n Balance of payments and changes in foreign exchange reserves

n Agricultural and industrial production trends

n Expansion of transportation and communication facilities

n Money supply in the economy

n Public debt (internal and external)

n Planned outlay in private and public sectors

Reprint 2025-26



76 Business Studies

trends, society’s expectations innovations which provide 
from business, etc. Traditions new ways of prod ucing goods 
define social practices that and services and new methods 
have lasted for decades or and techniques of operating a 
even centuries. For example, business. For exa mple, recent 
the celebration of Diwali, Eid, technological, adva nces in 
Christmas, and Guru Parv computers and electro nics 
in India provides significant have modified the ways in 
financial opportunities for gree­ which companies advertise 
tings card companies, sweets or their products. It is common 
confectionery manufacturers, now to see computerised 
tailoring outlets and many other inform ation kiosks, and World 

related business. Values refer to Wide Web multimedia pages 

concepts that a society holds in highlighting the virtues of 

high esteem. In India, individual products. Similarly, retailers 

freedom, social justice, equality have direct links with suppliers 
who replenish stocks when 

of opportunity and national 
needed. Manufacturers have 

integration are examples of 
flexible man ufacturing systems. 

major values cherished by all 
Airline com panies have Internet 

of us. In business terms, these 
values translate into freedom of and World Wide Web pages 

choice in the market, business’s where customers can look for 

responsibility tow ards the  flight times, desti nations and 

society and non­discriminatory fares and book their tickets 

employ ment practices. online. In addition, conti nuing 

Social trends present various innovations in different scientific 

opportunities and threats to and engineering fields such as 

business enterprises. For example, lasers, robotics, biotechnology, 

the health­and­fitness trend has food preservatives, medicine, 

become popular among large telecommunication and synthetic 

number of urban dwellers. fuels have provided numerous 

This has created a demand opportunities and threats for 

for products like organic food, many different enterprises. 

gyms, bottled (mineral) water Shifts in demand from vaccum 

and food supplements. tubes to transistors, from steam 
locomotives to die seland electric 

 (iii) Technological Environment: engines, from fou ntain pens to 
Technological environment ballpoint, from propeller airplanes 
includes forces relating to to jets, and from typewriters to 
scientific improvements and computer based word processors, 

Reprint 2025-26



Business Environment 77

have all been responsible and in the long term projects for 
creating new business. the growth of the economy. 

 (iv) Political Environment: Political Political instability can shake 
environment includes political that confidence. Similarly, 
conditions such as general the attitudes of government 
stability and peace in the officials towards business may 
coun­try and specific attitudes have either positive or negative 
that elected government impact upon business.
representatives hold towards  (v) Legal Environment: Legal 
business. The significance of envi ronment includes various 
political conditions in business legis lations passed by the 
success lies in the predictability Government administrative 
of business activities under orders issued by government 
stable political conditions. authorities,  court judgments as 
On the other hand, there may well as the decisions rendered 
be uncertainty of business by various commissions and 
activities due to political agencies at every level of the 
unrest and threats to law and government— centre, state 
order. Political stability, thus, or local. It is imperative for 
builds up confidence among the management of every 
business people to invest enterprise to obey the law 

Major Elements of Social Environment

n Attitudes towards product innovations, lifestyles, occupational distribution 
and consumer preferences

n Concern with quality of life
n Life expectancy
n Expectations from the workforce
n Shifts in the presence of women in the workforce
n Birth and death rates
n Population shifts
n Educational system and literacy rates
n Consumption habits
n Composition of family

Reprint 2025-26



78 Business Studies

Activity II 

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
Contact any ten families known to you. Find out the changes in their consumption 
habits over the last five years. Analyse the impact of these changes on the working 
of business enterprises.

Fashion industry Electronic gadgets 
(shifts towards (increase in demand 
formal wear) of these gadgets)

Cosmetic industry Food habits 
(increase in demand) (shift towards packed food)

Impact of shifts with the presence 
of women in the workforce

Reprint 2025-26



Business Environment 79

inDian railway catering anD tourisM corporation ltD.
(A Government of India Enterprise)

E­TICKET BOOKING ON THIS WEBSITE ­ A GUIDE
 n Register as an individual. Registration is FREE.
 n Login by entering your user name and password.
 n The ‘Plan my travel and Book tickets’ page appears.
 n Use ‘HELP’ option for any help required to book tickets.

	 n Fill in the details, by following 
the guidelines given below.

Because of technological advancement, it has become possible to book 
railway tickets through Internet from home, office etc..

Reprint 2025-26



80 Business Studies

of the land. Therefore, an 2002 and host of such other legal 
adequate knowledge of rules enactments as amended from 
and regulations framed by the time to time by the Parliament, 
Government is a pre­requisite is important for doing business. 
for better business performance. Impact of legal environment 
Non­compliance of laws can can be illustrated with the help 
land the business enterprise of government regulations to 
into legal problems. In India, protect consumer’s interests. For 
Constitutional Provisions; example, the advertisement of 
Companies Act 2013; Industries alcoholic beverages is prohibited. 
(Development and Regulations) Advertisements, including 
Act 1951; Foreign Exchange packets of cigarettes carry the 
Management Act and the statutory warning ‘Cigarette 
Imports and Exports (Control) smoking is injurious to health’. 
Act 1947; Factories Act, Similarly, advertisements of 
1948; Trade Union Act; 1926; baby food must necessarily 
Workmen’s Compensation Act, inform the potential buyer that 
1923; Industrial Disputes Act, mothers milk is the best. All 
1947, Consumer Protection these  regulations are required 
Act, 1986, Competition Act, to be followed by advertisers.

Major Elements of the Political Environment 
n Prevailing political system
n The degree of politicisation of business and economic issues
n Dominant ideologies and values of major political parties
n The nature and profile of political leadership and thinking of political 

personalities
n The level of political morality
n Political institutions like the government and allied agencies
n Political ideology and practices of the ruling party
n The extent and nature of government intervention in business
n The nature of relationship of our country with foreign countries

Reprint 2025-26



Business Environment 81

econoMic e chairpersons devote considerable 
nvironMent in 

attention to the general economic 
inDia environment prevailing in the country 
The economic environment in and an assessment of its impact on 
India consists of various macro­ their companies.
level factors related to the means of The economic environment of 
production and distribution of wealth business in India has been steadily 

which have an impact on business changing mainly due to the 
government policies. At the time of 

and industry. These include:
Independence:

(a) Stage of economic development of (a) The Indian economy was mainly 
the country. agricultural and rural in character;

(b) The economic structure in the (b) About 70% of the working population 
form of mixed economy which was employed in agriculture;
recognises the role of both public (c) About 85% of the population was 
and private sectors. living in the villages;

(c) Economic policies of the Govern­ (d) Production was carried out 
ment, including industrial, mone­ using irrational, low productivity 
tary and fiscal policies. technology;

(d) Economic planning, including (e) Communicable diseases were 
five year plans, annual budgets, widespread, mortality rates were 
and so on. high. These was no good public 

(e) Economic indices, like national health system.
income, distribution of income, In order to solve economic problems 

rate and growth of GNP, per of our country, the government took 
several steps including control by the 

capita income, disposal personal 
State of certain industries, central 

income, rate of savings and 
planning and reduced importance 

investments, value of exports and of the private sector. The main 
imports, balance of payments, objectives of India’s development 
and so on. plans were:

(f) Infrastructural factors, such as, (a) Initiate rapid economic growth to 
financial institutions, banks, raise the standard of living, reduce 
modes of transportation commu­ unemployment and poverty;
nication facilities, and so on. (b) Become self­reliant and set up 

Business enterprises in India do a strong industrial base with 
realise the importance and impact emphasis on heavy and basic 
of the economic environment on industries;
their working. Almost all annual (c) Reduce inequalities of income 
company reports presented by their and wealth;

Reprint 2025-26



82 Business Studies

(d) Adopt a socialist pattern of cent Foreign Direct Investment 
development — based on equality (FDI) was permitted.
and prevent exploitation of man (e) Automatic permission was now 
by man. granted for technology agree ments 

In accordance with the economic with foreign companies.
planning, the government gave a (f ) Foreign Investment Promotion 
lead role to the public sector for Board (FIPB) was set up to 
infrastructure industries whereas promote and channelise foreign 
the private sector was broadly given investment in India.
the responsibility of developing Appropriate measures were taken 
consumer goods industry. At the to remove obstacles in the way of 
same time, the government imposed growth and expansion of industrial 
several restrictions, regulations and units of large industrial houses. 
controls on the working of private Small­scale sector was assured all 
sector enterprises. India’s experience help and accorded due recognition.
with economic planning has delivered In essence, this policy has 
mixed results. In 1991 the economy sought to liberate industry from the 
faced a serious foreign exchange shackles of the licensing system 
crisis, high government deficit and a (liberalisation), drastically reduce the 
rising trend of prices despite bumper role of the public sector (privatisation) 
crops. and encourage foreign private 

As a part of economic reforms, the participation in India’s industrial 
Government of India announced a development (globalisation).
new industrial policy in July 1991. Liberalisation: The economic reforms 

The broad features of this policy that were introduced were aimed at 
were as follows: liberalising the Indian business and 
(a) The Government reduced the industry from all unnecessary controls 

number of industries under and restrictions. They signalled the 
compulsory licensing to six. end of the licence­pemit­quota raj. 

(b) Many of the industries reserved Liberalisation of the Indian industry 
for the public sector under the has taken place with respect to:
earlier policy, were dereserved.  (i) abolishing licensing requirement 
The role of the public sector was in most of the industries except 
limited only to four industries of a short list,
strategic importance.  (ii) freedom in deciding the scale 

(c) Disinvestment was carried out of business activities i.e., no 
in case of many public sector restrictions on expansion or 
industrial enterprises. contraction of business activities,

(d) Policy towards foreign capital was  (iii) removal of restrictions on the 
liberalised. The share of foreign movement of goods and services,
equity participation was increased  (iv) freedom in fixing the prices of 
and in many activities 100 per goods services,

Reprint 2025-26



Business Environment 83

Crisis of June 1991
Major elements of the crisis situation which led the Government of India to 
announce economic reform were:
n A serious fiscal crisis in which the fiscal deficit reached the level of 6.6 per 

cent of GDP in 1990-91.
n Heavy internal debt which rose to about 50 per cent of GDP with interest 

payments draining about 39 per cent of total revenue collections of the 
central government.

n Low GNP growth rate which fell to 1.4 per cent from the peak level of 10.5 
per cent in 1988-89 (at 1980-81 prices).

n Low overall agricultural production, foodgrain production and industrial 
production showed negative growth rates of –2.8 per cent, –5.3 per cent 
and –0.1 per cent respectively.

n Soaring inflation rate based both on wholesale price index and consumer 
price index (for industrial workers) at 13-14 per cent.

n Shrinkage of foreign trade, imports (in $ terms) fell by 19.4 per cent and 
exports by 1.5 per cent.

n Depreciation of rupee by 26.7 per cent vis-à-vis US dollars.
n Fall of foreign exchange reserves to such a low level that they were 

barely adequate to meet the import requirements of a few weeks.  
Non-resident Indians (NRIs) were withdrawing their deposits at an alarmingly 
high rate.

n The confidence of the international financial institutions was badly shaken 
and in just over a year its creditworthiness rating fell from AAA to BB+  
(put on credit watch).

n The country was on the verge of defaulting on international financial 
obligations and the situation warranted immediate policy action to save 
the situation. In May 1991, the Government had to lease 20 tones of gold 
out of its stock to the State Bank of India to enable it to sell the gold with 
repurchase option after six months. In addition, Reserve Bank of India was 
allowed to pledge 47 tones of gold to the Bank of England to raise a loan of 
$600 million.

 (v) reduction in tax rates and lifting Privatisation: The new set of econo­
of unnecessary controls over the mic reforms aimed at giving greater 
economy, role to the private sector in the nation 

 (vi) simplifying procedures for building process and a reduced role 
imports and experts, and to the public sector. This was a reversal 

( vii) making it easier to attract of the development strategy pursued 
foreign capital and technology so far by Indian planners. To achieve 
to India. this, the government redefined the 

Reprint 2025-26



84 Business Studies

role of the public sector in the New were with respect to (a) licensing of 
Industrial Policy of 1991, adopted imports, (b) tariff restrictions and (c) 
the policy of planned disinvestments quantitative restrictions. The new 
of the public sector and decided economic reforms aimed at trade 
to refer the loss making and sick liberalisation were directed towards 
enterprises to the Board of Industrial import liberalisation, export promotion 
and Financial Reconstruction. The through rationalisation of the tariff 
term disinvestments used here structure and reforms with respect to 
means transfer in the public sector foreign exchange so that the country 
enterprises to the private sector. does not remain isolated from the rest 
It results in dilution of stake of the of the world. Globalisation involves 
Government in the public enterprise. an increased level of interaction and 
If there is dilution of Government interdependence among the various 
ownership beyond 51 percent, it nations of the global economy. 
would result in transfer of ownership Physical geographical gap or political 
and management of the enterprise to boundaries no longer remain barriers 
the private sector. for a business enterprise to serve a 
Globalisation: Globalisation means customer in a distant geographical 
the integration of the various eco­ market. This has been made 
nomies of the world leading towards possible by the rapid advancement 
the emergence of a cohesive global in technology and liberal trade 
economy. Till 1991, the Government policies by Governments. Through 
of India had followed a policy of the policy of 1991, the government 
strictly regulating imports in value of India moved the country to this 
and volume terms. These regulations globalisation pattern.

A Truly Globalised Economy
A truly global economy implies a boundaryless world where there 
is:
(i) Free flow of goods and services across nations;
(ii) Free flow of capital across nations;
(iii) Free flow of information and technology;
(iv) Free movement of people across borders;
(v) A common acceptable mechanism for the settlement of 

disputes;
(vi) A global governance perspective.

Activity 3 

GLOBALISATION
Make a list of five Indian companies which have global operations today. Find 
out the major products they sell and the countries where they operate.

Reprint 2025-26



Business Environment 85

Early Crisis Met : Reform Measures

Some of the early major steps taken to manage the economic crisis were the following:
n Fiscal correction aimed at reducing fiscal deficit by about Rs. 7,700 crore in  

1991-92 (compared to 1990-91);
n Announcement of New Industry Policy in July 1991 seeking to deregulate the industry 

with the objective of promoting the growth of a more competitive and efficient industrial 
economy;

n Abolition of industrial licensing for all industrial projects except 18 industries of high 
strategic and environmental importance and with high import content. About 80 per cent 
of the industries were delicensed;

n Amendment of the MRTP Act to eliminate the need for prior approval of the Central 
Government by large companies for capacity expansion, diversification and merger and 
amalgamation.

n Nine areas in basic and core industries earlier reserved for the public sector were opened 
to the private sector;

n Limit of foreign equity holding raised from 40 per cent to 51 per cent in a wide range of 
priority industries;

n Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) established to negotiate proposals from large 
international firms and expedite clearances of the investment proposals;

n Rupee devaluation by 18 per cent during July 1-3, 1991 supported by a standby credit of 
$2.3 billion from the IMP over a 20 months period negotiated in October 1991;

n Negotiation of $500 million Structural Adjustment Loan from the World Bank in April 
1992 and a loan totalling SDR 1.3 billion from the International Monetory Fund (IMF) 
between January-September 1991;

n Introduction of India Development Bond Scheme and Immunity Scheme for repatriation 
of funds held abroad in October 1991, under which more than $2 billion were mobilised 
during 1991-92;

n Bringing back of gold earlier pledged to the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan;
n Continuance of the measures of import control and credit squeeze;
n Administered licensing of imports replaced by freely tradeable import entitlements (called 

Eximscrips) linked to export earnings. The measure was expected to introduce self-
balancing mechanism in India’s foreign trade;

n Introduction of Liberalised Exchange Rate Management System (LERMS) under which 
a dual exchange rate system was established, one rate being effectively floated in the 
market; and

n Import licensing in most capital goods, raw materials, intermediates and components 
eliminated. Advance Licensing System considerably simplified.
The initial series of measures set the tone for the future economic reforms. Any of the 

measures taken above was continued to form a part of the ongoing reform process.

Reprint 2025-26



86 Business Studies

Demonetisation: The Government  2. Demonetisation is also 
of India, made an announcement interpreted as a shift on the part 
on November 8, 2016 with profound of the government indicating 
implications for the Indian economy. that tax evasion will no longer be 
The two largest denomination notes, tolerated or accepted.
`500 `1,000, were ‘demonetised’  3. Demonetisation also led to tax 
with immediate effect, ceasing to be administration channelizing 
legal tender except for a few specified savings into the formal financial 
purposes such as paying utility bills. system. Though, much of the 
This led to eighty six per cent of the cash that has been deposited in 
money in circulation invalid. The the banking system is bound to 
people of India had to deposit the be withdrawn but some of the 
invalid currency in the banks which new deposits schemes offered 
came along with the restrictions by the banks will continue to 
placed on cash withdrawals. In other provide a base loans, at lower 
words, restrictions were placed on interest rates.
the convertibility of domestic money  4. Another  feature  of  demonetisation 
and bank deposits. is to create a less-cash or 

The aim of demonetisation was cash-lite economy, i.e., channeling 
to curb corruption, counterfeiting more savings through the formal 
the use of high denomination notes financial system and improving 
for illegal activities; and especially tax compliance. Though there 
the accumulation of ‘black money’ are arguments against this as 
generated by income that has not digital transactions require use 
been declared to the tax authorities. of cell phones for customers and 
Features Point­of­Sale (PoS) machines 
 1. Demonetisation is viewed as a tax for merchants, which will only 

administration measure. Cash work if there is internet 
holdings arising from declared connectivity. On the contrary, 
income was readily deposited these disadvantages are 
in banks and exchanged for counterbalanced by an 
new notes. But those with black understanding that it helps 
money had to declare their people into the formal economy, 
unaccounted wealth and pay thereby increasing financial 
taxes at a penalty rate. saving and reducing tax evasion. 

Digitalisation has broadly impact three sections of society: the poor, who are largely 
outside the digital economy; the less largely outside the digital economy; the less affluent, 
who are becoming part of the digital economy who have been covered under Jan Dhan 
Accounts and Rupay cards; and the affluent, who are fully conversant with digital transactions.

Reprint 2025-26



Business Environment 87

Impact of Demonetisation

1. Money/Interest i.   Decline in cash transactions
rates ii.  Bank deposits increased

iii. Increase in financial savings

2. Private wealth Declined since some high demonetised notes were not returned 
and real estate prices fell

3. Public sector No effect
wealth

4. Digitisation Digital transactions amongst new users (RuPay/AEPS) increased

5. Real estate Prices declined

6. Tax collection Rise in income tax collection because of  increased disclosure

Adapted from Economic Survey, 2016–17

Key Terms

Business environment  Opportunities  Threats  Economic 

Environment  Political environment  Social environment  
Technological environment  Legal environment  Liberalisation  
Privatisation  Globalisation

Summary

Meaning of business environment: The term business environment 
means the totality of all individuals, institutions and other forces that 
are outside a business but that potentially affect its performance. 
Business environment can be characterised in terms of 
(a) totality of external forces
(b) specific and general forces 
(c) inter­relatedness 
(d) dynamic nature 
(e) uncertainty 
(f ) complexity 
(g) relativity
Importance of business environment: Business environment and 
its understanding are important for (i) enabling the identification of 
opportunities and getting the first mover advantage, (ii) helping in 
the identification of threats and early warning signals, (iii) coping 
with the rapid changes, (v) assisting in planning and policy and 
(vi) improving the performance.

Reprint 2025-26



88 Business Studies

Elements of business environment: Business environment 
consists of five important dimensions including economic, social, 
technological, political and legal. 
Economic environment includes such factors as interest rates, 
inflation rates, changes in disposable income of people, stock market 
indexes and the value of rupee. 
Social environment includes social forces like traditions, values, 
social trends, society’s expectations of business, and so on. 
Technological environment includes forces relating to scientific 
improvements and innovations which provide new ways of producing 
goods and services and new methods and techniques of operating a 
business. 
Political environment includes political conditions such as general 
stability and peace in the country and specific attitudes that elected 
government representatives hold toward business. 
Legal environment includes various legislations passed by 
the government, administrative orders issued by government 
authorities, court judgments as well as decisions rendered by 
various commissions and agencies at every level of the government— 
center, state or local.
Economic environment in India: The economic environment in 
India consists of various macro­level factors related to the means 
of production and distribution of wealth which have an impact on 
business and industry. The economic environment of business in 
India has been steadily changing since Independence mainly due 
to government policies. In order to solve economic problems of our 
country at the time of Independence, the government took several 
steps including control by the state of key industries, central 
planning and reduced importance of the private sector. These 
steps delivered mixed results until 1991 when Indian economy 
happened to face serious foreign exchange crisis, high government 
deficit and a rising trend of prices despite bumper crops.
Liberalisation, privatisation and  globalisation: As a part of economic 
reforms, the Government of India announced a new industrial policy 
in July 1991 which sought to liberate the industry from the shackles of 
the licensing system (liberalisation), drastically reduce the role of the 
public sector (privatisation) and encourage foreign private participation 
in industrial development (globalisation).
Impact of Government policy changes on business and industry: 
The government policy of liberalisation, privatisation and globalisation 
has made a definite impact on the working of enterprises in business 
and industry in terms of 

Reprint 2025-26

##3##

Business Environment 89

 (a) increasing competition 
 (b) more demanding customers 
 (c) rapidly changing technological environment 
 (d) necessity for change 
 (e) need for developing human resource 
 (f ) market orientation 
 (g) loss of budgetary support to the public sector. In the new 

economic environment, the Indian enterprises have developed 
various strategies to meet the challenge of competition

Exercises

Very Short Answer Type:

 1. What is meant by business environment?

 2. How does understanding of business environment help in 
improving performance of a business?

 3. Give an example to show that a business firm operates within 
numerous inter related factors constituting the business 
environment.(Hint: example highlighting the inter relatedness of 
dimensions of business environment).

 4. Krishna Furnishers Mart started its operations in the year 1954 
and emerged as the market leader in the industry because of 
their original designs and efficiency in operations. They had a 
steady demand for their products but over the years, they found 
their market share declining because of new entrants in the field. 
The firm decided to review their operations and decided that in 
order to meet the competition, they need to study and analyze 
the market trends and then design and develop their products 
accordingly. List any two impacts of changes in business 
environment on Krishna Furnishers Mart’s operations. (Hint: 
increase in competition and Market orientation).

 5. Name any two Specific forces of business environment affecting 
business.

Short Answer Type:

 1. Why it is important for business enterprises to understand their 
environment? Explain.

 2. Explain the following terms:
 a. Liberalisation

Reprint 2025-26



90 Business Studies

 b. Privatization
 c. Globalisation

 3. National Digital Library of India (NDL India) work towards 
developing a framework of virtual repository of learning 
resources with a single-window search facility. It provides support 
to all academic levels including researchers, life-long learners 
and differently-abled learners free of cost. State the dimensions 
of business environment highlighted above.

 4. State the impact of demonetization on interest rates, private 
wealth and real estate.

Long Answer Type:

 1. How would you characterize business environment? Explain 
with examples, the difference between general and specific 
environment.

 2. How would you argue that the success of a businessenterprise is 
significantly influenced by its environment?

 3. Explain, with examples, the various dimensions of 
businessenvironment.

 4. The Government of India announced Demonetization of ` 500 
and ` 1,000 currency notes with effect from the midnight 
of November 8, 2016. As a result, the existing ` 500 and 
` 1,000 currency notes ceased to be legal tender from that date. 
New currency notes of the denomination of ` 500 and ` 2,000 
were issued by Reserve Bank of India after the announcement.

  This step resulted in a substantial increase in the awareness 
about and use of Point of Sale machines, e-wallets, digital cash 
and other modes of cashless transactions. Also, increased 
transparency in monetary transactions and disclosure led to a 
rise in government revenue in the form of tax collection.
 a. Enumerate the dimensions of business environment 

highlighted above.
 b. State the features of Demonetization.

 5. What economic changes were initiated by the Government under 
the Industrial Policy, 1991? What impact have these changes 
made on business and industry?

Reprint 2025-26


##4##
4
Planning

CHAPTER
IOCL: Fuelling Sustainable Future

L E A R N I N G 
Indian Oil, a Maharatna PSU, is India’s foremost 

O B J E C T I V E S
integrated energy conglomerate. As a leader, 

the company dedicates itself to delivering After studying this 
sustainable and affordable energy solutions that chapter, you will be 
shape India’s energy landscape through planned able to:
diversification into alternative energy sources 

and innovation for the global community. n State the meaning 

This story of success is not written in ‘Letters of of planning;
Gold’ but in ‘Green,’ as the company escalates n Describe the 
its goal of achieving net zero operational features and 
emissions by the year 2046. To realize this vision, 

importance of 
the company plans to undertake an investment 

planning;
of 2 lakh crore. The company envisions 

economic development by implementing n Explain the 
sustainable practices in line with achieving limitations of 
net zero emissions and rolling out plans for a planning;
renewable and green energy ecosystem in the 

country. In the spirit of sustainable planning, n Analyse the steps 

IOCL has begun waste management strategies in the planning 
by enhancing recycling efforts and ensuring the process; and
reduction of environmental footprints, waste 

n Identity the 
stewardship, and biodiversity conservation.

different types of 
IOCL, the country’s largest fuel retailer, has 

plans.
consistently featured in Fortune’s Global 

500 rankings for the last two decades on a  

Reprint 2025-26



92 Business Studies

year-to-year basis. in 2023, it was ranked 94th 

on Fortune’s Global 500 list.

Source: Fuelling Sustainable Future, 
Sustainability Highlights, FY 2022-2023

IntroductIon managers think in advance on what 

You have just read about the plans to do and how to do it. This is the 

of Indian Oil Company Limited essence of planning. 

(IOCL). Of course, these are broad 
concept

statements given by the company 
and they have to be broken down Planning is deciding in advance what 

into steps for implementation. This to do and how to do. It is one of the 

is an example of a company with a basic managerial functions. Before 

nation‑wide reach striving to be one doing something, the manager must 

of the top companies in India. Further formulate an idea of how to work on 

more, every organisation whether a particular task. Thus, planning is 

it is government‑owned, a privately closely connected with creativity and 

owned business or a company in the innovation. But the manager would 

private sector requires planning. The first have to set objectives, only then 

government makes five year plans will a manager know where he has 

for the country, a small business to go. Planning seeks to bridge the 

has it’s own plans, while other gap between where we are and where 

companies have big plans, sales we want to go. Planning is what 

plans, production plans. All of them managers at all levels do. It requires 

have some plans. taking decisions since it involves 
All business firms would like to be making a choice from alternative 

successful, increase their sales and courses of action.
earn profits. All managers dream Planning, thus, involves setting 
of these and strive to achieve their objectives and developing appropriate 
goals. But to turn these dreams courses of action to achieve these obj‑
into reality managers need to work ectives. Objectives provide direction 
hard in thinking about the future, for all managerial decisions and 
in making business predictions and actions. Planning provides a rational 
achieving targets. Dreams can be approach for achieving predetermined 
turned into reality only if business objectives. All  members, therefore, 

Reprint 2025-26



Planning 93

definition of planning? One of the 
ways to do so would be to define 
planning as setting objectives for 
a given time period, formulating 
various courses of action to 
achieve them, and then selecting 
the best possible alternative from 
among the various courses of 
action available.

Importance of  plannIng

You must have seen in films and 
Planning: Keeping the 

advertisements how executives 
objective in view and 

draw up plans and make powerful 
being in action

presentations in boardrooms. Do 
those plans actually work? Does 
it improve efficiency? After all why 

need to work towards achieving should we plan? These are numerous 
organisational goals. These goals 

questions to which we would like to 
set the targets which need to be 

find solutions. Planning is certainly 
achieved and against which actual 

important as it tells us where to go, 
performance is measured. Therefore, 

it provides direction and reduces 
planning means setting objectives 

the risk of uncertainty by preparing 
and targets and formulating an 
action plan to achieve them. It forecasts. The major benefits of 

is concerned with both ends and planning are given below:

means i.e., what is to be done and  (i) Planning provides directions: 
how it is to be done. By stating in advance how 

The plan that is developed has to work is to be done planning 
have a given time frame but time provides direction for action. 
is a limited resource. It needs to be Planning ensures that the goals 
utilised judiciously. If time factor or objectives are clearly stated 
is not taken into consideration, so that they act as a guide for 
conditions in the environment may deciding what action should be 
change and all business plans may taken and in which direction. 
go waste. Planning will be a futile If goals are well defined, 
exercise if it is not acted upon or employees are aware of what 
implemented. the organisation has to do and 

Do you think from the above we what they must do to achieve 
can formulate a comprehensive those goals. Departments and 

Reprint 2025-26



94 Business Studies

individuals in  the organisation of concrete plans. It is the most 
are able to work in coordination. challenging activity for the 
If there was no planning, empl‑ management as it guides all 
oyees would be working in future actions leading to growth 
different directions and the and prosperity of the business. 

organisation would not be able  (v) Planning facilitates decision 
to achieve its desired goals. making: Planning helps the 

 (ii) Planning reduces the risks of manager to look into the 
uncertainty: Planning is an activity future and make a choice from 
which enables a manager to look amongst various alternative 
ahead and anticipate changes. courses of action. The manager 
By deciding in advance the tasks has to evaluate each alternative 
to be performed, planning shows and select the most viable 
the way to deal with changes proposition. Planning involves 
and uncertain events. Changes setting targets and predicting 
or events cannot be eliminated future conditions, thus helping 
but they can be anticipated and in taking rational decisions.
managerial responses to them  (vi) Planning establishes standards 
can be developed. for controlling: Planning 

 (iii) Planning reduces overlapping involves setting of goals. The 
and wasteful activities: Planning entire managerial process is 
serves as the basis of coordinating concerned with accomplishing 
the activities and efforts of different predeter mined goals through 
divisions, departments and 

planning, organising, staffing, 
individuals. It helps in avoiding 

directing and controlling. 
confusion and misunderstanding. 

Planning provides the goals or 
Since planning  ensures 
clarity in thought and action, standards against which actual 

work is carried on smoothly performance is measured. By 

without interruptions. Useless comparing actual performance 
and redundant activities are with some standard, managers can 
minimised or eliminated. It is know whether they have actually 
easier to detect inefficiencies and been able to attain the goals. If 
take corrective measures to deal there is any deviation it can be 
with them. corrected. Therefore, we can say 

 (iv) Planning promotes innovative that planning is a prerequisite 
ideas: Since planning is the for controlling. If there were 
first function of management, no goals and standards, then 
new ideas can take the shape finding deviations which are a 

Reprint 2025-26



Planning 95

part of controlling would not be contributes to the achievement 
possible. The nature of corrective of predetermined organisational 
action required depends upon goals.
the extent of deviations from the  (ii) Planning is a primary function 
standard. Therefore, planning of management: Planning lays 
provides the basis of control. down the base for other 

functions of management. All 
features of plannIng other managerial functions are 
In the example of Polaris, the performed within the framework of 
company has plans of expansion. the plans drawn. Thus, planning 
Their objective is to increase their precedes other functions. This is 

capacity so that they can employ 800 also referred to as the primacy of 

more professionals. Their target time planning. The various functions 

is six months. The objective of the of management are interrelated 
and equally important. However, 

current year has also been clearly 
planning provides the basis of all 

stated which is to increase capacity 
other functions.

by 1500‑2000 more professionals. 
Since planning is the primary  (iii) Planning is pervasive: Planning 

is required at all levels of 
function of management they have 

management as well as in all 
set their objectives first. Thus, all 

departments of the organisation. 
businesses follow a set pattern of 

It is not an exclusive function 
planning. You will be able to find 

of top management nor of any 
some similarities in the features of 

particular department. But 
planning and what you see in real 

the scope of planning differs at 
life. Try and identify them.

different levels and among different 
The planning function of the 

departments. For example, the 
management has certain special 

top management undertakes 
features. These features throw light 

planning for the organisation as 
on its nature and scope.

a whole. Middle management 
 (i) Planning focuses on achieving does the departmental planning. 

objectives: Organisations are 
At the lowest level, day‑to‑day 

set up with a general purpose 
operational planning is done by 

in view. Specific goals are set 
supervisors.

out in the plans along with 
the activities to be undertaken  (iv) Planning is continuous: Plans 
to achieve the goals. Thus, are prepared for a specific period 
planning is purposeful. Planning of time, may be for a month, a 
has no meaning unless it quarter, or a year. At the end 

Reprint 2025-26



96 Business Studies

of that period there is need need for planning because 
for a new plan to be drawn on there is no choice. The need 
the basis of new requirements for planning arises only when 
and future conditions. Hence, alternatives are available. 
planning is a continuous In actual practice, planning 
process. Continuity of planning presupposes the existence of 
is related with the planning alternatives. Planning, thus, 
cycle. It means that a plan is involves thorough examination 
framed, it is implemented, and and evaluation of each 
is followed by another plan, and alternative and choosing the 
so on. most appropriate one.

 (v) Planning is futuristic: Planning  (vii) Planning is a mental exercise: 
essentially involves looking Planning requires application 
ahead and preparing for the of the mind involving foresight, 
future. The purpose of planning intelligent imagination and sound 
is to meet future events effectively judgement. It is basically an 
to the best advantage of an intellectual activity of thinking 
organisation. It implies peeping rather than doing, because 
into the future, analysing it planning determines the action 
and predicting it. Planning is, to be taken. However, planning 
therefore, regarded as a forward requires logical and systematic 
looking function based on thinking rather than guess 
forecasting. Through forecasting, work or wishful thinking. 
future events and conditions are 
anticipated and plans are drawn Planning: the first 
accordingly. Thus, for example, step to management
sales forecasting is the basis on 
which a business firm prepares 
its annual plan for production 
and sales.

 (vi) Planning involves decision 
making: Planning essentially 
inv olves choice from among 
various alternatives and 
activities. If there is only one 
possible goal or a possible 
course of action, there is no 

Reprint 2025-26



Planning 97

In other words, thinking for Following a pre‑decided plan, 
planning must be orderly and when circum stances have 
based on the analysis of facts changed, may not turn out to 
and forecasts. be in the organisations interest.

 (ii) Planning may not work in a 
lImItatIons of plannIng

dynamic environment: The 
We have seen how planning is business environment is 
essential for business organisations. dynamic, nothing is constant. 
It is difficult to manage operations The environment consists 
without formal planning. It is of a number of dimensions, 
important for an organisation to economic, political, physical, 
move towards achieving goals. But legal and social dimensions. 
we have often seen in our daily lives The organisation has to 
also, that things do not always go constantly adapt itself to 
according to plan. Unforeseen events changes. It becomes difficult to 
and changes, rise in costs and prices, accurately  assess future trends 
environmental changes, government in the environment if economic 
interventions, legal regulations, all policies are modified or political 
affect our business plans. Plans then conditions in the country are 
need to be modified. If we cannot not stable or there is a natural 
adhere to our plans, then why do calamity. Competition in the 
we plan at all? This is what we need market can also upset financial 
to analyse. The major limitations of plans, sales targets may have 
planning are given below: to be revised and, accordingly, 
 (i) Planning leads to rigidity: In cash budgets also need to be 

an organisation, a well‑defined modified since they are based 
plan is drawn up with specific on sales figures. Planning 
goals to be achieved within cannot foresee everything and 
a specific time frame. These thus, there may be obstacles to 
plans then decide the future effective planning.
course of action and managers  (iii) Planning reduces creativity: 
may not be in a position to Planning is an activity which is 
change it. This kind of rigidity done by the top management. 
in plans may create difficulty. Usually the rest of the members 
Managers need to be given some just implements these plans. 
flexibility to be able to cope with As a consequence, middle 
the changed circumstances. management and other decision 

Reprint 2025-26



98 Business Studies

makers are neither allowed to  (vi) Planning does not guarantee 
deviate from plans nor are they success: The success of an 
permitted to act on their own. enterprise is possible only 
Thus, much of the initiative when plans are properly drawn 
or creativity inherent in them up and implemented. Any 
also gets lost or reduced. Most plan needs to be translated 
of the time, employees do not into action or it becomes 
even attempt to formulate plans. meaningless. Managers have a 
They only carry out orders. tendency to rely on previously 
Thus, planning in a way reduces tried and tested successful 
creativity since people tend to plans. It is not always true 
think along the same lines as that just because a plan has 
others. There is nothing new or worked before it will work 
innovative. again. Besides, there are so 

 (iv) Planning involves huge costs: many other unknown factors 
When plans are drawn up huge to be considered. This kind of 
costs are involved in their complacency and false sense 
formulation. These may be in of security may act ually lead 
terms of time and money for to failure instead of success. 
example, checking accuracy of However, despite its limitations, 
facts may involve lot of time. planning is not a useless 
Detailed plans require scientific exercise. It is a tool to be used 
calculations to ascertain facts with caution. It provides a base 
and figures. The costs incurred for analysing future courses of 
sometimes may not justify the action. But, it is not a solution 
benefits derived from the plans. to all problems. 
There are a number of incidental 
costs as well, like expenses plannIng process

on boardroom meetings, Planning, as we all know is deciding 
discussions with professional in advance what to do and how to do. 
experts and preliminary It is a process of decision making. 
investigations to find out the How do we go about making a plan? 
viability of the plan. Since planning is an activity there 

 (v) Planning is a time-consuming are certain logical steps for every 
process: Sometimes plans to be manager to follow.
drawn up take so much of time  (i) Setting Objectives: The first 
that there is not much time left and foremost step is setting 
for their implementation. objectives. Every organisation 

Reprint 2025-26



Planning 99

must have certain objectives. own objectives within the broad 
Objectives may be set for the framework of the organisation’s 
entire organisation and each philosophy. Objectives have 
department or unit within the to percolate down to each unit 
organisation. Objectives or goals and employees at all levels. At 
specify what the organisation the same time, managers must 
wants to achieve. It could mean contribute ideas and participate 
an increase in sales by 20% in the objective setting process. 
which could be objective of the They must also understand 
entire organisation. How all how their actions contribute to 
dep artments would contribute achieving objectives. If the end 
to the organisational goals is result is clear it becomes easier 
the plan that is to be drawn up. to work towards the goal.
Objectives should be stated clearly  (ii) Developing Premises: Planning 
for all departments, units and is concerned with the future 
employees. They give direction to which is uncertain and every 
all departments. Departments/ planner is using conjecture about 
units then need to set their what might happen in future. 

Kinds of plans: Objective, Strategy and Policy of Mitticool

During the devastating earthquake of January 2001, Mansukhbhai incurred heavy 
loss and most of his goods were damaged. He distributed the leftover stock that was 
undamaged, to the quake affected masses of Kutch. This led to a photograph that 
was taken just after the earthquake and featured on the Sandesh Gujarati Daily in 
February 2001. It showed a broken water filter that was made by Mansukhbhai with 
a caption that said “The poor man’s broken fridge”. 

At that time, he met the Gujarat Grass-roots Innovation Augmentation Network 
(GIAN), Ahmedabad, which supported Mansukhbhai further in his endeavours. 
Finally after an arduous quest and several tests of soil and fridge designs, he emerged 
with the innovative Mitticool fridge in 2005. After that he has innovated various 
products using clay. 

y The company has stuck to its policy of keeping all its products at a lower rate 
which will be affordable for the poor people.

y Their future plans include starting a factory with the aid of the National Innovation 
Foundation at IIM Ahmedabad and making a MittiCool house. It will be a green 
(eco-friendly) house with clay that will have no electricity but only renewable 
energy to maintain a comfortable temperature inside.”

Reprint 2025-26



100 Business Studies

Therefore, the manager is be generated and thoroughly 
required to make certain discussed amongst the members 
assumptions about the future. of the organisation.
These assumptions are called  (iv) Evaluating alternative courses: 
premises. Assumptions are The next step is to weigh the pros 
the base material upon which and cons of each alternative. Each 
plans are to be drawn. The base course will have many variables 
material may be in the form of which have to be weighed 
forecasts, existing plans or any against each other. The positive 
past information about policies. 

and negative aspects of each 
The premises or assumptions 

proposal need to be evaluated 
must be the same for all and 

in the light of the objective to 
there should be total agreement 
on them. All managers involved in be achieved. In financial plans, 

planning should be familiar with for example, the risk‑return 

and use the same assumptions. trade‑off is very common. The 

For example, forecasting is more risky the investment, 
important in developing premises the higher the returns it is 
as it is a technique of gathering likely to give. To evaluate such 
information. Forecasts can be proposals detailed calculations 
made about the demand for a of earnings, earnings per share, 
particular product, policy change, interest, taxes, dividends are 
interest rates, prices of capital made and decisions taken. 
goods, tax rates etc. Accurate Accurate forecasts in conditions 
forecasts, therefore become of certainty/uncertainty then 
essential for successful plans. become vital assumptions for 

 (iii) Identifying alternative courses these proposals. Alternatives are 
of action: Once objectives are set, evaluated in the light of their 
assumptions are made. Then the feasibility and consequences.
next step would be to act upon  (v) Selecting an alternative: This is 
them. There may be many ways the real point of decision making. 
to act and achieve objectives. The best plan has to be adopted 
All the alternative courses of and implemented. The ideal 
action should be identified. The plan, of course, would be the 
course of action which may be most feasible, profitable and with 
taken could be either routine or least negative consequences. 
innovative. An innovative course Most plans may not always be 
may be adopted by involving subjected to a mathematical 
more people and sharing their analysis. In such cases, 
ideas. If the project is important, subjectivity and the manager’s 
then more alternatives should exp erience, judgement and 

Reprint 2025-26



Planning 101

at times, intuition play an operational goals. These plans can be 
important part in selecting classified into single‑use plans and 
the most viable alternative. standing plans.
Sometimes, a combination of Single-use Plan: A single‑use plan 
plans may be selected instead is developed for a one‑time event or 
of one best course. The manager project. Such a course of action is not 
will have to apply permutations likely to be repeated in future, i.e., 
and combinations and select the they are for non‑recurring situations. 
best possible course of action. The duration of this plan may depend 

 (vi) Implementing the plan: This is upon the type of the project. It may 
the step where other managerial span a week or a month. A project may 
functions also come into the sometimes be of only one day, such 
picture. The step is concerned as, organising an event or a seminar 
with putting the plan into action, or conference. These plans include 
i.e., doing what is required. For budgets, programmes and projects. 
example, if there is a plan to They consist of details, including 
increase production then more the names of employees who are 
labour, more machinery will be responsible for doing the work and 
required. This step would also contributing to the single‑use plan. For 
involve organising for labour example, a programme may consist of 
and purchase of machinery. identifying steps, procedures required 

 (vii) Follow-up action: To see whether for opening a new department to deal 
plans are being implemented and with other minor work. Projects are 
activities are performed according similar to programmes but differ in 
to schedule is also part of the scope and complexity. A budget is a 
planning process. Monitoring statement of  expenses, revenue and 
the plans is equally important income for a specified period.  
to ensure that objectives are Standing Plan: A standing plan is 
achieved. used for activities that occur regularly 

over a period of time. It is designed 
types of plans to ensure that internal operations of 

an organisation run smoothly. Such 
Single-use and standing plans a plan greatly enhances efficiency in 
An organisation has to prepare a plan routine decision‑making. It is usually 
before making any decision related to developed once but is modified from 
business operation, or undertaking time to time to meet business needs 
any project. Plans can be classified as required. Standing plans include 
into several types depending on the policies, procedures, methods and 
use and the length of the planning rules. 
period. Certain plans have a short‑ Policies are general forms of standing 
term horizon and help to achieve plans that specifies the organisations 

Reprint 2025-26



102 Business Studies

response to a certain situation like the very basic to the organisation and 
admission policy of an educational they are defined as ends which 
institution. Procedures describe the management seeks to achieve 
steps to be followed in particular by its operations. Therefore, an 
circumstances like the procedure objective simply stated is what you 
for reporting progress in production. would like to achieve, i.e., the end 
Methods provide the manner in which result of activities. For example, an 
a task has to be performed. Rules are organisation may have an objective 
very clearly stated as to exactly what 

of increasing sales by 10% or 
has to be done like reporting for work 

earning a reasonable rate of return 
at a particular time.

on investment, earn a 20% profit 
Single‑use and standing plans 

are part of the operational planning from business. They represent the 

process. end point of planning. All other 

There are other types of plans which managerial activities are also 

usually are not classified as single‑ directed towards achieving these 
use or standing plans. A strategy, for objectives. They are usually set by 
example, is part of strategic planning top management of the organisation 
or management. It is a general and focus on broad, general issues. 
plan prepared by top management They define the future state of 
outlining resource allocation, affairs which the organisation 
priorities and takes into consideration strives to realise. They serve as a 
the business environment and guide for overall business planning. 
competition. Objectives are usually Different departments or units in 
set by the top management and the organisation may have their own 
serve as a guide for overall planning. objectives. 
Each unit then formulates their own Objectives need to be expressed 
objectives keeping in view the overall 

in specific terms i.e., they should be 
organisational goals.  

measurable in quantitative terms, 
Based on what the plans seek to 

achieve, plans can be classified as in the form of a written statement of 

Objectives, Strategy, Policy, Procedure, desired results to be achieved within 

Method, Rule, Programme, Budget. a given time period.

strategy 
objectIves A strategy provides the broad contours 
The first step in planning is setting of an organisation’s business. It will 
objectives. Objectives, therefore, also refer to future decisions defining 
can be said to be the desired future the organisations direction and scope 
position that the management in the long run. Thus, we can say 
would like to reach. Objectives are a strategy is a comprehensive plan 

Reprint 2025-26



Planning 103

for accomplishing an organisation They are guides to managerial action 
objectives. This comprehensive plan and decisions in the implementation 
will include three dimensions, of strategy. For example, the company 
(i) determining long term objectives, may have a recruitment policy, pricing 
(ii) adopting a particular course of policy within which objectives are set 
action, and  (iii) allocating resources and decisions are made. If there is an 
necessary to achieve the objective. established  policy, it becomes easier 

Whenever a strategy is formulated, to resolve problems or issues. As such, 
the business environment needs to be a policy is the general response to a 
taken into consideration. The changes particular problem or situation. 
in the economic, political, social, There are policies for all levels 
legal and technological environment and departments in the organisation 
will affect an organisation’s strategy. ranging from major company 
Strategies usually take the course policies to minor policies. Major 
of forming the organisation’s company policies are for all to know 
identity in the business enviro‑

i.e., customers, clients, competitors 
nment. Major strategic decisions 

etc., whereas minor polices are 
will include decisions like whether 
the organisation will continue to applicable to insiders and contain 

be in the same line of business, minute details of information vital 

or combine new lines of activity to the employees of an organisation. 
with the existing business or seek But there has to be some basis for 
to acquire a dominant position in divulging information to others. 
the same market. For example, a Policies define the broad 
company’s marketing strategy has parameters within which a manager 
to address certain questions i.e., may function. The manager may 
who are the customers? what is use his/her discretion to interpret 
the demand for the product? which and apply a policy. For example, the 
channel of distribution to use? what decisions taken under a Purchase 
is the pricing policy? and how do we Policy would be in the nature of 
advertise the product. These and manufacturing or buying decisions. 
many more issues need to be resolved 

Should a company make or buy its 
while formulating a marketing 

requirements of packages, transport 
strategy for any organisation.  

services, printing of stationery, water 

polIcy and power supply and other items? 

Policies are general statements that How should vendors be selected 

guide thinking or channelise  energies for procuring supplies? How many 
towards a particular direction. Policies suppliers should a company make 
provide a basis for interpreting strategy purchases from? What is the criteria 
which is usually stated in general terms. for choosing suppliers. All these 

Reprint 2025-26



104 Business Studies

queries would be addressed by the programmes, lectures and seminars 
Purchase Policy. can be organised whereas at the 

supervisory level, on the job training 
procedure methods and work‑oriented  methods 
Procedures are routine steps on how are appropriate. 
to carry out activities. They detail 
the exact manner in which any rule

work is to be performed. They are Rules are specific statements that 
specified in a chronological order. For inform what is to be done. They do not 
example, there may be a procedure for allow for any flexibility or discretion. 
requisi tioning supplies before It reflects a managerial decision that 
production. Procedures are specified a certain action must or must not be 
steps to be followed in particular taken. They are usually the simplest 
circumstances. They  are generally type of plans because there is no 
meant for insiders to follow. The compromise or change unless a 
sequence of steps or actions to be policy decision is taken.
taken are generally to enforce a 
policy and to attain pre‑determined programme

objectives. Policies and procedures Programmes are detailed statements 
are interlinked with each other. about a project which outlines the 
Procedures are steps to be carried objectives, policies, procedures, rules, 
out within a broad policy framework. tasks, human and physical 

resources required and the budget 
method to implement any course of action. 
Methods provide the prescribed Programmes will include the entire 
ways or manner in which a task gamut of activities as well as the 
has to be performed considering organisation’s policy and how it will 
the objective. It deals with a task contribute to the overall business 
comprising one step of a procedure plan. The minutest  details are 
and specifies how this step is to be worked out i.e., procedures, rules, 
performed. The method may vary budgets, within the broad policy 
from task to task. Selection of proper framework.
method saves time, money and 
effort and increases efficiency. For budget

imparting training to employees at A budget is a  statement of expected 
various level from top management results expressed in numerical 
to supervisory, different methods terms. It is a plan which quantifies 
can be adopted. For example for future facts and figures. For example, 
higher level management orientation a sales budget may forecast the sales 

Reprint 2025-26



Planning 105

of different products in each area for a device to help the management to 
a particular month. A budget may plan and control the use of cash. It 
also be prepared to show the number is a statement showing the estimated 
of workers required in the factory at cash inflows and cash outflows over 

peak production times. a given period. Cash inflows would 

Since budget represents all items generally come from cash sales and 

in numbers, it becomes easier to the cash outflows would gener ally be 

compare actual figures with expected the costs and expenses associated 

figures and take corrective action with the operations of the business. 
The net cash position is determined 

subsequently. Thus, a budget is also 
by the cash budget i.e., inflows minus 

a control device from which deviations 
(–) outflows = surplus or deficiency.

can be taken care of. But making a 
The management has to hold 

budget involves forecasting, therefore, 
adequate cash balances for various 

it clearly comes under planning. It is 
purposes. But at the same time, it 

a fundamental planning instrument should avoid excess balance of cash 
in many organisations. since it gives little or no return. 

Let us take an example of Cash The business has to assess and 
Budget. The cash budget is a basic plan its need for cash with a degree 
tool in the management of cash. It is of caution. 

Key Terms

Planning  Objectives  Goals  Decisions

Standards  Controlling  Premises  Assumptions

Alternatives  Strategy  Policy  Procedure

Rule  Programme  Budget

Summary

Planning
Planning is deciding in advance what to do and how to do. It is one 
of the basic managerial functions.
Planning therefore involves setting objectives and developing an 
appropriate course of action to achieve these objectives.
Importance of Planning
Planning provides directions, reduces risks of uncertainty, reduces 
overlapping and wasteful activities, promotes innovative ideas, 
facilitates decision making, establishes standards for controlling. 
Features of Planning
Planning focuses on achieving objectives; It is a primary function 
of management; Planning is pervasive, continuous, futuristic and 
involves decision making; It is a mental exercise.

Reprint 2025-26



106 Business Studies

Limitations of  Planning
Planning leads to rigidity; reduces creativity; involves huge costs; It 
is a time consuming process; Planning does not work in a dynamic 
environment; and does not guarantee success.
Planning Process
Setting objectives: Objectives may be set for the entire organisation 
and each department or unit within the organisation.
Developing premises: Planning is concerned with the future which 
is uncertain and every planner is using conjucture about what 
might happen in future.
Identifying alternative courses of action: Once objectives are set, 
assumptions are made. Then the next step would be to act upon them.
Evaluating alternative courses: The next step is to weigh the pros 
and cons of each alternative.
Selecting an alternative: This is the real point of decision making. 
The best plan has to be adopted and implemented.
Implement the plan: This is concerned with putting the plan into action.
Follow-up action: Monitoring the plans are equally important to 
ensure that objectives are achieved.

Types of Plans
Objectives: Objectives therefore can be said to be the desired future 
position that the management would like to reach.
Strategy: A strategy provides the broad contours of an organisation’s 
business. It will also refer to future decisions defining the 
organisations direction and scope in the long run.
Policy: Policies are general statements that guide thinking or 
channelise  energies towards a particular direction.
Procedure: Procedures are routine steps on how to carry out activities.
Rule: Rules are specific statements that tell what is to be done.
Programme: Programmes  are detailed statements about a project 
which outlines the objectives, policies, procedures, rules, tasks, 
human and physical resources required and the budget to implement 
any course of action. 
Budget: A budget is a statement of expected results expressed in 
numerical terms. It is a plan which quantifies future facts and figures.

Exercises
Very Short Answer Type

1. How does planning provide direction?

2. A company wants to increase its market share from the 
present 10% to 25%  to have a dominant position in the 

Reprint 2025-26



Planning 107

market by the end of the next financial year. Ms Rajni, the 
sales manager has been asked to prepare a proposal that 
will outline the options available for achieving this objective. 
Her report included the following options ‑ entering new 
markets, expanding the product range offered to customers, 
using sales promotion techniques such as giving rebates, 
discounts or increasing the budget for advertising activities. 
Which step of the planning process has been performed by 
Ms Rajni?

3. Why are rules considered to be plans?

4. Rama Stationery Mart has made a decision to make all 
the payments by e‑transfers only. Identify the type of plan 
adopted by Rama Stationery Mart.

5. Can planning work in a changing environment? Give a 
reason to justify your answer.

Short Answer Type

1. What are the main aspects in the definition of planning?

2. If planning involves working out details for the future, why 
does it not ensure success?

3. What kind of strategic decisions are taken by business 
organisations?

4. Planning reduces creativity. Critically comment.(Hint: both 
the points ‑ Planning promotes innovative ideas and planning 
reduces creativity – will be given).

5. In an attempt to cope with Reliance Jio’s onslaught in 2018, 
market leader Bharti Airtel has refreshed its ` 149 prepaid 
plan to offer 2 GB of 3G/4G data per day, twice the amount 
it offered earlier. Name the type of plan is highlighted in the 
given example. ? State its three dimensions also.

6. State the type of plan and state whether they are Single use 
or Standing plan:
a. A type of plan which serves as a controlling device as 

well.(budget)
b. A plan based on research and analysis and is concerned 

with physical and technical tasks. (Method)

Long Answer Type

1. Why is it that organisations are not always able to accomplish 
all their objectives?

Reprint 2025-26



108 Business Studies

2. What are the steps taken by management in the planning 
process?

3. An auto company C Ltd. is facing a problem of declining 
market share due to increased competition from other new and 
existing players in the market. Its competitors are introducing 
lower priced models for mass consumers who are price 
sensitive. C Ltd. realized that it needs to take steps immediately 
to improve its market standing in the future. For quality 
conscious consumers, C Limited plans to introduce new models 
with added features and new technological advancements. 
The company has formed a team with representatives from all 
the levels of management. This team will brainstorm and will 
determine the steps that will be adopted by the organisation 
for implementing the above strategy. Explain the features 
of Planning highlighted in the situation given below.(Hint: 
Planning is pervasive, Planning is futuristic and Planning is a 
mental exercise).

Reprint 2025-26



ORGANISING 5
CHAPTER

Way To Go, Wipro!

It’s not quite there yet, but the goal is certainly within L E A R N I N G 
reach. One of India’s largest IT solutions providers, O B J E C T I V E S
Wipro Technologies, is taking on the likes of IBM and 
Accenture in its effort to be included among the largest After studying this chapter you 

should be able to:
and most successful technology services companies in 
the world. n Explain the concept of 

Restructuring Wipro was considered the organising;

most important step in becoming a global giant, n	Explain the process of 
driven by the goal towards improved customer- organising;

orientation. n	Describe the importance of 
During the past few months, Wipro separated organising;

itself into several subsidiaries by product line: n	Explain the meaning, advantages 
telecommunications, engineering, financial and disadvantages of functional 
services, etc. Each subsidiary brings in about $300 organisation;

million in annual earnings and is self-sufficient n	Explain the meaning, advantages  
with their own accounting books, personnel and and disadvantages of divisional 

administrative functions. organisation;

Wipro shifted from a centralised to  n	Explain the meaning, advantages 
decentralised management system. All and disadvantages of formal and 

responsibilities for growth lay with the informal organisation;

management of each entity. n	Distinguish between formal and 

“We tried to de-layer the organisation and informal organisation;

empower our business leaders with a much higher n	Explain the concept of 
degree of growth responsibility,” said Premji. “We delegation and decentralisation;

removed an entire layer [of executives]”. n	Describe the importance of 
delegation and decentralisation; 

Adapted from an article by Heide B. Malhotra and
for Epoch Times Washington D.C. n	Distinguish between delegation 

and decentralisation.

Once the plans have been laid down critical issue in accomplishing the 
and objectives specified therein, the goals specified in the planning 
next step is to organise resources process is structuring the work of an 
in a manner which leads to the organisation to adapt to the dynamic 
accomplishment of objectives. A business environment. The activities 

Reprint 2025-26



110 Business Studies

of an enterprise must be organised The organising function leads to the 
in such a manner that plans can be creation of an organisational structure 
successfully implemented. which includes the designing of roles 

For planning to be fruitful a number to be filled by suitably skilled people 
of considerations like resources that and defining the inter relationship 
will be needed, optimum utilisation between these roles so that ambi­
of the same translation of work into guity in performance of duties 
attainable tasks, empowering the can be eliminated. Not only is this 
workforce to accomplish these tasks important for productive cooperation 
etc., need to be understood and dealt between the personnel but also for 
with properly. clarification of extent of authority, 

It is evident from the way Wipro as well as responsibility for results 
has moved towards reaching for and logical grouping of activities. 
it’s goal of becoming a globally 
successful technology company, Meaning

that organising plays a significant Let us take an example to understand 
role in implementation of plans. how organising takes place. Have 

What has Wipro done to become a you ever paid attention to how, the 
contending force among other global school fete which you enjoy so much, 
giants? Are there lessons to be learnt actually takes place? What goes on 
from Wipro’s approach? behind the scene to make it the 

Wipro organised itself in a manner desired reality you want? The whole 
that allowed customer orientation to activity is divided into task groups 
dominate over other goals and diversified 

each dealing with a specific area like 
on the basis of product lines. It also 

the food committee, the decoration 
modified the relationships within the 

committee, the ticketing committee 
management hierarchy to suit the goals.

and so on. These are under the 
The management function of 

overall supervision of the official in 
organising ensures that efforts are 

charge of the event. Coordinating 
directed towards the attainment 

relationships are established among 
of goals laid down in the planning 
function in such a manner that the various groups to enable smooth 

resources are used optimally and interaction and clarity about each 

people are able to work collectively group’s contribution towards the 

and effectively for a common purpose. event. All the above activities are a 

Thus, it is in the context of effective part of the organising function. 

management that the organisation Organising essentially implies a 

function earns due importance. It is process which coordinates human 

a means for translating plans into efforts, assembles resources and 
action. integrates both into a unified whole 

Reprint 2025-26

##5##

Organising 111

to be utilised for achieving specified student supervises the work by 
objectives. grouping students, dividing the work, 

Organising can be defined as a assigning each group their quota and 
process that initiates implementation developing reporting relationships 
of plans by clarifying jobs and among them, the job will be done 
working relationships and effectively faster and in a better manner.
deploying resources for attainment From the above description, the 
of identified and desired results following steps emerge in the process 
(goals). of organising:

 (i) Identification and division 
StepS in the proceSS of of work: The first step in the 

process of organising involves 
organiSing

identifying and dividing the 
Organising involves a series of steps work that has to be done in 
that need to be taken in order to accordance with previously 
achieve the desired goal. Let us try determined plans. The work 
and understand how organising is divided into manageable 
is carried out with the help of an activities so that duplication 
example. can be avoided and the burden 

Suppose twelve students work for of work can be shared among 
the school library in the summer the employees.  
vacations. One afternoon they are  (ii) Departmentalisation: Once 
told to unload a shipment of new work has been divided into small 
releases, stock the bookshelves, and and manageable activities then 
then dispose of all waste (packaging, those activities  which are similar 
paper etc). If all the students decide in nature are grouped together. 
to do it in their own way, it will result Such sets facilitate specialisation. 
in mass confusion. However, if one This grouping process is 

Definition of Organising
Organising is the process of identifying and grouping the work to 
be performed, defining and delegating responsibility and authority, 
and establishing relationships for the purpose of enabling people to 
work most effectively together in accomplishing objectives. 

Louis Allen 
Organising is the process of defining and grouping the activities of the 
enterprise and establishing authority relationships among them.

Theo Haimman

Reprint 2025-26



112 Business Studies

Think About It
Your school must have various societies for extra-curricular 
activities like the dramatics society, the quiz club, the economics 
society, the debating society and so on. Observe and list the way 
they have organised their activities using division of labour, chain of 
communication and the levels they have adopted for reporting on 
work. How far is this similar to the process you have read about?

called departmentalisation. The establishment of such clear 
Departments can be created relationships helps to create a 
using several criteria as a basis. hierarchal structure and helps 
Examples of some of the most in coordination amongst various 
popularly used basis are territory departments.
(north, south, west, etc.) and 
products (appliances, clothes, iMportance of organiSing
cosmetics etc).

Performance of the organising 
 (iii) Assignment of duties: It is 

function can pave the way for a 
necessary to define the work 

smooth transition of the enterprise 
of different job positions and 
accordingly allocate work in accordance with the dynamic 

to various employees. Once business environment. The 

departments have been formed, significance of the organising 

each of them is placed under function mainly arises from the fact 

the charge of an individual. that it helps in the survival and 

Jobs are then allocated to the growth of an enterprise and equips 

members of each department in it to meet various challenges. In 

accordance to their skills and order for any business enterprise to 
competencies. It is essential perform tasks and successfully meet 
for effective performance that a goals, the organising function must 
proper match is made between be properly performed. The following 
the nature of a job and the points highlight the crucial role that 
ability of an individual. The work organising plays in any business 
must be assigned to those who enterprise:
are best fitted to perform it well.  (i) Benefits of specialisation: 

 (iv) Establishing authority and Organising leads to a systematic 
reporting relationships: Merely allocation of jobs amongst the 
allocating work is not enough. work force. This reduces the 
Each individual should also know workload as well as enhances 
who he has to take orders from productivity because of the 
and to whom he is accountable. specific workers performing  a 

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 113

specific job on a regular basis. way for a smooth transition. 
Repetitive performance of a It also provides much needed 
particular task allows a worker stability to the enterprise as it 
to gain experience in that area can then continue to survive 
and leads to specialisation. and grow inspite of changes.

 (ii) Clarity in working relation­  (v) Effective administration: 
ships: The establishment of Organising provides a clear 
working relationships clarifies description of jobs and related 
lines of communication and duties. This helps to avoid confusion 
specifies who is to report to and duplication. Clarity in working 
whom.  This removes ambiguity relationships enables proper 
in transfer of information execution of work. Management 
and instructions. It helps in of an enterprise thereby becomes 
creating a hierarchical order easy and this brings effectiveness 
thereby enabling the fixation of in administration.
responsibility and specification  (vi) Development of personnel:
of the extent of authority to be Organising stimulates creativity 
exercised  by an individual. amongst the managers.  Effective 

 (iii) Optimum utilisation of delegation allows the managers 
resources: Organising leads to to reduce their workload  by 
the proper usage of all material, assigning routine jobs to their 
fin ancial and human resources. subordinates.  The  reduction in 
The proper assignment of jobs workload by delegation is not 
avoids overlapping of work and just necessary because of limited 
also makes possible the best capacity of an individual but also 
use of resources. Avoidance allows the manager to develop new 
of duplication of work helps methods and ways of performing 
in preventing confusion and tasks. It gives them the time to 
minimising the wastage of explore areas for growth and the 
resources and efforts. opportunity to innovate thereby 

 (iv) Adaptation to change: The strengthening the company’s 
process of organising allows competitive position.  Delegation 
a business enterprise to also develops in the subordinate 
accommodate changes in the the ability to deal effectively with 
business environment. It allows challenges and helps them to 
the organisation structure to be realise their full potential.
suitably modified and the revision  (vii) Expansion and growth: Organ­
of inter­relationships amongst ising helps in the growth  and 
managerial levels to pave the diversification of an enterprise 

Reprint 2025-26



114 Business Studies

Think About It
Organising leads to specialisation in work. A pitfall of this is that 
repetitive performance of the same job may lead to monotony, 
stress, boredom and absenteeism. What can managers do to 
improve the scenario?

by enabling it to deviate from an enterprise as those companies 
existing norms and taking up which do not change at all will close 
new challenges. down or cease to grow.

It allows a business enterprise to As an organisation grows, coordi­
add more job positions, departments nation becomes difficult due to the 
and even diversify their product emergence of new functions and 
lines. New geographical territories increase in structural hierarchies. 
can be added to current areas Thus, for an organisation to function 
of operation and this will help to smoothly and face environmental 
increase customer base, sales and changes, it becomes necessary to 
profit.

pay attention to its structure.
Thus, organising is a process by 

Peter Drucker emphasises on the 
which the manager brings order out 

importance of having an appropriate 
of chaos, removes conflict among 

organisation structure when he 
people over work or responsibility 
sharing and creates an environment says, “organisation structure is an 

suitable for teamwork. indispensable means; and the wrong 
structure will seriously impair busi­

organiSation Structure ness performance and even destroy it.”

Organisation structure is the The organisation structure can 
outcome of the organising process. be defined as the framework within 
An effective structure will result which managerial and operating 
in increased profitability of the tasks are performed. It specifies the 
enterprise. The need for an adequate relationships between people, work 
organisation structure is felt by and resources. It allows correlation 
an enterprise whenever it grows in and coordination among human, 
size or complexity. It is only those physical  and financial resources  and 
enterprises which do not focus this enables a business enterprise 
on growth that can maintain a to accomplish desired goals. The 
particular structure for a long period organisation structure of a firm is 
of time. However, it is important to shown in an organisation chart.
understand that such stagnancy The span of management, to 
may prove to be detrimental to a large extent gives shape to the 

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 115

organisational structure. Span of sales and administration. Operations 
management refers to the number of include travel counsellor, reservation 
subordinates that can be effectively and ticketing and customer care. 
managed by a superior. This Sales include the Accounts executive. 
determines the levels of management Administration includes Book Keeper, 
in the structure. Cashier and utility personnel. 

A proper organisation structure is This division of work on the basis 
essential to ensure a smooth flow of of functions has resulted into an 
communication and better control organisational structure specifying the 
over the operations of a business line of authority and responsibility.
enterprise.

An organisation structure provides typeS of organiSation 
the framework which enables the StructureS
enterprise to function as an integrated 
unit by regulating and coordinating The type of structure adopted by an 

the responsibilities of individuals organisation will vary with the nature 

and departments. Let us try and and types of activities performed by 

understand this through an example. an organsation. The organisational 

For example: Sunita opened her own structure can be classified under two 

travel agency. The success of her travel categories which are as follows: 

agency depends on a harmonious  (i) Functional structure and 
relationship between the customer  (ii) Divisional structure
and the employees of the travel agency. 
In order to achieve this objective she Functional structure 
has divided the entire work of the Grouping of jobs of similar nature 
agency into three subheads based under functional and organising 
on the functions namely operations, these major functions as separate 

Functional Structure

Managing Director

Research and 
Human Resources Marketing Development Purchasing

Reprint 2025-26



116 Business Studies

departments creates a functional Disadvantages: The functional 
structure. All departments report to structure has certain disadvantages 
a coordinating head. For example, in which an organisation must take 
a manufacturing concern division of into consideration before it adopts it. 
work into key functions will include Some of them are as follows:
production, purchase, marketing, (a)  A functional structure places less 
accounts and personnel. These emphasis on overall enterprise 
departments may be further divided objectives than the objectives 
into sections. Thus, a functional pursued by a functional head. 

structure is an organisational design Such practices may lead to 

that groups similar or related jobs functional empires wherein 

together. the importance of a particular 

Advantages: The functional structure function may be overemphasised. 

has many advantages to offer. Pursuing departmental interests 

Important among them are as follows: at the cost of organisational 

(a) A functional structure leads to interests can also hinder the 
interaction between two or more 

occupational specialisation since 
departments.

emphasis is placed on specific 
(b)  It may lead to problems in 

functions. This promotes efficiency 
coordination as information has to 

in utilisation of manpower as 
be exchanged across functionally 

employees perform similar tasks 
differentiated departments.

within a department and are able 
(c)  A conflict of interests may 

to improve performance. arise when the interests of two 
(b) It promotes control and or more departments are not 

coordination within a department compatible. For example, the 
because of similarity in the tasks sales department insisting on 
being performed. a customer friendly design may 

(c) It helps in increasing managerial cause difficulties in production. 
and operational efficiency  and Such dissension can prove to be 
this results in increased profit. harmful in terms of fulfillment 

(d) It leads to minimal duplication of of organisational interest. Inter­
effort which results in economies departmental conflicts can also 
of scale and this lowers cost. arise in the absence of  clear 

(e) It makes training of  employees separation of responsibility.
easier as the focus is only on a (d)  It may lead to inflexibility as 
limited range of  skills. people with same skills and 

(f) It ensures that different functions knowledge base may develop a 
get due attention. narrow perspective and thus, 

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 117

Think About It
Read newspapers regularly and try to identify the structures various 
business organisations being mentioned in the news have adopted. 
Have their structures led to improved and desired results in any 
way?

have difficulty in appreciating by Each unit has a divisional manager 
other point of view. Functional responsible for performance and 
heads do not get training for top who has authority over the unit. 
management positions because Generally, manpower is grouped 
they are unable to gather on the basis of different products 
experience in diverse areas. manufactured. Each division is 

Suitability: It is most suitable when multifunctional because within each 
the size of the organisation is large, has division functions like production, 
a diversified activities and operations marketing, finance, purchase, etc., 
require a high degree of specialisation. are performed together to achieve 

a common goal. Each division is 
Divisional Structure self­contained as it develops expertise 
Many large organisations with in all functions related to a product 
diversified activities have reorganised line.
themselves away from the simpler and In other words, within each division, 
basic functional structure towards the functional structure tends to be 
a divisional structure which is more adopted. However, functions may vary 
suited to their activities. This is across divisions in accordance with a 
particularly true of those enterprises particular product line. Further, each 
which have more than one category division works as a profit center where 
of products to offer. This is because the divisional head is responsible for 
although every organisation performs the profit or loss of his division. For 
a set of homogenous functions, as example, a large company may have 
it diversifies into varied product divisions like cosmetics, clothing, etc. 
categories, the need for a more evolved Advantages: The divisional structure 
structural design is felt to cope with offers many benefits. Prominent 
the emerging complexity. among these are as follows:

In a divisional structure, the (a) Product specialisation helps in the 
organisation structure comprises of development of varied skills in a 
separate business units or divisions. divisional head and this prepares 

Reprint 2025-26



118 Business Studies

Organisation Chart Managing Director

Showing Divisional and 
Functional Structure

Cosmetics Garments Footwear Skin care

Research and 
Human Resources Marketing Development Purchasing

him for higher positions. This is operations by merely adding 
because he gains experience in all another divisional head and staff 
functions related to a particular for the new product line.
product. Disadvantages: The divisional 

(b) Divisional heads are accountable structure has certain disadvantages. 

for profits, as revenues and costs Some of them are as follows:

related to different departments can (a) Conflict may arise among 
different divisions with reference 

be easily identified and assigned to 
to allocation of funds and further 

them. This provides a proper basis 
a particular division may seek to 

for performance measurement. It 
maximise its profits at the cost of 

also helps in fixation of responsibility 
other divisions.

in cases of poor performance of the (b) It may lead to increase in costs 
division and appropriate remedial since there may be a duplication 
action can be taken. of activities across products. 

(c) It promotes flexibility and initiative Providing each division with 
because each division functions as separate set of similar functions 
an autonomous unit which leads increases expenditure.
to faster decision making.  (c) It provides managers with the 

(d) It facilitates expansion and growth authority to supervise all activities 
as new divisions can be added related to a particular division. In 
without interrupting the existing course of time, such a manager 

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 119

Comparative view: Functional and Divisional Structure

Basis Functional Structure Divisional Structure

Formation Formation is based on Formation is based on product 
functions lines and is supported by 

functions.

Specialisation Functional specialisation. Product specialisation.

Responsibility Difficult to fix on a Easy to fix responsiblity for 
department. performance.

Managerial Difficult, as each Easier, autonomy as well as 
Development functional manager the chance to perform multiple 

has to report to the top functions helps in managerial 
management. development.

Cost Functions are not Duplication of resources in 
duplicated hence various departments, hence 
economical costly.

Coordination Difficult for a multi­ Easy, because all functions 
product company. related to a particular 

product are integrated in one 
department.

may gain power and in a bid Thus, it can be said that business 
to assert his independence may operates in a dynamic environment 

ignore organisational  interests. and those enterprises which fail 

Suitability: Divisional structure to adapt to change are unable to 

is suitable for those business survive. Hence, management must 

enterprises where a large variety of continuously review its plans and 
objectives and accordingly the 

pro ducts are manufactured using 
organisation structure of the enterprise 

diffe rent productive resources. When 
should also be subjected to periodic 

an organisation grows and needs to 
review to determine if modification is 

add more employees, create more required. An organisation structure, 
depar tments and introduce new at all times should contribute towards 
levels of management, it will decide the achievement of the enterprise’s 
to adopt a divisional structure. Table objectives and should provide scope 
1 provides a comparison of functional for initiative so that contribution 
and divisional structure to provide of personnel can be maximum and 
further clarity on the topic. effective.

Reprint 2025-26



120 Business Studies

Reprint 2025-26

Organisation Chart of ONGC

C & MD

l  Company Secretary
l	Corporate Affairs MD, ONGC Videsh Ltd.
l	Chief Vigilance Officer

Director
Director Director Director Director Director

Tech & Field ... To be filled ...
Offshore Onshore Exploration HR Finance

Services

Mumbai Supply Ahmedabad Western HRD Chief Drill. Internal Chief Infocom
Offshore IDT

High Bases Services Audit

Ankleshwar Western Functional IOGPT
Drilling Commer- Chief Planning Bassein & Onshore HR Planning

Uran Plant
Satellite Mehsana cial

Projects & Cap. 
IEOT

Assam & Cementing Budget

Assam-Arakan Employee 
Heera & Hazira Assam Relations Mud Explor. & Perfor- Chief MM
Neelam Plant Cauvery Dev Tech mance 

Karaikal ONGC Chief Well mgmt & Chief Business 
Offshore (Cauvery) KG-PG Academy Services Bench- Devp., JVs & 
PSC - JV marking

GVK (Frontier) Security Workover
Marketing

Rajamundhry 
(KG) KDIMPE Legal WSS Chief SHE

Regional 
Tripura Medical IPSEM

Labs Well 
Completion Chief EM. 

IRS Corporate & Drilling Technical Audit 
Comm

& QA
GEOPIC Geophysical 

Services Chief Logging Mainte- Chief 

Regional Geo- nance EngineeringCBMMBP
physical Services

Design Head, Regional 
Exploration 

Officer
Directorate Works

EX COM

Adapted from www.ongc.com/archives1



Organising 121

Structural Transformation at ONGC

Since its inception, ONGC has been instrumental in transforming the country’s limited 
upstream sector into a large viable playing field, with its activities spread throughout India and 
significantly in overseas territories.

The 1990s had begun on a grim note for ONGC. It took almost a decade for the Corporation 
to sort things out in most uncertain of times.

Among many problems, the Corporation was also suffering from the organisational atrophy.
In order to survive ONGC sought help from Mc Kinsey.

Mc Kinsey’s mandate was to evolve an organisational structure that was far more 
responsive to its business needs than that based on business groups. The ONGC  system run 
by functional heads often meant delays exceeding a year in matters requiring urgent decisions 
on fields. Also, since responsibilities were shared at production platforms between different 
business groups, the system degenerated into wrangling over responsibilities. Similarly, group 
loyalties often took precedence over the requirements of tasks. But, most importantly, it 
was found that the performance evaluation criteria based on business group yardstick were 
completely at loggerheads with requirements on fields. Mc Kinsey recommended an asset-
based approach with clearly-defined responsibilities in its presentation titled ‘Organisation 
Transformation Project’

Though Mc Kinsey recommendations were broadly accepted, coordination issues 
concerning commonly-shared services needed to be sorted out. 

Finally, the first control over all service personnel working with asset teams was vested 
in asset managers, on grounds that being responsible for the performance of their strategic 
business units they must rightfully exercise control over all personnel working with them. 
Even procurement powers were devolved. Finally, a new structure made up of 14 assets and 
11 centralised services was rolled out .

Do It Yourself
You have seen the structure of ONGC as an illustration in this text. 
Browse the websites of other business organisations and study their 
organisational chart. Try to identify the structure they are using.

forMal and inforMal processes have to be laid down. This is 
done through the formal organisation.

organiSation Formal organisation refers to 
In all organisations, employees are the organisation structure which 
guided by rules and procedures. is designed by the management 
To enable smooth functioning of to accomplish a particular task. It 
the enterprise, job description and specifies clearly the boundaries of 
rules and procedures related to work authority and responsibility and 

Reprint 2025-26



122 Business Studies

there is a systematic coordination Advantages: Formal organisation 
among the various activities to offers many advantages. Some of the 
achieve organisational goals. important ones are:

The structure in a formal organ­ (a) It is easier to fix responsibility 
isation can be functional or divis­ since mutual relationships are 
ional. The formal organisation can clearly defined.
be better understood by a study of its (b) There is no ambiguity in the role 
features which are as follows: that each member has to play 
(a) It specifies the relationships as duties are specified. This also 

among various job positions helps in avoiding duplication of 
and the nature of their inter­ effort.
relationship. This clarifies who (c) Unity of command is maintained 
has to report to whom. through an established chain of 

(b) It is a means to achieve the command.
objectives specified in the (d) It leads to effective accomplish­
plans, as it lays down rules and ment of goals by providing a 
procedures essential for their framework for the operations to 
achievement. be performed and ensuring that 

(c) Efforts of various departments each employee knows the role he 
are coordinated, interlinked and has to play.
integrated through the formal (e) It provides stability to the organ­
organisation. isation. This is because behaviour 

(d) It is deliberately designed by the of employees can be fairly pre­
top management to facilitate dicted since there are specific 
the smooth functioning of the rules to guide them. 
organisation. Limitations: The formal organisation 

(e) It places more emphasis on suffers from the following limitations:
work to be performed than (a) The formal communication may 
interpersonal relationships lead to procedural delays as the 
among the employees. established chain of command has 

Formal Organisation
The formal organisation is a system of well-defined jobs, each bearing 
a definite measure of authority, responsibility and accountability.

Louis Allen 
Formal organisation is a system of consciously coordinated activities 
of two or more persons toward a  common objective.

Chester  Barnand

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 123

to be followed which increases the those who take part in cricket matches 
time taken for decision making. on Sundays, meet in the cafeteria for 

(b) Poor organisation practices may coffee, are interested in dramatics, 
not provide adequate recognition etc. Informal organisation has no 
to creative talent, since it does not written rules, is fluid in form and 
allow any deviations from rigidly scope and does not have fixed lines of 
laid down polices. communication. The Table in the next 

(c) It is difficult to understand page compares informal organisation 
all human relationships in an with the formal organisation to provide 
enterprise as it places more better understanding of both types.
emphasis on structure and work. Informal organisation can be 

Hence, the formal organisation better understood with the help of 
the following features:

does not provide a complete picture 
(a) An informal organisation 

of how an organisation works.
originates from within the formal 

inforMal organiSation orga nisation as a result of personal 

Interaction among people at work interaction among employees.

gives rise to a ‘network of social (b) The standards of behaviour 
evolve from group norms rather 

relationships among employees’ called 
than officially laid down rules 

the informal organisation.
and regulations.

Informal organisation emerges (c) Independent channels of 
from within the formal organisation communication without specified 
when people interact beyond their direction of flow of information 
officially defined roles. When people are developed by group members.
have frequent contacts they cannot (d) It emerges spontaneously and is 
be forced into a rigid formal structure. not deliberately created by the 
Rather, based on their interaction and management.
friendship they tend to form groups (e) It has no definite strucure or form 
which show conformity in terms of because it is a complex network 
interest. Examples of such groups of social relationships among 
formed with common interest may be members.

Informal Organisation
An informal organisation is an aggregate of interpersonal relationships without any 
conscious purpose but which may contribute to joint results.

Chester Barnand
Informal organisation is a network of personal and social relations not established or required 
by the formal organisation but arising spontaneously as people associate with one another.

Keith Davis

Reprint 2025-26



124 Business Studies

Advantages: The informal organisation the formal organisation. For example, 
offers many benefits. Important among employees reactions towards plans 
them are given below: and policies can be tested through 
(a) Prescribed lines of communication the informal network.

are not followed. Thus, the Disadvantages: The informal 

informal organisation leads to organisation has certain disadvantages. 

faster spread of information as Some of them are as follows:
(a) When an informal organisation 

well as quick feedback.
spreads rumours, it becomes 

(b) It helps to fulfill the social needs a destructive force and goes 
of the members and allows against the interest of the formal 
them to find like minded people. organisation.
This enhances their job satisfaction (b) The management may not be 
since it gives them a sense of successful in implementing chan­
belongingness in the organisation. ges if the informal organisation 

(c) It contributes towards fulfillment opposes them. Such resistance 
of organisational objectives by to change may delay or restrict 
compensating for inadequacies in growth.

 Formal and informal organisation: A Comparative view

Basis Formal organisation Informal organisation

Network of social 
Structure of authority 

relationships arising out 
Meaning relationships created by the 

of interaction among 
management

employees

Arises as a result of Arises as a result of social 
Origin

company rules and policies interaction

Arises by virtue of position Arises out of personal 
Authority

in management qualities

There is no set behaviour 
Behavior It is directed by rules

pattern

Flow of communication 
Communication takes place is not through a planned 

Flow of Communication
through the scalar chain route. It can take place in 

any direction

Nature Rigid Flexible

Leaders may or may not 
Leadership Managers are leaders. be managers. They are 

chosen by the group.

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 125

(c) It pressurises members to conform desires to meet the organisational 
to group expectations. This can goals, focus on objectives and ensure 
be harmful to the organisation if that all work is accomplished, he 
the norms set by the group are must delegate authority.
against organisational interests. Delegation refers to the downward 

Informal organisation cannot transfer of  authority from a superior 
be altogether eliminated. Thus, to a subordinate. It is a pre­requisite 

it would be in the best interest of to the efficient functioning of an 

the organisation if the existence of organisation because it enables 

such groups is recognised and the a manager to use his time on high 

roles that their members play are priority activities. It also satisfies the 

identified. The knowledge of such subordinate’s need for recognition 
and provides them with opportunities 

groups can be used to gather their 
to develop and exercise initiative.

support and consequently lead to 
Delegation helps a manager to 

improved organisational performance. 
extend his area of operations as 

Such groups can also provide useful 
without it, his activities would be 

communication channels. Instead of 
restricted to only what he himself 

confronting them, the management can do. However, delegation does 
should skillfully take advantage of both not mean abdication. The manager 
the formal and informal organisation shall still be accountable for the 
so that work continues smoothly. performance of the assigned tasks.

Moreover, the authority granted to a 
delegation

subordinate can be taken back and 
A manager, no matter how capable he redelegated to another person. Thus, 
is, cannot manage to do every task on irrespective of the extent of delegated 
his own. The volume of work makes authority ,the manager  shall still  be 
it impractical for him to handle it all accountable to the same extent as 
by himself. As a consequence, if he before delegation.

Delegation
Delegation is the process a manager follows in dividing the work 
assigned to him so that he performs that part which only he because  
of his unique organisational placement, can perform  effectively and 
so that he can get others to help with what remains.

Louis Allen
Delegation of authority merely means the granting of authority to 
subordinates to operate within prescribed limits.

Theo Haimman

Reprint 2025-26



126 Business Studies

Elements of Delegation established scalar chain which 
links the various job positions 

According to Louis Allen, delegation is and levels of an organisation. 
the entrustment of responsibility and 

Authority also refers to the right 
authority to another and the creation 

to take decisions inherent in a 
of accountability for performance. managerial position to tell people 

A detailed analysis of Louis Allen’s what to do and expect them to 
definition brings to light the following do it.  
essential elements of delegation: In the formal organisation authority 
 (i) Authority: Authority refers to originates by virtue of an individual’s 

the right of an individual to position and the extent of authority 
command his subordinates and is highest at the top management 
to take action within the scope levels and reduces successively as we 
of his position. The concept go down the corporate ladder. Thus, 
of authority arises from the authority flows from top to bottom, 

No delegation leads to delays in 
decision-making

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 127

Creation of accountability for 
performance

i.e., the superior has authority over It must be noted that authority 
the subordinate. is restricted by laws and the rules 

Authority relationships helps to and regulation of the organisation, 

maintain order in the organisation which limit its scope. However, as 

by giving the managers the right to we go higher up in the management 

exact obedience and give directions hierarchy, the scope of authority 
increases.

to the workforce under them.
 (ii) Responsibility: Responsibility is 

Authority determines the superior 
the obligation of a subor­dinate 

subordinate relationship wherein the 
to properly perform the assigned 

superior communicates his decision duty. It arises from a superior–
to the subordinate, expecting subordinate relationship because 
compliance from him and the the subor­dinate is bound to 
subordinate executes the decision perform the duty assigned to 
as per the guidelines of the superior. him by his superior. Thus, 
The extent to which a superior can responsibility flows upwards, 
exact compliance also depends on i.e., a subordinate will always 
the personality of the superior. be responsible to his superior.

Reprint 2025-26



128 Business Studies

An important consideration to cannot deny accountability. It cannot 
be kept in view with respect to be delegated and flows upwards, i.e., a 
both authority and responsibility subordinate will be accountable to a 
is that when an employee is given superior for satisfactory performance 
responsibility for a job he must also of work. It indicates that the manager 
be given the degree of authority has to ensure the proper discharge 
necessary to carry it out. Thus, for of duties by his subordinates. It is 
effective delegation the authority generally enforced through regular 
granted must be commensurate feedback on the extent of work 

with the assigned responsibility. accomplished. The subordinate will be 

If authority granted is more than expected to explain the consequences 

responsibility, it may lead to misuse of his actions or omissions. 

of authority, and if responsibility In conclusion, it can be stated that 

assigned is more than authority it while authority is delegated, responsi­
bility is assumed, accountability is 

may make a person ineffective.
imposed. Responsibility is derived 

 (iii) Accountability: Delegation of 
from authority and accountability is 

authority, undoubtedly empowers 
derived from responsibility. 

an employee to act for his superior 
but the superior would still be iMportance of delegation

accountable for the outcome: Delegation ensures that the subordi­
Accountability implies being nates perform tasks on behalf of the 

answerable for the final outcome. manager thereby reducing his 
Once authority has been delegated workload and providing him with more 
and responsibility accepted, one time to concentrate on important 

 Overview of the elements of delegation

Basis Authority Responsibility Accountability

Meaning Right to command. Obligation to Answerability for 
perform an assigned outcome of the 
task. assigned task.

Delegation Can be delegated. Cannot be entirely Cannot be delegated 
delegated. at all.

Origin Arises from formal Arises from Arises from 
position . delegated authority. responsibility.

Flow Flows downward Flows upward from Flows upward from 
from superior to subordinate to subordinate to 
subordinate. superior. superior

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 129

matters. Effective delegation leads to on the part of the subordinate. 
the following benefits: Responsibility for work builds 
 (i) Effective management: By the self­esteem of an employee 

empowering the employees, the and improves his confidence. 
managers are able to function He feels encouraged and tries 
more efficiently as they get more to improve his performance 
time to concentrate on  important further.
matters. Freedom from doing  (iv) Facilitation of growth: Delegation 
routine work provides them with helps in the expansion of an 
opportunities to excel in new organisation by providing a ready 
areas. workforce to take up leading 

 (ii) Employee development: As a positions in new ventures. Trained 
result of delegation, employees and experienced employees are 
get more opportunitiecs to utilise able to play significant roles in 
their talent and this may give the launch of new projects by 
rise to latent abilities in them. replicating the work ethos they 
It allows them to develop those have absorbed from existing units, 
skills which will enable them in the newly set up branches.
to perform complex tasks and  (v) Basis of management hier­
assume those responsibilities archy: Delegation of authority 
which will improve their career establishes superior­subordinate 
prospects. It makes them relationships, which are the basis 
better leaders and decision 

of hierarchy of management. It is 
makers. Thus, delegation helps 

the degree and flow of authority 
by preparing better future 

which determines who has to 
managers. Delegation empowers 

report to whom. The extent of 
the employees by providing 

delegated authority also decides 
them with the chance to use 

the power that each job position 
their skills, gain experience and 

enjoys in the organisation.
develop themselves for higher 

 (vi) Better coordination: The 
positions. 

elements of delegation, namely 
 (iii) Motivation of employees: 

authority, responsibility and 
Delegation helps in developing 
the talents of the employees. It accountability help to define the 

also has psychological benefits. powers, duties and answerability 

When a superior entrusts a related to the various positions 

subordinate with a task, it in an organisation. This helps to 

is not merely the sharing of avoid overlapping of duties and 
work but involves trust on the duplication of effort as it gives a 
superior’s part and commitment clear picture of the work being 

Reprint 2025-26



130 Business Studies

done at various levels. Such clarity of the organisation. Decision making 
in reporting relationships help authority is shared with lower levels 
in developing and maintaining and is consequently placed nearest 
effective coordination amongst to the points of action. In other words 
the departments, levels and decision making authority is pushed 

functions of management. down the chain of command.
Thus, delegation is a key element When decisions taken by the 

in effective organising. lower levels are numerous as well 
as important an organisation can be 

decentraliSation regarded as greatly decentralised.
In many organisations the top Centralisation and 
management  plays an active role Decentralisation
in taking all decisions while there 

Centralisation and decentralisation 
are others in which this power is 

are relative terms, as seen from the 
given to even the lower levels of 

existing status of various business 
management. Those organisations 

enterprises.
in which decision making authority 

An organisation is centralised 
lies with the top management are 

when decision­making authority 
termed as  centralised organisations 

is retained by higher management 
whereas those in which such 

levels whereas it is decentralised 
authority is shared with lower levels 

when such authority is delegated.
are decentralised organisations.

Complete centralisation would 
Decentralisation explains the 

imply concentration of all decision 
manner in which decision making making functions at the apex of 
responsibilities are divided among the management hierarchy. Such a 
hierarchical levels. Put simply, scenario would obviate the need for a 
decentralisation refers to delegation management hierarchy. On the other 
of authority throughout all the levels hand, complete decentralisation 

Decentralisation
Decentralisation refers to systematic effort to delegate to the 
lowest level all authority except that which can be exercised at 
central points.

Louis Allen
Everything which goes to increase the importance of a subordinate’s 
role is decentralisation, everything that goes to reduce it is 
centralisation.

Henri Fayol

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 131

would imply the delegation of all however, needs to carefully select 
decision making functions to the those decisions which will be pushed 
lower level of the hierarchy and this down to lower levels and those that will 
would obviate the need for higher be retained for higher levels. Table 4 
managerial positions. Both the provides a comparative look between 
scenarios are unrealistic. delegation and decentralisation.

An organisation can never be Decentralisation is a fundamental 
completely centralised or decent­ step and its importance can be 
ralised. As it grows in size and comp­ understood from the following points:
lexity , there is a tendency to move  (i) Develops initiative among 
towards decentralised decision subordinates: Decentralisation 
making. This is because in large helps to promote self­reliance 
organisations those employees who and confidence amongst the 
are directly and closely involved with subordinates. This is because 
certain operations tend to have more when lower managerial levels are 
knowledge about them than the top given freedom to take their own 
management which may only be decisions they learn to depend 
indirectly associated with individual on their own judgment. It also 
operations. keeps them in a state wherein 

Hence, there is a need for a they are constantly challenged 
balance between these co­existing and have to develop solutions 
forces. Thus, it can be said that every for the various problems they 
organisation will be characterised encounter. A decentralisation 
by both centralisation and policy helps to identify those 
decentralisation. executives who have the 

necessary potential to become 
iMportance dynamic leaders.
Decentralisation is much more than a  (ii) Develops managerial talent 
mere transfer of authority to the lower for the future: Formal training 
levels of management hierarchy. It is plays an important part in 
a philosophy that implies selective equipping subordinates with 
dispersal of authority because it skills that help them rise in 
propagates the belief that people are the organisation but equally 
competent, capable and resourceful. important is the experience 
They can assume the responsibility gained by handling assignments 
for the effective implementation of independently. Decentralisation 
their decisions. Thus this philosophy gives them a chance to prove 
recognises the decision maker’s need their abilities and creates a 
for autonomy. The management, reservoir of qualified manpower 

Reprint 2025-26



132 Business Studies

who can be considered to fill exercised by a superior over the 
up more challenging positions activities of a subordinate because 
through promotions. It also helps they are given the freedom to 
to identify those who may not be act and decide albeit within the 
successful in assuming greater limits set by the superior. Also, 
responsibility. Thus, it is a means personal supervision is generally 
of management education as well replaced by other forms of control 
as an opportunity for trained such as return on investment 
manpower to use its talent in real etc. Decentralisation also leaves 
life situations. the top management with more 

 (iii) Quick decision making: The time which they can devote to 
management hierarchy can important policy decisions rather 
be looked upon as a chain of than occupying their time with 
communication. In centralised both policy as well as operational 
organisation because every decisions. In  fact decentralisation 
decision is taken by the top is greatest when checking required 
management the flow of on decisions taken by lower levels 
information is slow as it has to of management is least.
traverse many levels. Response  (v) Facilitates growth: Decentrali­
also takes time. This reduces the sation awards greater autonomy to 
speed of decision making and the lower levels of management as 
makes it difficult for an enterprise well as divisional or departmental 
to adapt to dynamic operating heads. This allows them to 
conditions. In a decentralised function in a manner best suited 
organisation, however ,since to their department and fosters 
decisions are taken at levels which a sense of competition amongst 
are nearest to the points of action the departments. Consequently, 
and there is no requirement for with each department doing its 
approval from many levels, the best in a bid to outdo the other, the 
process is much faster. There are productivity levels increase and 
also less chances of information the organisation is able to generate 
getting distorted because it more returns which can be used 
doesn’t have to go through long for expansion purposes.
channels.  (vi) Better control: Decentralisation 

 (iv) Relief to top management: makes it possible to evaluate 
Decentralisation diminishes the performance at each level and the 
amount of direct supervision departments can be individually 

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 133

held accountable for their mation system. Decentralisation 
results. The extent of achievement compels the management 
of organisational objectives as to innovative performance 
well as the contribution of each measur ement systems.
department in meeting the overall As a conclusion, it must be 
objectives can be ascertained. noted that in spite of its benefits 
Feedback from all levels helps to decentralisation should be applied 
analyse variances and improve with caution as it can lead to 
operations. In decentralisation, organisational disintegration if the 
one of the challenges is the departments start to operate on their 
accountability  of performance. own guidelines which may be contrary 
In response to this challenge, to the interest of the organisation. 
better control systems are Decentralisation must always be 
being evolved such as the balance balanced with centralisation in areas 
score card and management infor­ of major policy decisions.

Decentralisation : A Strength

The McNeil name has been associated with the manufacturing and sale of pharmaceutical 
products since 1879, when Robert McNeil opened his first retail drug outlet in Pennsylvania. 
Growing as a producer of prescription pharmaceuticals, McNeil Laboratories, Inc. was 
incorporated in the U.S. in 1933, and became a member of the Johnson & Johnson family of 
companies in 1959. Mcneil Consumer Healthcare began operations in Canada in an existing 
administrative Johnson & Johnson facility in Guelph, Ontario in 1980.

McNeil Consumer Healthcare (nonprescription pharmaceutical products) in Guelph, 
Ontario is member of the Johnson & Johnson family of companies in Canada.

An important difference between Johnson & Johnson and most other companies — is the 
concept of decentralised management. Instead of operating as one large multi-billion dollar 
corporation, Johnson & Johnson is operated as 190 smaller companies, each focused on a 
specific medical or product franchise and/or geographic area, with each affiliate generating 
multiple options for growth. Through decentralisation we combine the advantages of being 
big with the agility and focus of smaller firms. Decentralisation enables each company 
to sty close to its customer, maintain short lines of communication with customers and 
employees, and accelerate the development of talent. The Johnson & Johnson - Merck 
Consumer Pharmaceuticals company also operates from our Woodlawn Road facility in 
Guelph.

http://www.mcneilcanada.com/eng/eco07pgl.shtm

Reprint 2025-26



134 Business Studies

Think About It
If you were a manager, would you decentralise, knowing that it 
would mean dispersal of decision making authority?

Delegation and Decentralisation: A Comparative view

Basis Delegation Decentralisation

Nature Delegation is a compulsory Decentralisation is an optional 
act because no individual can policy decision. It is done 
perform all tasks on his own. at the discretion of the top 

management.

Freedom of action More control by superiors Less control over executives 
hence less freedom to take hence greater freedom of 
own decisions. action.

Status It is a process followed to It is the result of the 
share tasks. policy decision of the top 

management.

Scope It has narrow scope as it is It has wide scope as it implies 
limited to superior and his extension of delegation to the 
immediate subordinate. lowest level of management.

Purpose To lessen the burden of the To increase the role of 
manager. the subordinates in the 

organisation by giving them 
more autonomy.

Key Terms

Organising  Organisational structure

Departmentalisation  Delegation  Authority

Responsibility  Accountability  Functional structure

Divisional structure  Formal organisation

Informal organisation  Span of management

Centralisation  Decentralisation

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 135

Summary

Organising is the process of defining and grouping activities and 
establishing authority relationships among them.
Process: the process of organising consists of the following steps:

 (a) Identification and division of work
 (b) Departmentalisation
 (c) Assignment of Duties
 (d) Establishing reporting relationships

Importance: Organising is considered important because it leads 
to division of work, clarity in reporting relationships, optimum 
utilization of resources, growth, better administration and greater 
creativity.
Organisational structure is the framework within which managerial 
and operating tasks are performed. It can be functional or divisional. 
Span of management is the number of subordinates under a 
superior.
Functional structure groups activities on the basis of functions. 
The advantages of such a structure are specialisation, better 
control, managerial efficiency and ease in training employees. The 
disadvantages are functional empires, conflict of interest, inflexibility, 
and restriction in managerial development.
Divisional structure groups activities on the basis of products. 
The advantages are integration, product specialisation, greater 
accountability, flexibility, better coordination and more initiative. 
The disadvantages are departmental conflicts, costly process, 
ignoring of organisational interests, increase in requirements of 
general managers. 
Formal organisation is designed by the management to achieve 
organisational goals. Its advantages are fixation of responsibility, 
clarity of roles, unity of command and effective accomplishment 
of goals. Its disadvantages are procedural delays, inadequate 
recognition of creativity, limited in scope. 
Informal organisation arises out of interaction amongst people 
at work. Its advantages are speed, fulfillment of social needs, fills 
inadequacies of formal structure. Its disadvantages are:  disruptive 
force, resistance to change and priority to group interests. 
Delegation is the transfer of authority from superior to subordinate. 
It has three elements: Authority, Responsibility and Accountability. 

Reprint 2025-26



136 Business Studies

Importance of delegation is that it helps in effective management, 
employee development, motivation, growth and coordination.
Decentralisation is delegation of authority throughout the 
organisation.
Importance of decentralisation is that it helps in development of 
managerial talent, quick decision making reducing burden on top 
management, development of initiative, growth and better control.

Exercises

Very Short Answer Type:

1. Identify the network of social relationships which arises 
spontaneously due to interaction at work.

2. What does the term ‘Span of management’ refer to?

3. State any two circumstances under which the functional 
structure will prove to be an appropriate choice.

4. Draw a diagram depicting a functional structure.

5. company has its registered office in Delhi, manufacturing 
unit at Gurgaon and marketing and sales department at 
Faridabad. The company manufactures the consumer 
products. Which type of organisational structure should it 
adopt to achieve its target?

Short Answer Type:

1. What are the steps in the process of organising?

2. Discuss the elements of delegation.

3. How does informal organisation support the formal 
organisation?

4. Can a large sized organisation be totally centralised of 
decentralised? Give your opinion.

5. Decentralisation is extending delegation to the lowest level.
Comment.

6. Neha runs a factory wherein she manufactures shoes. The 
business has been doing well and she intends to expand by 
diversifying into leather bags as well as western formal wear 
thereby making her company a complete provider of corporate 
wear. This will enable her to market her business unit as the 
one stop for working women. Which type of structure would 
you recommend for her expanded organisation and why?

Reprint 2025-26



Organising 137

7. The production manager asked the foreman to achieve a target 
production of 200 units per day, but he doesn’t give him the 
authority to requisition tools and materials from the stores 
department. Can the production manager blame the foreman 
if he is not able to achieve the desired target? Give reasons.

Long Answer Type

1. Why delegation is considered essential for effective organising?

2. What is a divisional structure? Discuss its advantages and 
limitations. 

3. Decentralisation is an optional policy. Explain why an 
organisation would choose to be decentralised.

4. Distinguish between centralisation and decentralisation.

5. How is a functional structure different from a divisional 
structure?

6. A company, which manufactures a popular brand of toys, has 
been enjoying good market reputation. It has a functional 
organisational structure with separate departments for 
Production, Marketing, Finance, Human Resources and 
Research and Development. Lately to use its brand name and 
also to cash on to new business opportunities it is thinking to 
diversify into manufacture of new range of electronic toys for 
which a new market is emerging. Which organisation structure 
should be adopted in this situation? Give concrete reasons 
with regard to benefits the company will derive from the steps 
it should take.

7. A company manufacturing sewing machines set up in 1945 by 
the British promoters follows formal organisation culture in 
totality. It is facing lot of problems in delays in decision making. 
As the result it is not able to adapt to changing business 
environment. The work force is also not motivated since they 
cannot vent their grievances except through formal channels, 
which involve red tape. Employee turnover is high. Its market 
share is also declining due to changed circumstances and 
business environment. You are to advise the company with 
regard to change it should bring about in its organisation 
structure to overcome the problems faced by it. Give reasons 
in terms of benefits it will derive from the changes suggested 
by you. 

Reprint 2025-26



138 Business Studies

8. A company X limited manufacturing cosmetics, which has 
enjoyed a pre­eminent position in business, has grown in 
size. Its business was very good till 1991. But after that, 
new liberalised environment has seen entry of many MNC’s 
in the sector. With the result the market share of X limited 
has declined. The company had followed a very centralised 
business model with Directors and divisional heads making 
even minor decisions. Before 1991 this business model had 
served the company very well as consumers had no choice. 
But now the company is under pressure to reform. What 
organisation structure changes should the company bring 
about in order to retain its market share? How will the changes 
suggested by you help the firm? Keep in mind that the sector 
in which the company is FMCG.

Reprint 2025-26



STAFFING 6
CHAPTER

Management of Human Resources at INFOSYS
“Our assets walk out of the door each evening. We have to L E A R N I N G 
make sure that they come back the next morning” (as stated O B J E C T I V E S
by Narayana Murthy former, CEO of INFOSYS.)

At a time when organisations are debating the strategic After studying this 
importance of their human resources, Infosys, a consulting and chapter, you should be 
software services organisation, includes its human resources able to:
on its balance sheet to affirm their asset value. The rationale 
for this is as follows: “The long term success of a company n define staffing;
is usually examined on certain financial and non-financial 

n establish its 
parameters. Human resources are among these new non-
financial parameters that challenge the usefulness of evaluating relationship with 

corporate success solely on traditional measures. Human Human Resource 
resources represent the collective expertise, innovation, Management;
leadership, entrepreneurial and managerial skills endowed in 

n state the need and 
the employees of an organisation.” 

As a knowledge intensive company, Infosys recognises importance of staffing;
the value of its human assets in maintaining its competitive n describe the steps in 
position. It realises that these assets can easily walk away, 

the staffing process;
as competitors in India and abroad covet its IT talent. 
Consequently, the challenge facing Infosys is how to attract, n state the meaning 
retain and develop its human assets in a highly competitive of recruitment and 
and dynamic environment?

selection;
Most of the current human resource practices at Infosys 

result from the vision of the leaders and the culture that they n identify important 
have created. Narayana Murthy, known for his leadership and sources of 
vision is the public image of Infosys. His leadership style is recruitment;
humble and straight-forward, quite uncommon in the  world 
of Indian business. He believes in sharing wealth with his n describe the steps in 
employees and in leading by example. In a knowledge-based the selection process;
business like Infosys, he sees the importance of consistency in 
rhetoric and action in empowering employees. He is credited n appreciate the 
with creating a culture of closeness and empowerment at need of training and 
Infosys. His management style, rare among Indian business development; and
leaders, is based on western management. 

n explain various on the 
Source: Sumita Raghuram, Fordham Graduate 

job and off the job 
School of Business

methods of training. 

Reprint 2025-26



140 Business Studies

IntroductIon of every single person employed 
The foundation of any organisation is by an organisation as it is the 
the talented and hardworking people, individual worker, who is the ultimate 
who are the principal assets of any performer. 
firm. It is an established fact that the Staffing has been described as 
growth of an organisation requires the managerial function of filling 
the continual infusion of quality and keeping filled the positions in 
staff. Thus, adequate staffing or the the organisation structure. This is 
provision for appropriate human achieved by, first of all, identifying 
resources is an essential requirement requirement of work force, followed 
for any organisation’s success. It is, by recruitment, selection, placement, 
therefore, believed that an organisation promotion, appraisal and development 
can achieve its objectives only when of personnel, to fill the roles designed 
it has the right persons in the right into the organisation  structure.
positions. In a new enterprise, the staffing 

function follows the planning and 
MeanIng organising functions. After deciding 
After planning and selection of the what is to be done, how it is to be done 
organisation structure, the next step and after creation of the organisation 
in the management process is to fill structure, the management is in a 
the various posts provided in the position to know the human resource 
organisation. This is termed as the requirements of the enterprise at 
management of staffing function. In different levels. Once the number and 
the simplest terms, staffing is ‘putting types of personnel to be selected is 
people to jobs’. It begins with workforce determined, management starts with 
planning and includes different other the activities relating to recruiting, 
function like recruitment, selection, selecting and training people, to fulfill 
training, development, promotion, the requirements of the enterprise. 
compensation and performance In an existing  enterprise, staffing is 
appraisal of work force. In other a continuous process because new 
words, staffing is that part of the jobs may be created and some of the 
process of management which is existing employees may leave the 
concerned with obtaining, utilising organisation.
and maintaining a satisfactory and 
satisfied work force. Today, staffing 
may involve any combination of IMportance of StaffIng

employees including daily wagers, In any organisation, there is a need 
consultants and contract employees. for people to perform work. The 
Staffing recognises the importance staffing function of management 

Reprint 2025-26


##6##
Staffing 141

fulfills this requirement and finds  (iv) helps to ensure optimum utili­
the right people for the right job. sation of the human resources. 
Basically, staffing fills the positions as By avoiding overmanning, it 
shown in the organisation structure. prevents under­utilisation of 

Human resources are the foundation personnel and high labour 
of any business. The right people costs. At the same time it avoids 
can help you take your business to disruption of work by indicating 
the top; the wrong people can break in advance the shortages of 
your business. Hence, staffing is the personnel; and
most fundamental and critical drive  (v) improves job satisfaction and 
of organisational performance. The morale of employees through 
staffing function has assumed greater objective assessment and fair 
importance these days because of reward for their contribution.
rapid advancement of technology, Staffing function must be performed 
increasing size of orga nisation and efficiently by all organisations. If right 
complicated behaviour of human kind of employees are not available, 
beings. Human resources are the most it will lead to wastage of materials, 
important asset of an organisation. time, effort and energy, resulting in 
The ability of an organisation to lower productivity and poor quality 
achieve its goal depends upon the of products. The enterprise will not 
quality of its human resources. be able to sell its products profitably. 
Therefore, staffing is a very important It is, therefore, essential that right 
managerial function. No organisation kind of people must be available in 
can be successful unless it can fill right number at the right time. They 
and keep filled the various positions should be given adequate training 
provided for in the structure with the so that wastage is minimum. They 
right kind of people. must also be induced to show higher 

Proper  staffing  ensures the productivity and quality by offering 
following benefits to the organisation: them proper incentives.
 (i) helps in discovering and obtai­

ning competent personnel for Staffing as part of Human 
various jobs; Resource Management

 (ii) makes for higher performance, It is a function which all managers 
by putting right person on the need to perform. It is a separate and 
right job; specialised function and there are 

 (iii) ensures the continuous survival many aspects of human relations 
and growth of the enterprise to be considered. It is the job of 
through the succession planning managers to fill positions in their 
for managers; organisation and to make sure that 

Reprint 2025-26



142 Business Studies

they remain occupied with qualified But as organisations grow and 
people. Staffing is closely linked to number of persons employed 
organising since after the structure increases, a separate department 
and positions have been decided, called the human resource department 
people are required to work in these is formed which has specialists in 
positions. Subsequently, they need managing people. The management 
to be trained and motivated to work of human resource is a specialised 
in harmony with the goals of the area which requires the expertise of 
organisation. Thus, staffing is seen as many people. The number of human 
a generic function of management. resource specialists and size of this 

The staffing function deals with department gives an indication of 
the human element of management. the size of the business as well. For 
Managing the human component of a very large company, the Human 
an organisation is the most important Resources Department itself will 
task because the performance of contain specialists for each function 
an organisation depends upon how of this department.
well this function is performed. Human Resource Management 
The success of an organisation in includes many specialised activities 
achieving its goals is determined to and duties which the human resource 
a great extent on the competence, personnel must perform. These duties 
motivation and performance of its are:
human resource. n Recruitment, i.e., search for 

It is the responsibility of all managers qualified people
to directly deal with and select people n Analysing jobs, collecting inform­
to work for the organisation. When ation about jobs to prepare job 
the manager performs the staffing descriptions.
function his role is slightly limited. n Developing compensation and 
Some of these responsibilities will incentive plans.
include placing the right person n Training and development of 
on the right job, introducing new employees for efficient perfor­
employees to the organisation, mance and career growth.
training employees and improving n Maintaining labour relations and 
their performance, developing their union management relations.
abilities, maintaining their morale and n Hand l ing  g r i e vances  and 
protecting their health and physical complaints.
conditions. In small organisations, n Providing for social security and 
managers may perform all duties welfare of employees.
related to employees salaries, welfare n Defending the company in law suits 
and working conditions. and avoiding legal complications.

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 143

training of employees. People came to 
evolutIon of HuMan 

be recognised as a valuable resource, 
reSource ManageMent which can be further developed. 

Increase in scope of the work led to 
Human resource management has 

replacement of personnel manager 
replaced the traditional concept of 

with human resource manager.
labour welfare and personnel manag­
ement. Human Resource Management You may have observed that all 
(HRM) in its present form has these aspects  are concerned with 
evolved from a number of significant the human element in industry as 
inter­related developments, which distinct from the mechanical side 
date back to the era of industrial of the enterprise. Thus, staffing is 
revolution. Emergence of trade union an inherent part of human resource 
movement led to the need of a person management as it is the practice of 
who could act as an effective link finding, evaluating and establishing 
between the owners and workers. a working relationship with people, 
Thus, the concept of labour welfare for a purpose. 
officer came into being. His role was It is important to understand 
limited to the bare minimum welfare that staffing is both a function of 
activities of employees. In fact, he was management just like planning, 
looked down by both the workers and organising, directing, and controlling 
the owners. as well as a distinct functional area 

With the introduction of factory of management just as marketing 
system, thousands of persons began management and financial 
to be employed under one roof. The job management. Staffing, is therefore, 
of hiring people for the organisation referred to as both a line as well 
was given to one man, who later on as a staff activity i.e., an essential 
was assigned the responsibility of function of the manager as well as an 
recruitment, selection and placement advisory role played by the Human 
of personnel. This led to the Resource Department.
emergence of personnel officer in the 
first place and personnel manager, StaffIng proceSS

later on. As you are now aware, the prime 
Human relations approach recog­ concern of the staffing function 

nises human factor as the most in the management process 
important instrument of success in is the timely fulfillment of the 
an organisation. Fast changing tech­ manpower requirements within an 
nological developments, however, nec­ organisation. These requirements 
essitated new skill development and may arise in case of starting a new 

Reprint 2025-26



144 Business Studies

business or expanding the existing well. For example, if one is selected 
one or they may arise as a matter by a Business Process Outsourcing 
of the need for replacing those who (BPO) unit by virtue of being 
quit, retire or are transferred or extrovert and well­versed in English 
promoted from or are fired from the speaking, one needs to be trained 
job. In any case, need for ‘the right in the relevant business processes, 
person for the right job’ hardly needs telephone conversation etiquettes 
an over emphasis. But just as the as well as diction adaptation before 
phrase ‘water water everywhere and actual placement. The employee’s 
not a drop to drink’ amplifies the fact experiences during orientation and 
that despite 2/3rd of the earth being 

placement form his/her ‘first 
water, drinkable water is a scarce 

impression’ of the organisation. Even 
commodity, so may also be said 

whilst on the job, the employees need 
of finding ‘the right person for the 

training for upgradation of knowledge 
right job.’ As such, it is important 

and skills and for preparing for higher 
to appreciate staffing as a process 
that starts from understanding the responsibilities. So staff training and 

manpower requirements within development is another important 

the organisation and identifying aspect of the staffing process. 

the potential sources from where What follows is a brief description 
it can be met, either from within of the above stages.
the organisation or from outside. 

 (i) Estimating the Manpower 
And, given that ‘the right person’ 

Requirements: You are aware 
is scarce, there is need to ‘market’ 

that while designing the organis­
the job and the organisation to the 

ational structure, we undertake 
people. Even in situations where an analysis of the decisions 
a single job vacancy might attract and the decision­making levels, 
a few hundreds of the applicants, activities as well as relationship 
there is a challenge of selecting among them with a view to 
the most appropriate one. Freshly evolving the horizontal and 
appointed persons might need vertical dimensions of the 
orientation or training to familiarise structure. Thus, various job 
them with the way the things are positions are created. Clearly, 
done in an organisation. And, in performance of each job 
case they have been selected only on necessi tates the appointment 
the basis of academic qualifications of a person with a specific set of 
and aptitude for learning, they might educational qualifications, skills, 
need training in specific skills as prior experience and so on. 

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 145

Thus, understanding manpower A situation of overstaffing somewhere 
requirements is not merely a would necessitate employee removal 
matter of knowing how many or transfer elsewhere. A situation of 
persons we need but also of understaffing would necessitate the 
what type.  Given that we need to starting of the recruitment process. 
encourage women, persons from However, before that can be done, 
backward communities and it is important to translate the 
persons with special abilities manpower requirements into specific 
(such as physically challenged, job description and the desirable 
visually and hearing impaired) profile of its occupant — the 
to assume responsible positions desired qualifications, experience, 
in our organisations, there is a personality characteristics and so on. 
need to understand, and if the This information becomes the base 
need be, to redefine manpower for looking for potential employees.
requirements accordingly. Can 

 (ii) Recruitment: Recruitment may be 
you think why should we 

defined as the process of searching 
encourage such a diversity in 

for prospective employees and 
the workforce? 

stimulating them to apply for jobs in 
Operationally, understanding the the organisation. The information 

manpower requirements would nece­ generated in the process of writing 
ssitate workload analysis on the the job description and  the 
one hand and workforce analysis on candidate profile may be used for 
the other. Workload analysis would developing the ‘situations vacant’ 
enable an assessment of the number advertisement. The advertisement 
and types of human resources may be displayed on the factory/
necessary for the performance of office gate or else it may be got 
various jobs and accomplishment of published in print media or 
organisational objectives. Workforce flashed in electronic media. This 
analysis would reveal the number step involves locating the potential 
and type available. In fact such an candidate or determining the 
exercise would reveal whether we sources of potential candidates. 
are understaffed, overstaffed or In fact, there are a large number 
optimally staffed. It may be pointed of recruitment avenues available 
out that neither over­staffing to a firm which would be discussed 
nor under­staffing is a desirable latter when we talk about the 
situation. Can you think why? In fact various sources of recruitment. 
this exercise would form the basis The essential objective is to 
of the subsequent staffing actions. create a pool of the prospective 

Reprint 2025-26



146 Business Studies

job candidates. Both internal and test and the interviews are offered 
external sources of recruitment an employment contract, a written 
may be explored. Internal sources document containing the offer 
may be used to a limited extent. of employment, the terms and 
For fresh talent and wider choice conditions and the date of joining.
external sources are used.  (iv) Placement and Orientation: 

 (iii) Selection: Selection is the pro­ Joining a job marks the beginning 
cess of choosing from among of socialisation of the employee at 
the pool of the prospective job the workplace. The employee is 
candidates developed at the stage given a brief presentation about 
of recruitment. Even in case of the company and is introduced 
highly specialised  jobs where to his superiors, subordinates 
the choice space is very narrow, and the colleagues. He is taken 
the rigour of the selection process around the workplace and given 
serves two important purposes: the charge of the job for which he 
(i) it ensures that the organisation has been selected. This process 
gets the best among the available, of familiarisation is very crucial 
and (ii) it enhances the self­esteem and may have a lasting impact 
and prestige of those selected and on his decision to stay and on 
conveys to them the seriousness his job performance. Orientation 
with which the things are done in the is, thus, introducing the selected 
organisation. The rigour involves employee to other employees and 
a host of tests and interviews, familiarising him with the rules 
described later. Those who are and policies of the organisation. 
able to successfully negotiate the Placement refers to the employee 

Over-staffing: 
More play, less work

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 147

occupying the position or post  (vi) Performance Appraisal
for which the person has been   After the employees have 
selected. undergone a period of training 

 (v) Training and Development: and they have been on the job 

What people seek is not simply for some time, there is a need 
to evaluate their performance. 

a job but a career. Every one 
All organisations have some 

must have the opportunity to 
formal or informal means of 

rise to the top. The best way to 
appraising their employee’s 

provide such an opportunity is 
performance. Performance 

to facilitate employee learning. 
appraisal means evaluating an 

Organisations have either in­
employee’s current and/or past 

house training centers or have 
performance as against certain 

forged alliances with training and 
predetermined standards. The 

educational institutes to ensure 
employee is expected to know 

continuing learning of their 
what the standards are and 

employees. The organisations 
the superior is to provide the 

too benefit in turn. If employee 
employee feedback on his/her 

motivation is high, their performance. The performance 
competencies are strengthened, appraisal process, therefore, 
they perform better and thus, will include defining the job, 
contribute more to organisational appraising performance and 
effectiveness and efficiency. By providing feedback.
offering the opportunities for 
career advancement to their  (vii) Promotion and career planning

members, organisations are   It becomes necessary for all 

not only able to attract but also organisations to address career 

retain its talented people. related issues and promotional 

As discussed earlier, in most avenues for their employees. 

organisations there is a separate Managers need to design 

Human Resource Department, which activities to serve employees’ 

takes care of the staffing function. long­term interests also. They 

But in small organisations the line must encourage employees 

manager is required to perform to grow and realise their full 

all the functions of management potential. Promotions are 

viz, planning, organising, staffing, an integral part of people’s 

directing and controlling. The career. They refer to being 

process of staffing will then include placed in positions of increased 

three more stages. responsibility. They usually 

Reprint 2025-26



148 Business Studies

mean more pay, responsibility employees time based wage or 
and job satisfaction. salary as well as performance based 

(viii) Compensation financial incentives and bonuses, 
and employee benefits.

  All organisations need to Besides there are some other 
establish wage and salary plans factors also which influence the 
for their employees. There are design of any pay plan, like legal 
various ways to prepare different (labour laws), union, company policy 
pay plans depending on the worth and equity.
of the job. Basically the price of Thus, we see that as a process, 
the job needs to be determined. staffing  includes acquisition, rete ntion, 
Compensation, therefore, refers development, performance appraisal, 
to all forms of pay or rewards promotion and compensation of 
going to employees. It may be the most important resource of an 
in the form of direct financial organisation, that is, its human 
payments like wages, salaries, capital. 
incentives, commissions and It needs to be kept in mind that 
bonuses and indirect payments several factors such as supply and 
like employer paid insurance demand of specific skills in the 
and vacations. labour market, unemployment rate, 

Direct financial payments labour market conditions, legal and 
are of two types : time based or political considerations, company’s 

performance based. A time based image, policy, human resource 

plan means salary and wages are planning cost, technological 

paid either daily, weekly or monthly developments and general economic 

or annually. Performance based environment etc., will influence 

plans means salary/wages are paid the way recruitment, selection and 

according to piecework. For example, training will be actually carried out.

a worker may be paid according to 
the number of units produced by aSpectS of StaffIng

him/her. There are many methods There are three aspects of staffing: 
to calculate the compensation under recruitment, selection and training. 
various incentive plans to reward These are now discussed in detail.
performance. Certain pay plans can 
be created which are a combination recruItMent

of time based pay plus incentives Recruitment refers to the process of 
for higher performance. Various finding possible candidates for a job 
plans may be formulated for paying or a function. It has been defined as 

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 149

‘the process of searching 
Applicant

for prospective employees Organisation
(Person) (Job)

and stimulating them 
to apply for jobs in an 
organisation.’

Advertising is commonly Recruitment

part of  the recruitment (identification and attraction)

process, and can occur 
through several means, 

Selection
through newspapers, using 

(assessment, evaluation and 
newspaper dedicated to job final match)
advertisement, through 
professional publication, 

Training
using advertisements (Acquainting and skill  
placed in windows, through development)
a job center, through 
campus interviews, etc. Aspects of Staffing

and (d) inviting applications from 
Sources of Recruitment the prospective candidates, for the 
The object of recruitment is to vacancies.
attract potential employees with The requisite positions may be 
the necessary characteristics filled up from within the organisation 
or qualification, in the or from outside. Thus, there are two 
adequate number for the jobs sources of recruitment – Internal 
available. It locates available people and External. 
for the job and invites them to apply Internal Sources 
for the job in the organisation. The 
process of recruitment precedes There are two important sources 

the process of selection of a right of internal recruitment, namely, 
transfers and promotions, which are 

candidate for the given positions 
discussed below:

in the organisation. Recruitment 
seeks to attract suitable applicants  (i) Transfers: It involves shifting 
to apply for available jobs. The of an employee from one job 
various activities involved with the to another, one department 
process of recruitment includes (a) to another or from one shift to 
identification of the different sources another, without a substantive 
of labour supply, (b) assessment change in the responsibilities 
of their validity, (c) choosing the and status of the employee. It 
most suitable source or sources, may lead to changes in duties 

Reprint 2025-26



150 Business Studies

and responsibilities, working Merits of Internal Sources
condition etc., but not necessarily 
salary. Transfer is a good source Filling vacancies in higher jobs from 
of filling the vacancies with within the organisation or through 
employees from over­staffed internal transfers has the following 
departments. It is practically merits:
a horizontal movement of 

 (i) Employees are motivated to 
employees. Shortage of suitable 

improve their performance. A 
personnel in one branch may 

promotion at a higher level may 
be filled through transfer from 

lead to a chain of promotion at 
other branch or department. 

lower levels in the organisation. 
Job transfers are also helpful 

This motivates the employees 
in avoiding termination and in 

to improve their performance 
removing individual problems 

through learning and practice. 
and grievances. At the time of 

Employees work with commitment 
transfer, it should be ensured that 

and loyalty and remain satisfied 
the employee to be transferred 

with their jobs. Also peace 
to another job is capable of 

prevails in the enterprise because 
performing it. Transfers can also 

of promotional avenues;
be used for training of employees 
for learning different jobs.  (ii) Internal recruitment also simpli­

 (ii) Promotions: Business enterprises fies the process of selection and 
generally follow the practice of placement. The candidates that are 
filling higher jobs by promoting already working in the enterprise 
employees from lower jobs. can be evaluated more accurately 
Promotion leads to shifting an and economically. This is a more 
employee to a higher position, reliable way of recruitment since 
carrying higher responsibilities, the candidates are already known 
facilities, status and pay. to the organisation; 
Promo tion is a vertical shifting 

 (iii) Transfer is a tool of training the 
of em ployees. This practice 

employees to prepare them for 
helps to improve the motivation, 

higher jobs. Also people recruited 
loyalty and satisfaction level 

from within the organisation do 
of employees. It has a great 

not need induction training;
psycho logical impact over the 
employees because a promotion  (iv) Transfer has the benefit of 
at the higher level may lead to shifting workforce from the 
a chain of promotions at lower surplus departments to those 
levels in the organisation. where there is shortage of staff;

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 151

 (v) Filling of jobs internally is cheaper External recruitment provides wide 
as compared to getting candidates choice and brings new blood in the 
from external sources. organisation. The commonly used 

Limitations of Internal  external sources of recruitment are 

Sources discussed below:

 (i) Direct Recruitment: Under 
The limitations of using internal 

the direct recruitment, a notice 
sources of recruitment are as follows:

is placed on the notice­board 
 (i) When vacancies are filled of the enterprise specifying the 

through internal promotions, the details of the jobs available. Job­
scope for induction of fresh talent seekers assemble outside the 
is reduced. Hence, complete premises of the organisation on 
reliance on internal recruitment the specified date and selection 
involves danger of ‘inbreeding’ by is done on the spot. The practice 
stopping ‘infusion of new blood’ of direct recruitment is followed 
into the organisation; usually for casual vacancies of 

 (ii) The employees may become unskilled or semi­skilled jobs. 
lethargic if they are sure of time­ Such workers are known as 
bound promotions; casual or ‘badli’ workers and they 

 (iii) A new enterprise cannot use are paid remuneration on daily 
internal sources of recruitment. wage basis. This method of 
No organisation can fill all its recruitment is very inexpensive 
vacancies from internal sources; as it does not involve any cost 

 (iv) The spirit of competition among of advertising the vacancies. 

the employees may be hampered; It is suitable for filling casual 

and vacancies when there is a rush of 
work or when some permanent 

 (v) Frequent transfers of employees 
workers are absent.

may often reduce the productivity 
of the organisation.  (ii) Casual Callers: Many reputed 

business organisations keep 
External Sources a database of unsolicited 
An enterprise has to tap external applicants in their offices. Such 
sources for various positions job­seekers can be a valuable 
because all the vacancies cannot be source of manpower. A list 
filled through internal recruitment. of such job­seekers can be 
The existing staff may be insufficient prepared and can be screened to 
or they may not fulfill the eligibility fill the vacancies as they arise. 
criteria of the jobs to be filled. The major merit of this source 

Reprint 2025-26



152 Business Studies

of recruitment is that it reduces not up to date and many of the 
the cost of recruiting workforce candidates referred by them may 
in comparison to other sources. not be found suitable. 

 (iii) Advertisement: Advertisement  (v) Placement Agencies and 
in newspapers or trade and Management Consultants: In 
professional journals is generally technical and professional 
used when a wider choice is areas, private agencies and 
required. Most of the senior professional bodies appear to 
positions of industry as well be doing substantive work. 
as commerce are filled by this Placement agencies provide a 
method. The advantage of nationwide service in matching 
advertising vacancies is that more personnel demand and supply. 
information about the organisation These agencies compile bio­data 
and job can be given in the of a large number of candidates 
advertisement. Advertisement and recommend suitable names 
gives the management a wider to their clients. Such agencies 
range of candidates from which charge fee for their services and 
to choose. Advertisements may be they are useful where extensive 

placed in leading newspapers. Its screening is required. These 

disadvantage is that it may bring professional recruiters can 

in a flood of response, and many entice the needed top executives 

times, from quite unsuitable from other companies by making 

candidates. the right offers. 

 (iv) Employment Exchange: Emp­    Management consultancy 

loyment exchanges run by the firms help the organisations to 

Government are regarded as a recruit technical, professional 

good source of recruitment for and managerial personnel. They 

unskilled and skilled operative specialise in middle level and 

jobs. In some cases, compulsory top level executive placements. 

notification of vacancies to They maintain data bank of 

employment exchange is required persons with different qualifica­

by law. Thus, employment tions and skills and even 

exchanges help to match advertise the jobs on behalf of 

personnel demand and supply their clients to recruit right type 

by serving as link between of personnel.

job­seekers and employers.  (vi) Campus Recruitment: Colleges 
Unfortunately, the records of and institutes of management 
employment exchange are often and technology have become a 

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 153

popular source of recruitment the workers employed through him 
for technical, professional and will follow suit. 
managerial jobs. Many big orga­  (ix) Advertising on Television: The 
nisations maintain a close liaison practice of telecasting of vacant 
with the universities, vocational posts over Television is gaining 
schools and management insti­ importance these days. The 
tutes to recruit qualified person­ detailed requirements of the job 

nel for various jobs. Recruitment and the qualities required to do 

from educational institutions is it are publicised alongwith the 
profile of the organisation where 

a well­established practice of 
vacancy exists.

businesses. This is referred to 
as campus recruitment.  (x) Web Publishing: Internet is 

becoming a common source of 
 (vii) Recommendations of Emp­ recruitment these days. There 

loyees: Applicants introduced are certain websites specifically 
by present employees, or their designed and dedicated for the 
friends and relatives may prove to purpose of providing information 
be a good source of recruitment. about both job seekers and job 
Such applicants are likely to opening. In fact, websites  are 
be good employees because very commonly visited both by 
their background is sufficiently the prospective employees and 
known. A type of preliminary the organisations searching for 
screening takes place because suitable people. 
the present employees know 
both the company and the 
candidates and they would try 
to satisfy both.

 (viii) Labour Contractors: Labour 
contractors maintain close contacts 
with labourers and they can provide 
the required number of unskilled 
workers at short notice. Workers 
are recruited through labour 
contractors who are themselves 
employees of the organisation. 
The disadvantages of this system 
are that if the contractor himself 
decides to leave the organisation, all Campus  Recruitment

Reprint 2025-26



154 Business Studies

Merits of External Sources  2. Lengthy process: Recruitment 
from external sources takes a 

The advantages of using external 
long time. The business has to 

sources of recruitment are as follows:
notify the vacancies and wait 

 (i) Qualified Personnel: By using 
external sources of recruitment, for applications to initiate the 

the management can attract selection process.

qualified and trained people  3. Costly process: It is very costly 

to apply for vacant jobs in the to recruit staff from external 

organisation. sources. A lot of money has to 

 (ii) Wider Choice: When vacancies be spent on advertisement and 

are advertised widely, a large processing of applications.

number of applicants from 
SelectIon

outside the organisation apply. 
The management has a wider Selection is the process of identifying 
choice while selecting the people and choosing the best person out of 
for employment. a number of prospective candidates 

 (iii) Fresh Talent: The present for a job. Towards this purpose, the 
employees may be insufficient candidates are required to take a series 
or they may not fulfill the of employment tests and interviews.  At 
specifications of the jobs to be every stage many are eliminated and a 
filled. External recruitment few move on to the next stage until the 
provide wider choice and brings right type is found.  The process may 
new blood in the organisation. start right from the screening of the 
However, it is expensive and time­ applications. It may continue even after 
consuming. the offer of employment, acceptance and 

 (iv) Competitive Spirit: If a company joining of the candidate. It is so because 
taps external sources, the the process of selection, like any other 
extisting staff will have to managerial decision, involves judgment 
compete with the outsiders. They about the performance potential of 
will work harder to show better the candidate. The effectiveness of the 
performance. selection process would ultimately be 

tested in terms of on­the­job of the 
Limitations of External Sources

chosen person.
 1. Dissatisfaction among existing staff: 

External recruitment may lead Process of Selection
to dissatisfaction and frustration The important steps in the process of 
among existing employees. They selection are as follows: 
may feel that their chances of  (i) Preliminary Screening: Preli­
promotion are reduced. minary screening helps the 

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 155

...Hiring via employee referrals on the rise

When Lenovo India decided to strengthen its diversity numbers, it decided to tap into its 
referral system. The company asked its employees to recommend candidates, and decided 
to reward those who successfully recommended more women for the same roles. As 
employee referrals become an established method to hire quality lateral talent, companies 
are using technology platforms to build a steady talent pipeline through referrals. A majority 
of companies (nearly 41%, according to one study) across India use top technology for 
referral hires. According to the study India Recruiting Trends 2016 conducted by LinkedIn 
Talent Solutions, employee referrals are on the rise. This year, referrals were the top source 
of quality hires. “Nearly 55% of talent leaders see employee referral programmes as the 
top source of quality hire,” says Irfan Abdulla, director, talent solutions, LinkedIn India. Top 
players such as Coca-Cola, Infosys, Genpact, Capgemini, Deloitte, Dabur, Jubilant and more 
are reporting that over 40% of their hires come through referrals. 

Today, technology major Infosys, for instance, has enhanced the use of technology for the 
employee referral process. It has created a portal where employees can view requirements 
and submit profiles of candidates directly. Employees can then track the status of their 
referral real-time. Richard Lobo, senior vice president and head HR, Infosys, says a majority 
of their hiring now takes place through the referral route. “Employees can make a good 
referral decision as they understand the aspirations of the candidate they refer as well as the 
requirements and culture of the company,” he said. 

 
Source: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com ›, August 19, 2016

manager eliminate unqualified Important Tests Used for Selection 
or unfit job seekers based on of Employees: 
the information supplied in the 

 (a) Intelligence Tests: This is one 
application forms. Preliminary of the important psychological 
interviews help reject misfits for tests used to measure the level 
reasons, which did not appear in of intelligence quotient of an 
the application forms. individual. It is an indicator of a 

 (ii) Selection Tests: An employment person’s learning ability or the 
test is a mechanism (either a paper ability to make decisions and 
and pencil test or an exercise) that judgments.
attempts to measure certain cha­
racteristics of individuals. These  (b) Aptitude Test: It is a measure 

characteristics range from apti­ of individuals potential for 
tudes, such as manual dexterity, learning new skills. It indicates 
to intelligence to personality. the person’s capacity to develop. 

Reprint 2025-26



156 Business Studies

Intense Competition, Talent Crunch Push Companies 
to Hand Out 15-20% Pay Hikes

Indian employees have never had it so good. Intense competition and rising attrition levels 
are forcing companies to hand out 15-20% mid-term salary hikes.

Reliance Industries, Marico and Dabur have offered mid-term increments and out-of-turn 
hikes of 15-20% to top performers in recent months. This is over and above the 15-20% 
salary hikes handed out during annual appraisals last year. This comes at a time when India 
Inc. is desperately trying to hold back talent, especially in telecom, IT, BPO and retail.

A massive recruitment spree in sunrise sectors like BPO, telecom and retail has led to 
a demand-supply mismatch and mid-term hikes going up to 40%. Average attrition rates 
in IT have moved up to 22% from 18% and those in BPOs to 50% from 46%. In the 
manufacturing sector, talent exodus is averaging 8-12%.

Several corporates are even offering bonuses and increments on a quarterly basis to top 
teams. An HR head said, “Although it is a short-term reaction, we have to react proactively 
to the market scenario and retain our performers. If one loses an employee, the average 
time taken for a new person to pick up the skills is up to six months, which is critical time 
lost for a company. Also, replacement costs like hiring consultants would in any case add up 
to a huge expense and a lot of pressure on HR,” said Dabur India HR chief.

Company are identifying people who may be tempted to leave and are devising ways of 
retaining such talent – offering learning and development facilities for freshers, sending them 
abroad on one-year bonds (for six-months postings), etc.

Source: The Economic Times, 1st Dec. 06

Such tests are good indices of a level of knowledge and proficiency 
person’s future success score. in the area of professions or 

technical training. The difference 
 (c) Personality Tests: Personality 

between aptitude test and trade 
tests provide clues to a person’s 

test is that the former measures 
emotions, her reactions, maturity 

the potential to acquire skills 
and value system etc. These tests 

and the later the actual skills 
probe the overall personality. possessed. 
Hence, these are difficult to 

 (e) Interest Tests: Every individual 
design and implement. 

has fascination for some job than 
 (d) Trade Test: These tests measure the other. Interest tests are used 

the existing skills of the to know the pattern of interests 
individual. They measure the or involvement of a person. 

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 157

 (iii) Employment Interview: be generally considered in the 
Interview is a formal, in­depth final selection because it is 
conversation conducted to he/she who is responsible for 
evaluate the appli cant’s suitability the performance of the new 
for the job. The role of the employee. 
interviewer is to seek information  (vi) Medical Examination: After the 
and that of the interviewee is to selection decision and before the 
provide the same. Though, in job offer is made, the candidate 
present times, the interviewee is required to undergo a medical 
also seeks information from fitness test. The job offer is given 
interviewer. to the candidate being declared 

fit after the medical examination.
 (iv) Reference and Background 

 (vii) Job Offer: The next step in the 
Checks: Many employers request 

selection process is job offer 
names, addresses, and telephone 

to those applicants who have 
numbers of references for the 

passed all the previous hurdles. 
purpose of verifying information 

Job offer is made through a 
and, gaining additional inform­

letter of appointment/confirm 
ation on an applicant. Previous 

his acceptance. Such a letter 
employers, known persons, 

generally contains a date by 
teach ers and university 

which the appointee must 
professors can act as references.

report on duty. The appointee 
 (v) Selection Decision: The final must be given reasonable time 

decision has to be made from for reporting.
among the candidates who  (viii)Contract of Employment: After 
pass the tests, interviews and the job offer has been made 
reference checks. The views and candidate accepts the offer, 
of the concerned manager will certain documents need to be 

Right/ Wrong Selection Decisions Matter a lot to the Organisations!
Consider, for a moment that any selection decision can result in 4 possible outcomes. A 
decision is correct when an applicant was predicted to be successful and proved to be 
successful on the job, or when the applicant was predicted to be unsuccessful and would 
perform accordingly if hired. In the first case, we have successfully accepted; in the second case 
we have successfully rejected. Problems arise when errors are made in rejecting candidates 
who would have performed successfully on the job (reject errors) or accepting those who 
ultimately perform poorly (accept errors). Don’t you think, these problems can be significant 
and can result in costly mistakes?

Reprint 2025-26



158 Business Studies

Start

Sources of Application

Internal Sources
External Sources

Preliminary Screening

Is 
Preliminary 

Yes Screening No …
OK Reject

Selection Tests
Is 

Selection 
Test No …
OK Reject

Employment Interview Yes

Is 
Employ­ No …

ment Interview Reject
OK

Reference and Background 
Analysis Yes

Is 
Reference and Back- No …

ground OK Reject

Selection Decision Yes

Is 
Selection  No …

Decision Positive Reject

Yes

Job Offer

Employment contract

Evaluation of the 
effectiveness of the selection Rejected 

process Applications

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 159

executed by the employer and the through learning, usually by changing 
candidate. One such document is the employee’s attitude or increasing 
the attestation form. This form his or her skills and knowledge.
contains certain vital details Importance of Training and 
about the candidate, which are Development
authenticated and attested by 
him or her. Attestation form When jobs were simple, easy to learn 
will be a valid record for future and influenced to only a small degree 
reference. There is also a need by technological changes, there was 
for preparing a contract of little need for employees to upgrade 
employment. Basic information or alter their skills. But the rapid 

that should be included in a changes taking place during the 

written contract of employment last quarter century in our highly 

will vary according to the level sophisticated and complex society 

of the job, but the following have created increased pressures for 

checklists sets out the typical organisations to readapt the products 

headings: Job Title, Duties, and services produced, the manner 

Responsibilities, Date when in which products and services are 

continuous employment starts produced and offered, the types of 

and the basis for calculating jobs required and the types of skills 

service, rates of pay, allowances, necessary to complete these jobs. 

hours of work, leave rules, Thus, as jobs have become more 

sickness, grievance procedure, complex the importance of employee 

disciplinary procedure, work training has increased.

rules, termination of employment. Training and development help 
both the organisation and the 

traInIng and developMent individual.
Someone has rightly said: Benefits to the organisation

“If you wish to plan for a year, sow 
The benefits of training and develop­

seeds,
ment to an organisation are as follows:

If you wish to plan for 10 years, 
 (i) Training is a systematic learning, 

plant trees,
always better than hit and trial 

If you wish to plan for a lifetime, methods which lead to wastage 
develop people.” of efforts and money.

Training and Development is an  (ii) It enhances employee produc­
attempt to improve the current or future tivity both in terms of quantity 
employee performance by increasing and quality, leading to higher 
an employee’s ability to perform profits.

Reprint 2025-26



160 Business Studies

 (iii) Training equips the future are distinct terms although they 
manager who can take over in overlap to some extent. 
case of emergency. Training is any process by which 

 (iv) Training increases employee 
the aptitudes, skills and abilities 

morale and reduces absenteeism 
of employees to perform specific 

and employee turnover.
jobs are increased. It is a process of 

 (v) It helps in obtaining effective 
learning new skills and application 

response to fast changing 
environment – technological and of knowledge. It attempts to 

economic. improve their performance on the 
current job or prepare them for any 

Benefits to the Employee intended job.
The benefits of training and develop­
ment activity to the employees are as Education is the process of increa­

follows: sing the knowledge and understanding 

 (i) Improved skills and knowledge of employees. It is the understanding 

due to training lead to better and interpretation of knowledge. It 
career of the individual. does not provide definite answers, but 

 (ii) Increased performance by the rather develops a logical and rational 
individual help him to earn more. mind that can determine relationships 

 (iii) Training makes the employee among pertinent variables and 
more efficient to handle machines. thereby understand a phenomenon. 
Thus, less prone to accidents. Education imparts qualities of mind 

 (iv) Training increases the satisfaction and character and understanding of 
and morale of employees. the basic principles and develop the 

capacities of analysis, synthesis and 
Training, Development and 

objectivity. Education is broader in 
Education

scope than training. Training is tied 
The term training is used to indicate to the goals of organisations more 
the process by which attitudes, than to the goals of the individual. 
skills and abilities of employees to Development refers to the 
perform specific jobs are increased. learning opportunities designed 
But the term development means to help employees grow. It covers 
growth of individual in all respects. not only those activities which 
Training is short term process but improve job performance but also 
development is an on going process. those which bring about growth of 
Also, development includes training. the personality, help individuals 

It also needs to be understood that in the progress towards maturity 
training, education and development and actualisation of their potential 

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 161

Difference between Training and Development 

Training Development

It is a process of increasing knowledge It is a process of learning and growth.
and skills. 

It is to enable the employee to do the job It is to enable the overall growth of the 
better. employee.

It is a job oriented process. It is a career oriented process.

capacities so that they become not on tHe Job MetHodS 
only good employees but better men 

 (i) Apprenticeship Programmes: 
and women.

Apprenticeship programmes 
The field of training and develop­ put the trainee under the 

ment concerned with improving guidance of a master worker. 
deals with the design and delivery These are designed to acquire 
of learning to improve performance a higher level of skill. People 
within organisations. In some org­ seeking to enter skilled jobs, to 
anisations the term Learning and become, for example, plumbers, 
Development is used instead of electricians or iron­workers, 
Training and Development in order to are often required to undergo 
emphasise the importance of learning apprenticeship training. These 
for the individual and the organisation. apprentices are trainees who 
In other organisations, the term spend a prescribed amount 
Human Resource Development is of time working with an 
used.

experienced guide, or trainer. 
A uniform period of training is 

traInIng MetHodS
offered to trainees, in which both 

There are various methods of training. 
fast and slow learn here, are 

These are broadly categorised into 
placed together. Slow learners 

two groups: On­the­Job and Off­the­ 
may require additional training.

Job methods. On­the­Job methods 
refer to the methods that are applied  (ii) Coaching: In this method, the 
to the workplace, while the employee superior guides and instructs the 
is actually working. Off­the­Job trainee as a coach. The coach or 
methods are used away from the work counselor sets mutually agreed 
place. The former means learning upon goals, suggests how to 
while doing, while the latter means achieve these goals, periodically 
learning before doing. reviews the trainees progress 

Reprint 2025-26



162 Business Studies

and suggests changes required When employees are trained by 
in behavior and performance. this method, the organisation 
The trainee works  directly with a finds it easier at the time of 
senior manager and the manager promotions, replacements or 
takes full responsibility for the transfers.
trainee’s coaching. Classically off tHe Job MetHodS 
the trainee is being groomed  (i) Class Room Lectures/Confer­
to replace the senior manager ences: The lecture or conference 
and relieve him from some of 

approach is well adapted to 
his duties. This gives a chance 

conveying specific information­
for the trainee to learn the 

rules, procedures or methods. 
job also. 

The use of audio­visuals or 
 (iii) Internship Training: It is a demonstrations can often make 

joint programme of training in a formal classroom presentation 
which educational institutions more interesting while increasing 
and business firms cooperate. 

retention and offering a vehicle 
Selected candidates carry 

for clarifying more difficult 
on regular studies for the 

points.
prescribed period. They also 

 (ii) Films: They can provide 
work in some factory or office to 

information and explicitly 
acquire practical knowledge and 
skills. demonstrate skills that are not 

easily represented by the other 
 (iv) Job Rotation: This kind of 

techniques. Used in conjunction 
training involves shifting the 

with conference discussions, it is 
trainee from one department 
to another or from one job to a very effective method in certain 

another. This enables the trainee cases. 

to gain a broader understanding  (iii) Case Study: Taken from actual 
of all parts of the business and experiences of organisations, 
how the organisation as a whole cases represent attempts to 
functions. The trainee gets fully describe, as accurately as possible 
involved in the departments real problems that managers have 
operations and also gets a faced. Trainees study the cases 
chance to test her own aptitude to determine problems, analyse 
and ability. Job rotation allows causes, develop alternative 
trainees to interact with other solutions, select what they 
employees facilitating future believe to be the best solution, 
cooperation among departments. and implement it.

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 163

 (iv) Computer Modelling: It simul­ equipment. This is usually done 
ates the work environment by when employees are required to 
programming a computer to handle sophisticated machinery 
imitate some of the realities and equipment. 
of the job and allows learning  (vi) Programmed Instruction: This 
to take place without the risk method incorporates a prearran­
or high costs that would be ged and proposed acquisition of 
incurred if a mistake were made some specific skills or general 
in real life situation. knowledge. Information is broken 

 (v) Vestibule Training: Employees into meaningful units and these 
learn their jobs on the equipment units are arranged in a proper 
they will be using, but the way to form a logical and 
training is conducted away from sequential learning package i.e. 
the actual work floor. Actual from simple to complex. The 
work environments are created trainee goes through these units 
in a class room and employees by answering questions or filling 
use the same materials, files and the blanks.

Key Terms

Staffing    Personnel Management

Human Resource Management

Recruitment    Selection

Training   Development 

Performance Appraisal    Assessment Tests

Summary

Meaning: Staffing has been described as the managerial function of 
filling and keeping filled, the positions in an organisation structure. 
This is achieved by, first of all, identifying requirement of work force, 
followed by recruitment, selection, placement, promotion, appraisal 
and development of personnel, to fill the roles designed into the 
organisation  structure.
Need and Importance of Staffing: In any organisation, there 
is a need for people to perform work. The staffing function of 
management fulfills this requirement and finds the right people for 
the right job.

Reprint 2025-26



164 Business Studies

The staffing function has assumed greater importance these days 
because of rapid advancement of technology, increasing size of 
organisation and complicated behaviour of human beings. The 
ability of an organisation to achieve its goal depends upon the 
quality of its human resources.
Staffing as part of Human Resource Management: Staffing is a 
function which all managers need to perform. It is a separate and 
specialised function and there are many aspects of human relations 
to be considered.
It is the responsibility of all managers to directly deal and select 
people to work for the organisation. When the manager performs the 
staffing function his role is slightly limited. In small organisations, 
managers may perform all duties related to employees salaries, 
welfare and working conditions.
But as organisations grow and number of persons employed increases, 
a separate department called the human resource department is formed 
which has specialists in the field to manage people.
Human Resource Management includes many specialised activities 
and duties which the human resource personnel must perform. 
Evolution of HRM: Human resource management has replaced the 
traditional concept of labour welfare and personnel management. 
HRM in its present form has evolved from a number of significant 
inter­related developments, which date back to the era of industrial 
revolution. Emergence of trade union movement led to the need of 
a person who could act as an effective link between the owners and 
workers.
You may have observed that all these aspects  are concerned with 
the human element in the industry as distinct from the mechanical 
side of the enterprise. Thus, staffing is an inherent part of human 
resource management as it is the practice of finding, evaluating and 
establishing a working relationship with people, for a purpose.
Staffing Process: The prime concern of the staffing function in 
the management process is the timely fulfillment of the manpower 
requirements within an organisation. 
Estimating the Manpower Requirements: Performance of each 
job necessitates the appointment of a person with a specific set 
of educational qualifications, skills, prior experience and so on. 
Operationally, understanding the manpower requirements would 
necessitate workload analysis on the one hand and workforce 
analysis on the other. 

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 165

Recruitment: Recruitment may be defined as the process of searching 
for prospective employees and stimulating them to apply for jobs in 
the organisation.
Selection: Selection is the process of choosing from among the 
pool of the prospective job candidates developed at the stage of 
recruitment.
Placement and Orientation: Orientation is introducing the selected 
employee to other employees and familiarising him with the rules 
and policies of the organisation. Placement refers to the employee 
occupying the position or post for which the person has been 
selected.  
Training and Development: What people seek is not simply a job but a 
career. Every one must have the opportunity to rise to the top. The best 
way to provide such an opportunity is to facilitate employee learning. 
Recruitment 
Recruitment refers to the process of finding possible candidates for 
a job or function.
Sources of Recruitment: The requisite positions may be filled up 
from within the organisation or from outside. Thus, there are two 
sources of recruitment – Internal and External. 
Internal Sources: Recruitment from within the enterprise. There are 
two important sources of internal recruitment, namely, transfers 
and promotions.
External Sources: An enterprise has to tap external sources for various 
positions because all the vacancies cannot be filled through internal 
recruitment. The commonly used external sources of recruitment are 
Direct Recruitment, Casual Callers, Advertisements, Employment 
Exchange, Placement Agencies and Management Consultants, 
Campus Recruitment, Recommendations of Employees, Labour 
Contractors, Advertising on Television and Web Publishing.
Process of Selection: (i) Preliminary Screening: Application Form 
(ii) Selection Tests: (a) Intelligence Tests (b) Aptitude Test (c) 
Personality Tests (d) Trade Test (e) Interest Tests 
(iii) Employment (iv) Interview, (v) Reference and Background 
Checks, (vi) Selection Decision, (vii) Medical Examination, (viii) Job 
Offer (ix) Contract of Employment

Training and Development

Need of Training and Development
The rapid changes taking place in our highly sophisticated and 
complex society have created increased pressures for organisations 

Reprint 2025-26



166 Business Studies

to readapt the products and services produced, the manner in which 
products and services are produced and offered, the types of jobs 
required and the types of skills necessary to complete these jobs. 
Training is any process by which the aptitudes, skills and abilities 
of employees to perform specific jobs are increased. 
Education is the process of increasing the knowledge and 
understanding of employees. It is the understanding and 
interpretation of knowledge. 
Development refers to the learning opportunities designed to help 
employees grow.

Training Methods
There are various methods of training. These are broadly categorised 
into two groups: On­the­Job and Off­the­Job methods. 
On the Job Methods
(i) Apprenticeship Programs (ii) Coaching (iii) Internship Training 
(iv) Job Rotation 
Off the Job Methods
(i) Class Room Lectures/Conferences (ii) Films (iii) Case Study 
(iv) Computer Modelling (v) Vestibule Training (vi) Programmed 
Instruction.

Exercises

Very Short Answer Type

1.  What is meant by staffing?

2.  State the two important sources of recruitment.

3.  The workers of a factory are unable to work on new machines 
and always demand for help of supervisor. The Supervisor is 
overburdened with their frequent calls. Suggest the remedy. 
( Hint: training)

4.  The quality of production is not as per standards. On 
investigation it was observed that most of the workers were 
not fully aware of the proper operation of the machinery. 
What could be the way to improve the quality of production 
to meet the standards? (training).

5.  The workers of a factory remain idle because of lack of 
knowledge of hi­tech machines. Frequent visit of engineer 
is made which causes high overhead charges. How can this 
problem be removed.  (vestibule training)

Reprint 2025-26



Staffing 167

Short Answer Type

1.  What is meant by recruitment? How is it different from 
selection?

2.  An organisation provides security services. It requires such 
candidates who are reliable and don’t leak out the secrets of 
their clients. What steps should be incorporated in selection 
process?

3.  A company is manufacturing paper plates and bowls. It 
produces 1,00,000 plates and bowls each day. Due to local 
festival, it got an urgent order of extra 50,000 plates and 
bowls. Explain the method of recruitment that the company 
should adopt in the given circumstances to meet the order.  

4.  Distinguish between training and development.

5.  Why are internal sources of recruitment considered to be 
more economical?

6. ‘ No organisation can be successful unless it fills and keeps 
the various positions filled with the right kind of people for 
the right job.’ Elucidate

Long Answer Type

1.  ‘Human resource management includes many specialized 
activities and duties.’ Explain.

2.  Explain the procedure for selection of employees.

3.  What are the advantages of training to the individual and to 
the organisation?

4.  Kaul Consultants have launched www.naukaripao.com 
exclusively for senior management professionals. The 
portal lists out senior level jobs and ensures that the job is 
genuine through rigorous screening process.
a.  State the source of recruitment highlighted in the case 

above.
b.  State four benefits of the above identified source of 

recruitment. 

5.  A company, Xylo limited, is setting up a new plant in India 
for manufacturing auto components. India is a highly 
competitive and cost effective production base in this 
sector. Many reputed car manufacturers source their auto 
components from here. Xylo limited is planning to capture 
about 40% of the market share in India and also export to 
the tune of at least ̀  50 crores in about 2 years of its planned 

Reprint 2025-26



168 Business Studies

operations. To achieve these targets it requires a highly 
trained and motivated work force. You have been retained by 
the company to advise it in this matter. While giving answers 
keep in mind the sector the company is operating. 

 Questions: 
a.  Outline the process of staffing the company should 

follow.
b.  Which sources of recruitment the company should rely 

upon. Give reasons for your recommendation.
c.  Outline the process of selection the company should 

follow with reasons.

6.  A major insurance company handled all recruiting, screening 
and training processes for data entry/customer service 
representatives. Their competitor was attracting most of the 
qualified, potential employees in their market. Recruiting 
was made even more difficult by the strong economy and 
the ‘jobseeker’s market.’ This resulted in the client having to 
choose from candidates who had the ‘soft’ skills needed for 
the job, but lacked the proper ‘hard’ skills and training.

 Questions
a.  As an HR manager what problems do you see in the 

company?
b.  How do you think it can be resolved and what would be 

its impact on the company?

7. Ms. Jayshree recently completed her Post Graduate Diploma 
in Human Resource Management. A few months from now 
a large steel manufacturing company appointed her as its 
human resource manager. As of now, the company employs 
800 persons and has an expansion plan in hand which may 
require another 200 persons for various types of additional 
requirements. Ms. Jayshree has been given complete charge 
of the company’s Human Resource Department.

 Questions
a.  Point out, what functions is she supposed to perform?
b.  What problems do you foresee in her job?
c.  What steps is she going to take to perform her job 

efficiently?
d.  How significant is her role in the organisation?

Reprint 2025-26



DIRECTING 7
CHAPTER

Grassroot Leadership - Ford Motor Co.
Ford has always attracted and nurtured LEARN ING  OBJECT IVES

capable managers and technicians, but it After studying  this chapter, you 
has failed to do the same for change agents should be able to:
and leaders. So, as part of the automaker’s 

n Explain the concept of directing 
cultural overhaul, Ford is embarking on a 

and its importance in business 
sweeping attempt to mass-manufacture 

organisations;
leaders. It wants to build an army of “warrior-
entrepreneurs” — people who have the n Understand the principles guiding 
courage and skills to topple old ideas, and directing process;
who believe in change passionately enough n Explain the meaning of supervision 
to make it happen. and its importance;

Ford Motor Company announced key 
n Explain the meaning of motivation 

changes to its senior management team as 
and its importance in business 

it continues to strengthen its automotive 
business, improve the company’s operational management;

fitness, and accelerate a strategic shift to n Understand and explain Maslow’s 
capitalize on emerging opportunities. In theory of hierarchy of needs and 
announcing the leadership changes, Ford its application to motivation of 
President and CEO Jim Hackett said Form employees in an organisation;
is “very fortunate to have an experienced n Explain the financial and non-
and committed executive team in place to 

financial incentives through which 
significantly strengthen their business while 

managers motivate their employees;
building towards their vision of becoming 
the world’s most trusted mobility company. n Explain the concept of leadership 
Their objective is to lead business to new and its importance in management;
levels of operational fitness, product and n Describe the qualities of a good 
brand excellence and profitability. leader;

Ford views grassroot leadership as the best 
n Explain about formal and 

vehicle for creating a successful business.
informal communications in the 

Source: http://media.ford.com/ organisations; and
content/fordmedia/fna/us/en/news/ n Identify various barriers to effective 
2018/02/22/company-news.html communications and measures to 

overcome these barriers in the 
organisations.

Reprint 2025-26



170 Business Studies

I performed by every manager. Directing 
ntroductIon

The above case reveals how important is a managerial process which 

it is to instill leadership qualities in takes place throughout the life of an 
organisation.

all managers. Business organisations 
The main characteristics of 

have always given due importance 
directing are discussed below:

to its managers who are capable of 
leading others. A manager needs to  (i) Directing initiates action: Directing 

use various ways to lead, motivate is a key managerial function. A 

and inspire the subordinates and to manager has to perform this 

communicate with them suitably. function along with planning, 

These ways, discussed in the present organising, staffing and controlling 

chapter, are collectively called the while discharging his duties in 
the organisation. While other 

directing function of management.
functions prepare a setting for 

MeanIng action, directing initiates action 
In the ordinary sense, directing in the organisation.
means giving instructions and guiding  (ii) Directing takes place at every level 
people in doing work. In our daily life, of management: Every manager, 
we come across many situations like from top executive to supervisor 
a hotel owner directing his employees performs the function of directing. 
to complete certain activities for The directing takes place wherever 
organising a function, a teacher superior – subordinate relations 
directing his student to complete an exist.
assignment, a film director directing  (iii) Directing is a continuous process: 
the artists about how they should act Directing is a continuous activity. 
in the film etc. In all these situations, It takes place throughout the life 
we can observe that directing is done to of the organisation irrespective 
achieve some predetermined objective. of people occupying managerial 

In the context of management of positions. We can observe that in 
an organisation, directing refers to organisations like Infosys, Tata, 
the process of instructing, guiding, BHEL, HLL and the managers may 
counselling, motivating and leading change but the directing process 
people in the organisation to achieve continues because without direction 
its objectives. the organisational activities can 

You can observe here that directing not continue further.
is not a mere issue of communication  (iv) Directing flows from top to bottom: 
but encompasses many elements like Directing is first initiated at top 
supervision, motivation and leadership. level and flows to the bottom 
It is one of the key managerial functions through organisational hierarchy. 

Reprint 2025-26

##7##

Directing 171

It means that every manager can a manager with good leadership 
direct his immediate subordinate abilities will be in a position to 
and take instructions from his convince the employees working 
immediate boss. under him that individual efforts 

and team effort will lead to 
IMportance of dIrectIng achievement of organisational 
The importance of directing can be goals.
understood by the fact that every  (iii) Directing guides employees to 
action in the organisation is initiated fully realise their potential and 
through directing only. Directing capabilities by motivating and 
guides towards achievement of providing effective leadership. A 
common objectives. Through good leader can always identify 
directing, managers not only tell the the potential of his employees 
people in the organisation as to what and motivate them to extract 
they should do, when they should work up to their full potential.
do and how they should do but  (iv) Directing facilitates introduction 
also see that their instructions are of needed changes in the organi-
implemented in proper perspective. sation. Generally, people have 
Very often, this becomes an important a tendency to resist changes 
factor in the efficient and effective in the organisation. Effective 
functioning of the organisation. directing through motivation, 
The points which emphasise the communication and leadership 
importance of directing are presented helps to reduce such resistance 
as follows: and develop required cooperation 
 (i) Directing helps to initiate action by in introducing changes in the 

people in the organisation towards organisation. For example, if 
attainment of desired objectives. a manager wants to introduce 
For example, if a supervisor guides new system of accounting, 
his subordinates and clarifies there may be initial resistance 
their doubts in performing a task, from accounting staff. But, if 
it will help the worker to achieve manager explains the purpose, 
work targets given to him. provides training and motivates 

 (ii) Directing integrates employees- with additional rewards, the 
efforts in the organisation in such employees may accept change 
a way that every individual effort and cooperate with manager.
contributes to the organisational  (v) Effective directing helps to 
performance. Thus, it ensures bring stability and balance in 
that the individuals work for the organisation since it fosters 
organisational goals. For example, cooperation and commitment 

Reprint 2025-26



172 Business Studies

among the people and helps to benefits to fulfill his personal 
achieve balance among various needs. The organisation may 
groups, activities and the expect employees to improve 
departments. productivity to achieve expected 

profits. But, good directing should 
prIncIples of dIrectIng provide harmony by convincing 
Providing good and effective directing that employee rewards and work 
is a challenging task as it involves efficiency are complimentary to 
many complexities. A manager has each other.
to deal with people with diverse  (iii) Unity of Command: This principle 
background, and expectations. This insists that a person in the 
comp licates the directing process. organisation should receive 
Certain guiding principles of directing instructions from one superior 
may help in directing process. These only. If instructions are received 
principles are briefly explained below: from more than one, it creates 
 (i) Maximum individual contribution: confusion, conflict and disorder 

This principle emphasises that in the organisation. Adherence 
directing techniques must help to this principle ensures effective 
every individual in the organisation direction.
to contribute to his maximum  (iv) Appropriateness of direction tech­
potential for achievement of nique: According to this principle, 
organisational objectives. It should appropriate motivational and 
bring out untappted energies of leadership technique should be 
employees for the efficiency of used while directing the people 
organisation. For example, a good based on subordinate needs, 
motivation plan with suitable capabilities, attitudes and other 
monetary and non-monetary situational variables. For example, 
rewards can motivate an employee for some people money can act as 
to contribute his maximum efforts powerful motivator while for others 
for the organisation as he or she promotion may act as effective 
may feel that their efforts will bring motivator.
them suitable rewards.  (v) Managerial communication: Effe-

 (ii) Harmony of objectives: Very often, ctive managerial communication 
we find that individual objectives of across all the levels in the 
employees and the organisational organisation makes direction 
objectives as understood are effective. Directing should convey 
conflicting to each other. For clear instructions to create total 
example, an employee may expect understanding to subordinates. 
attractive salary and monetary Through proper feedback, the 

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 173

managers should ensure that the profits to the managers for their 
subordinate understands his contribution to inhance profits of the 
instructions clearly. company, and (iv) A manager inspires 

 (vi) Use of informal organisation: A his/her employees by playing a lead 
manager should realise that role in performing a work.
informal groups or organisations All these examples and many 
exist within every formal other activities related to directing 
organisation. He should spot and may broadly be grouped into four 
make use of such organisations categories which are the elements of 
for effective directing. directing. These are:

 (vii) Leadership: While directing the  (i) Supervision
subordinates, managers should  (ii) Motivation
exercise good leadership as it  (iii) Leadership
can influence the subordinates  (iv) Communication
positively without causing To know more about directing, these 
dissatisfaction among them. elements are discussed in detail.

 (viii)Follow through: Mere giving of 
an order is not sufficient. supervIsIon

Managers should follow it up by The term supervision can be 
reviewing continuously whether understood in two ways. Firstly, it 
orders are being implemented can be understood as an element of 
accordingly or any problems are directing and secondly, as a function 
being encountered. If necessary, performed by supervisors in the 
suitable modifications should be organisational hierarchy. 
made in the directions. Supervision being an element of 

directing, every manager in the 
eleMents of dIrectIon organisation supervises his/her 
The process of directing involves subordinates. In this sense, supervision 
guiding, coaching, instructing, can be understood as the process of 
motivating, leading the people in an guiding the efforts of employees and 
organisation to achieve organisational other resources to accomplish the desired 
objectives. Consider the following objectives. It means overseeing what 
examples: (i) A supervisor explains is being done by subordinates and 
a worker about operations to be giving instructions to ensure optimum 
carried by him on a lathe machine, utilisation of resources and achievement 
(ii) A mining engineer explains about of work targets.
safety precautions to be followed Secondly, supervision can be 
while working in a coal mine, (iii) A understood as the function to be 
Managing Director declares share in performed by supervisor, a managerial 

Reprint 2025-26



174 Business Studies

position in the organisation relations with workers. A good 
hierarchy at the operative level i.e., supervisor acts as a guide, friend 
immedia tely above the worker. The and philosopher to the workers.
functions and performance of the  (ii) Supervisor acts as a link between 
supervisor are vital to any workers and management. He 
organisation because he is directly conveys management ideas to 
related with workers whereas other the workers on one hand and 
mangers have no direct touch with workers problems to the 
bottom level workers. management on the other. This 

role played by supervisor helps 
Importance of Supervision

to avoid misunderstandings and 
The importance of supervision can conflicts between management 
be understood from multiple roles and workers/employees.
performed by a supervisor. These are  (iii) Supervisor plays a key role in 
explained below: maintaining group unity among 
 (i) Supervisor maintains day-to-day workers placed under his control. 

contact and maintains friendly He sorts out internal differences 

Directing a Dissatisfied Manager

Rashmi Joshi had been a district sales manager with Fine Productions for ten years. She was 
recognised by her peers and supervisors as a person who managed department in a good 
way. However, everyone realised that Rashmi was extremely ambitious and was seeking a 
higher-level management position. When one of her sales representatives did a good job, she 
would attempt to take the credit. However, if a problem arose, she thought it was not her 
fault. When the marketing manager retired, Rashmi applied for the position. The company 
decided to do a thorough search because of the responsibility and importance associated 
with the position. When the search was concluded, the decision was made to fill the position 
by a person from outside the company. The consensus of top management was that Rashmi, 
although a good district sales manager might have difficulties in working with her new peer 
groups. They felt that she might displease the other managers if she tried to take credit for 
their work and, as a result, their performance would suffer.

Rashmi was heart-broken. She had wanted that particular job for a long time and had 
dedicated all her energies towards obtaining it. She became very despondent and her work 
deteriorated. The department functioned inspite of her, not because of her. Decisions were 
made slowly if at all and she began to be late with her sales reports. Although her sales staff 
continued to be productive, Rashmi could not take the credit.

When the new marketing manager took over, one of the first major problems that he 
confronted was how to motivate and inspire Rashmi to her former level of performance. He 
recognised that Rashmi had been with the company for a long time but something had to be 
done to motivate her to perform really well.

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 175

and maintains harmony among highly committed and hardworking 
workers. staff or lazy, evasive and superficial 

 (iv) Supervisor ensures performance workers. He or she may wonder what 
of work according to the targets to do with workers not willing to 
set. He takes responsibility for work to their potential. Psychologists 
task achievement and motivates say it is motivation, which stimulates 
his workers effectively. people to take up work voluntarily.

 (v) Supervisor provides good Let us try to understand something 
on-the-job training to the workers about motivation.
and employees. A skilled and Motivation: Motivation means inci-
knowledgeable supervisor can tement or inducement to act or move. In 
build efficient team of workers. the context of an organisation, it means 

 (vi) Supervisory leadership plays the process of making subordinates 
a key role in influencing the to act in a desired manner to achieve 
workers in the organisation. A certain organisational goals. 
supervisor with good leadership While discussing about motivation, 
qualities can build up high we need to understand three inter 
morale among workers. related terms — motive, motivation 

 (vii) A good supervisor analyses and motivators. Let us try to know 
the work performed and gives about these terms.
feedback to the workers. He  (i) Motive: A motive is an inner state 
suggests ways and means of that energises, activates or moves 
developing work skills. and directs behaviour towards 

goals. Motives arise out of the 
MotIvatIon

needs of individuals. Realisation of 
The case of Rashmi reveals an a motive causes restlessness in the 
important fact of managerial work; individual which prompts some 
it is not always possible to get the action to reduce such restlessness. 
best of work from employees merely For example, the need for food 
by exercising formal authority. What causes hunger an account of 
makes people to behave the way they which a man searches for food. 
do? Why are some people reluctant to Some such motives are – hunger, 
do the work though they have ability thirst, security, affiliation, need 
to do? What should be done to make for comfort, recognition etc.,
people work effectively?  (ii) Motivation: Motivation is the 

For answering these questions, process of stimulating people 
a manager should try to develop to action to accomplish desired 
insights into causes of behaviour of goals. Motivation depends upon 
people. A manager may come across satisfying needs of people.

Reprint 2025-26



176 Business Studies

 (iii) Motivators: Motivator is the  (ii) Motivation produces goal 
technique used to motivate directed behaviour. For example, 
people in an organisation. Managers the promotion in the job may 
use diverse motivators like pay, be given to employee with 
bonus, promotion, recognition, the objective of improving his 
praise, responsibility etc., in the performance. If the employee 
organisation to influence people to is interested in promotion, it 
contribute their best. helps to produce a behaviour to 

Some of the definitions to explain improve performance.
the concept of motivation are given in  (iii) Motivation can be either positive 
the above box. or negative. Positive motivation 
Features of Motivation: The ana- provides positive rewards like 
lysis of various definitions and increase in pay, promotion, 
viewpoints on motivation reveals the recognition etc., Negative moti-
following features of motivation: vation uses negative means like 
 (i) Motivation is an internal feeling. punishment, stopping increments, 

The urge, drives, desires, aspi- threatening etc. which also may 
rations, striving or needs of human induce a person to act in the 
being, which are internal, influence desired way.
human behaviour. For example,  (iv) Motivation is a complex process as 
people may have the urge or the individuals are heterogeneous 
desire for possessing a motorbike, in their expectations, perceptions 
comfortable house, reputation and reactions. Any type of 
in the society. These urges are motivation may not have uniform 
internal to an individual. effect on all the members.

Definitions on Motivation
Motivation means a process of stimulating people to action to accomplish desired goals 

William G. Scout
Motivation refers to the way in which urges, drives, desires, aspirations, strivings or needs 
direct, control and explain the behaviour of human beings.

Mc Farland
Motivation is a complex force starting with keeping a person at work in an organisation. 
Motivation is something which moves the person to action and continues him in the course 
of action already initiated.

Dubin
Motivation is a process which begins with a physiological or psychological need or deficiency 
which triggers behaviour or a drive that is aimed at a goal or incentive.

Fred Luthans

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 177

Motivation Process: Motivation walking for 2 kms, he could find a 
process is based on human needs. A hotel where roti and dal was available 
simple model to explain motivation for ` 10. Since he had only ` 15 in 
process is presented below. his pocket, he paid ` 10 and had a 

The following example explains satisfying meal. After taking a meal, 
the process of satisfaction of human he felt that he had regained energy.
needs. An unsatisfied need of an individual 

Ramu is very hungry since he did creates tension which stimulates his 
not have breakfast in the morning. or her drives. These drives generate 
By1.00 P.M., he became restless and a search behaviour to satisfy such 
started walking on the road in search need. If such need is satisfied, the 
of a hotel for snacks or meals. After individual is relieved of tension.

Motivating Employees in Tata Steel 
In Tata Steel several initiatives have been taken to further improve the motivation levels 
and participation in the decision making process of the officers, greater impetus to training 
through a formalised system of a personal development programme, talent review and job 
rotation systems, compensation linked to the performance management system, formal 
rewards and recognition systems, knowledge management systems linked with appraisals, 
leadership opportunities in quality circles, continuous improvement and value engineering 
programmes and an extremely transparent and credible multi-path communication system 
to address queries and concerns of all employees through various dialogues both formal and 
online, with such tools as video conferencing, ‘MD Online’, special dialogues with senior 
management, meetings, conferences and seminars. These initiatives have helped to build a 
homogeneous and focused team in Tata Steel, increasing motivation and binding to the vision 
of the company and spurred employees to deliver targets on a participatory management 
basis leading to ownership of processes.

Tata Steel is a company that actively promotes freedom to work, freedom to innovate 
and even the freedom to fail. It is a nimble, fast, modern and forward-looking company on 
a strong growth path. The company has undergone a revolutionary change in terms of its 
production facilities and the technology in the manufacturing process. These changes have 
resulted in creating greater opportunities for taking up newer challenges for young recruits 
work and for performance based on IT enabled systems and high levels of automation. 
These have led to making the company one of the lowest cost producers of steel and the 
only Indian company to be recognised by the World Steel Dynamics as one of the top most 
‘World Class’ steel makers. Tata Steel hopes not only to consolidate but better its leadership 
by robust leadership development systems that have seen the company create many CEOs 
for other companies. 

http://www.tata.com/tata_steel/releases/20030829.htm

Reprint 2025-26



178 Business Studies

Unsatisfied Need as well as the organisation. 
Since proper motivation satisfies 
the needs of employees, they in 

Tension turn devote all their energies 
for optimum performance in 
their work. A satisfied employee 

Drives
can always turnout expected 
performance. Good motivation in 

Search  the organisation helps to achieve 
Behaviour higher levels of performance as 

motivated employees contribute 
Satisfied their maximum efforts for 

Need organisational goals.
 (ii) Motivation helps to change 

Reduction nega tive or indifferent attitudes 
of Tension of employee to positive attitudes 

so as to achieve organisational 
Importance of Motivation: In goals. For example, a worker 
the example of Tata Steel you have may have indifferent or negative 
seen how the direction, motivation attitude towards his work, if 
and effective leadership has taken he is not rewarded properly. 
the company forward. Even commu- If suitable rewards are given 
nication systems in the company and supervisor gives positive 
have encouraged employees to encouragement and praise for 
achieve targets. the good work done, the worker 

Motivation is considered important may slowly develop positive 
because it helps to identify and attitude towards the work.
satisfy the needs of human resources  (iii) Motivation helps to reduce 
in the organisation and thereby helps employee turnover and thereby 
in improving their performance. saves the cost of new recruitment 
It is the reason why every major and training. The main reason for 
organisation develops various kinds high rate of employee turnover is 
of motivational programmes and lack of motivation. If managers 
spends crores of rupees on these identify motivational needs of 
programmes. The importance of moti- employees and provide suitable 
vation can be pointed out by the incentives, employees may not 
following benefits: think of leaving the organisation. 
 (i) Motivation helps to improve High rate of turnover compels 

performance levels of employees management to go for new 

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 179

recruitment and training which these, Maslow’s Need Hierarchy 
involve additional investment of Theory is considered fundamental to 
money, time and effort. Motivation understanding of motivation. Let us 
helps to save such costs. It also examine it in detail.
helps to retain talented people in Abraham Maslow, a well-known 
the organisation. psychologist in a classic paper published 

 (iv) Motivation helps to reduce abse- in 1943, outlined the elements of an 
nteeism in the organisation. overall theory of motivation.
Some important reasons for His theory was based on human 
absenteeism are–bad working needs. He felt that within every human 
conditions, inadequate rewards, being, there exists a hierarchy of five 
lack of recognition, poor relations needs. These are:
with supervisors and colleagues  (i) Basic Physiological Needs: These 
etc. Through sound motivational needs are most basic in the 
system, all these deficiencies hierarchy and corresponds to 
can be covered. If motivation primary needs. Hunger, thirst, 
is adequately provided, work shelter, sleep and sex are some 
becomes a source of pleasure examples of these needs. In the 
and workers attend to the work organisational context, basic 
regularly. salary helps to satisfy these 

 (v) Motivation helps managers to needs.
introduce changes smoothly  (ii) Safety/Security Needs: These 
without much resistance from needs provide security and 
people. Normally, for any change protection from physical and 
introduced in the organisation, emotional harm. Examples: job 
there may be resistance for security, stability of income, 
changes. If manager can convince Pension plans etc.,
employees that proposed changes  (iii) Affiliation/Belonging Needs: These 
will bring additional rewards needs refer to affection, sense of 
to employees, they may readily belongingness, acceptance and 
accept the change. friendship.

Maslow’s Need Hierarchy Theory  (iv) Esteem Needs: These include 
of Motivation: Since motivation is factors such as self-respect, 
highly complex, many researchers auto nomy status, recognition 
have studied about motivation from and attention.
several dimensions and developed  (v) Self Actualisation Needs: It is 
some theories. These theories help the highest level of need in the 
to develop understanding about hierarchy. It refers to the drive 
motivation phenomenon. Among to become what one is capable of 

Reprint 2025-26



180 Business Studies

Individual  Organisational  
Example Example

Self fulfillment Achievement of goals

Self 
actualisation Job title

Status needs

Esteem 
needs Cordial relations with 

Friendship
Affiliation/ colleagues

Belongingness
needs

Stability of Income Pension plan
Safety/Security 

needs

Hunger Basic Physiological Needs
Basic Salary

Maslow’s Need Hierarchy Theory

becoming. These needs include of his propositions are questioned 
growth, self-fulfillment and achi- on his classification of needs and 
evement of goals. hierarchy of needs. But, despite such 

Maslow’s theory is based on the criticism, the theory is still relevant 
following assumptions: because needs, no matter how they 
 (i) People’s behaviour is based on are classified, are important to 

their needs. Satisfaction of such understand the behaviour. It helps 
needs influences their behaviour. managers to realise that need level 

 (ii) People’s needs are in hierarchical of employee should be identified to 
order, starting from basic needs provide motivation to them.
to other higher level needs.

 (iii) A satisfied need can no longer Financial and Non-Financial 

motivate a person; only next higher Incentives 

level need can motivate him. Incentive means all measures which 
 (iv) A person moves to the next are used to motivate people to improve 

higher level of the hierarchy only performance. These incentives may 
when the lower need is satisfied. be broadly classified as financial and 

Maslow’s Theory focuses on the non financial. Let us learn about 
needs as the basis for motivation. these incentives in detail.
This theory is widely recognised Financial Incentives: In the context 
and appreciated. However, some of existing economic system, money 

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 181

Profile of Abraham Maslow (1908 – 1970)
Abraham H. Maslow was born in Brooklyn, New York, in 1908. He studied 
primate behavior at the University of Wisconsin, where he received his 
doctorate in psychology in 1934.

Early in his career, Maslow was drawn to the study of human motivation and 
personality. His work in this area upset strict behaviorists, whose explanations 
of motivation and personality failed to account for what Maslow called the 
whole person. His theory of the hierarchy of needs, which leads to the ‘self-
actualised’ individual, was a strong catalyst for the founding of humanistic 
psychology. Maslow successfully bridged motivation and personality in his 
theories of needs, self-actualising persons, and peak experiences.

Maslow is considered an important figure in contemporary psychology. 
His career was a formidable one. For 14 years he taught at Brooklyn 
College, and then went to Brandeis University as chairman of the Psychology 
Department. In 1968 he was elected president of the American Psychological 
Association. In 1969 he went to the Laughlin Foundation in Menlo Park, 
California. He wrote two important books: Toward a Psychology of Being 
(1968) and Motivation and Personality (1970). Abraham Maslow died of a 
heart attack in 1970.

has become a means to satisfy the system consists of regular 
physical needs of daily life and also of increments in the pay every year 
obtaining social position and power. and enhancement of allowances 
Since, money has the purchasing from time-to-time. In some 
power, it becomes a very important business organisations, pay hike 
incentive for every individual. and increments may be linked to 

Financial incentives refer to performance.
incentives which are in direct  (ii) Productivity linked wage incen­
monetary form or measurable in tives: Several wage incentive 
monetary term and serve to motivate plans aims at linking payment of 
people for better performance. wages to increase in productivity 
These incentives may be provided at individual or group level.
on individual or group basis. The  (iii) Bonus: Bonus is an incentive 
financial incentives generally used offered over and above the wages/
in organisations are listed below: salary to the employees.
 (i) Pay and allowances: For every  (iv) Profit Sharing: Profit sharing 

employee, salary is the basic is meant to provide a share 
monetary incentive. It includes to employees in the profits of 
basic pay, dearness allowance the organisation. This serves 
and other allowances. Salary to motivate the employees to 

Reprint 2025-26



182 Business Studies

improve their performance and Non-financial incentives mainly focus 
contribute to increase in profits. on these needs. Some times, monetary 

 (v) Co­partnership/ Stock option: aspect may be involved in non-financial 
Under these incentive schemes, incentives as well. However, the 
employees are offered company emphasis is to provide psychological 
shares at a set price which is lower and emotional satisfaction rather 
than market price. Sometimes, than money driven satisfaction. For 
management may allot shares in example, if an individual gets promo-
line of various incentives payable tion in the organisation, it satisfies 
in cash. The allotment of shares him psychologically more as he gets a 
creates a feeling of ownership to feeling of elevation, increase in status, 
the employees and makes them increase in authority, challenge in the 
to contribute for the growth job etc., Though promotion involves 
of the organisation. In Infosys payment of extra money, non-monetary 
the scheme of stock option has aspects over-ride monetary aspects.
been implemented as a part of Some of the important non-financial 
managerial compensation. incentives are discussed below:

 (vi) Retirement Benefits: Several  (i) Status: In the organisational 
retirement benefits such as context, status means ranking 
provident fund, pension, and of positions in the organisation. 
gratuity provide financial The authority, responsibility, 
security to employees after their rewards, recognition, perquisites 
retirement. This acts as an and prestige of job indicate 
incentive when they are in service the status given to a person 
in the organisation. holding a managerial position. 

 (vii) Perquisites: In many companies Psychological, social and esteem 
perquisites and fringe benefits needs of an individual are satisfied 
are offered such as car allowance, by status given to their job.
housing, medical aid, and  (ii) Organisational Climate: Organi-
education to the children, etc., sational climate indicates the 
over and above the salary. characteristics which describe 
These measures help to provide an organisation and distinguish 
motivation to the employees/ one organisation from the other. 
managers. These characteristics influence 

Non-Financial Incentives: All the the behaviour of individuals in 
needs of individuals are not satisfied the organisation. Some of these 
by money alone. Psychological, social characteristics are–individual 
and emotional factors also play autonomy, reward orientation, 
important role in providing motivation. consideration to employees, 

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 183

risk-tasking, etc., If managers appreciation is given to the work 
take positive measures regarding performed by employees, they 
these aspects, it helps to develop feel motivated to perform/work 
better organisational climate. at higher level. Some examples of 

 (iii) Career Advancement Opportunity: employee recognition are:
Every individual wants to n Congratulating the employee 
grow to the higher level in for good performance.
the organisation. Managers n Displaying on the notice board 
should provide opportunity to or in the company news letter 
employees to improve their skills about the achievement of 
and be promoted to the higher employee.
level jobs. Appropriate skill n Installing award or certificate 
development programmes, and for best performance.
sound promotion policy will help n Distributing mementos, com-
employees to achieve promotions. plimentaries like T -shirts 
Promotion works as a tonic and in recognition of employee 
encourages employees to exhibit services.
improved performance. n Rewarding an employee for 

 (iv) Job Enrichment: Job enrichment giving valuable suggestions.
is concerned with designing jobs  (vi) Job security: Employees want 
that include greater variety of their job to be secure. They want 
work content, require higher certain stability about future 
level of knowledge and skill; income and work so that they 
give workers more autonomy do not feel worried on these 
and responsibility; and provide aspects and work with greater 
the opportunity for personal zeal. In India, this aspect is 
growth and a meaningful work more important considering the 
experience. If jobs are enriched inadequate job opportunities and 
and made interesting, the job itself too many aspirants for these. 
becomes a source of motivation to However, there is one negative 
the individual. aspect of job security. When 

 (v) Employee Recognition programmes: people feel that they are not 
Most people have a need for likely to lose their jobs, they may 
evaluation of their work and due become complacent.
recognition. They feel that what  (vii) Employee participation: It means 
they do should be recognised by involving employees in decision 
others concerned. Recognition making of the issues related to 
means acknowledgment with a them. In many companies, these 
show of appreciation. When such programmes are in practice in 

Reprint 2025-26



184 Business Studies

the form of joint management success without such great leaders. 
committees, work committees, The leaders always play a key role 
canteen committees etc., for the success and excellence of any 

 (viii)Employee Empowerment: Empo- organisation.
werment means giving more Let us understand the concept 
autonomy and powers to of leadership, its importance and 
subordinates. Empowerment qualities of good leaders. Leadership 
makes people feel that their is the process of influencing the 
jobs are important. This feeling behaviour of people by making 
contributes positively to the use them strive voluntarily towards 
of skills and talents in the job achievement of organisational goals. 
performance. Leadership indicates the ability 

of an individual to maintain good 
leadershIp interpersonal relations with followers 
Whenever we hear the success and motivate them to contribute for 
stories of any organisation, we are achieving organisational objectives.
immediately reminded of their leaders. 
Can you imagine Mircrosoft without Features of leadership
Bill Gates, Reliance Industries without An examination of the above defi-
Ambanis, Infosys without Narayana nition reveals the following important 
Murthy, Tata without J.R.D. Tata features of leadership:
or Wipro without Azim Premji. You  (i) Leadership indicates ability of an 
would say it is not possible to achieve individual to influence others.

Definitions of Leadership
Leadership is the activity of influencing people to strive willingly for group objectives.

George Terry
Leadership is the art or process of influencing people so that they will strive willingly and 
enthusiastically towards the achievement of group goals.

Harold Koontz and Heinz Weihrich
Leadership is a set of interpersonal behaviours designed to influence employees to cooperate 
in the achievement of objectives.

Glueck
Leadership is both a process and property. The process of leadership is the use of non-
coercive influence to direct and coordinate the activities of the members of an organised 
group towards the accomplishment of group objectivities. As a property, leadership is the set 
of qualities or characteristics attributed to those who are perceived to successfully employ 
such influence.

Gay and Strake

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 185

 (ii) Leadership tries to bring change related factors like – their skills, 
in the behaviour of others. knowledge, commitment, willingness 

 (iii) Leadership indicates interperso- to cooperate, team spirit etc., make 
nal relations between leaders and a person an effective leader. It is said 
followers. that followers make a person, a good 

 (iv) Leadership is exercised to achieve leader by acceptance of leadership. 

common goals of the organisation. Therefore, it is to be recognised that 
both leader and follower play key role 

 (v) Leadership is a continuous 
in leadership process.

process.
Importance of Leadership: 

The term leader emerges from 
Leadership is a key factor in making 

leadership. An individual possessing 
any organisation successful. History 

attributes of leadership is known reveals that, many times, difference 
as leader. While discussing about between success and failure of an 
leadership, it is important to under- organisation is leadership. It is aptly 
stand leader–follower relationship. mentioned by Stephen Covey, a 
Many times, the success of an famous management consultant, that 
organisation is attributed to the managers are important but leaders 
leader, but due credit is not given are vital for lasting organisational 
to the followers. Many followers success. A leader not only commits 

Effective leadership is getting work 
done, tasks completed on time and goals 
achieved at minimum cost

Reprint 2025-26



186 Business Studies

his followers to organisational goals  (v) Leader provides training to their 
but also pools needed resources, subordinates. A good leader 
guides and motivates subordinates to always builds up his successor 
reach the goals. and helps in smooth succession 

The importance of leadership can process.
be discussed from the following However, we should remember that 
benefits to the organisation: all good leaders may not necessarily 
 (i) Leadership influences the posses all the qualities of a good 

behaviour of people and makes leader. In fact, it is not possible for 
them to positively contribute any individual to have all the qualities. 
their energies for the benefit of But an understanding about these 
the organisation. Good leaders qualities help the managers to acquire 
always produce goods results them through training and conscious 
through their followers. efforts.

 (ii) A leader maintains personal Leadership Style
relations and helps followers There are many theories of leadership 
in fulfilling their needs. He behaviour and styles. Research 
provides needed confidence, studies have revealed certain traits 
support and encouragement and and qualities which a leader might 
thereby creates congenial work possess. However, these are not 
environment. conclusive since many people may 

 (iii) Leader plays a key role in possess these qualities but may not 
introducing required changes in be leaders. 
the organisation. He persuades, There are several bases for classifying 
clarifies and inspires people to leadership styles. The most popular 
accept changes whole-heartedly. classification of leadership styles is 
Thus, he overcomes the problem based on the use of authority. Depending 
of resistance to change and on the use of authority, there are three 
introduces it with minimum basic styles of leadership:
discontentment.  (i) Autocratic (ii) Democratic, and

 (iv) A leader handles conflicts  (iii) Laissez-faire
effectively and does not allow  (i) Autocratic or Authoritarian leader 
adverse effects resulting from the   An autocratic leader gives orders 
conflicts. A good leader always and expects his subordinates to 
allows his followers to ventilate obey those orders.  If a manager 
their feelings and disagreement is following this style, then 
but persuades them by giving communication is only one-way 
suitable clarifications. with the subordinate only acting 

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 187

according to the command given  (iii) Laissez faire or Free-rein leader 
by the manager.   Such a leader does not believe in the 

  This leader is dogmatic, i.e., use of power unless it is absolutely 
does not change or wish to be essential. The followers are given 
contradicted. His following is a high degree of independence to 
based on the assumption that formulate their own objectives and 
reward or punishment both can be ways to achieve them. The group 
given depending upon the result. members work on their own tasks 
This leadership style is effective resolving issues themselves.  The 

in getting productivity in many manager is there only to support 

situations like in a factory where them and supply them the 

the supervisor is responsible for required information to complete 

production on time and has to the task assigned. At the same 

ensure labour productivity. Quick time, the subordinate assumes 

decision-making is also facilitated. responsibility for the work to be 

   But there are variations also, performed. 

they may listen to everyone’s Depending upon the situation 

opinion, consider subordinates a leader may choose to exercise a 

ideas and concerns but the combination of these styles when 

decision will be their own. required. Even a laissez faire leader 

 (ii) Democratic or Participative would have certain rules to be followed 

leader while doing work and a democratic 
  A democratic leader will develop leader may have to take his own 

action plans and makes decision in an emergency situation.
decisions in consultation 

coMMunIcatIon 
with his subordinates. He will 
encourage them to participate Communication plays key role in 

in decision-making. This kind of the success of a manager. How 

leadership style is more common much professional knowledge and 
now-a-days, since leaders also intelligence a manager possesses 
recognise that people perform becomes immaterial if he is not 
best if they have set their own able to communicate effectively 
objectives. They also need to with his subordinates and create 
respect the other’s opinion and understanding in them. Directing 
support subordinates to perform abilities of a manager mainly depend 
their duties and accomplish upon his communication skills. That 
organisational objectives. They is why organisation always emphasise 
exercise more control by using on improving communication skills of 
forces within the group.           managers as well as employees.

Reprint 2025-26



188 Business Studies

Definitions of Communication
Communication is the sum of all things one person does when he wants to create understanding 
in the mind of another. It involves systematic and continuous process of telling, listening and 
understanding.

Louis Allen
Communication is transfer of information from the sender to the receiver with the information 
being understood by the receiver.

Harold Koontz and Heniz Weihrich
Communication is a process by which people create and share information with one another 
in order to reach common understanding.

Rogers

Effective Communication 
increases managerial efficiency A close examination of above 

definitions reveals that communication 
is the process of exchange of infor-
mation between two or more persons 
to reach common understanding.

Elements of Communication 
Process
Communication has been defined 
as a process. This process involves 
elements like source, encoding, 
media/channel, receiver, decoding, 

 The word communication has noise and feedback. The process is 
been derived from the Latin word represented in the figure. 
‘communis’ which means ‘common’ The elements involved in commu-
which consequently implies common nication process are explained below:
understanding. Communication is  (i) Sender: Sender means person who 
defined in different ways. Generally, it conveys his thoughts or ideas to 
is understood as a process of exchange the receiver. The sender represents 
of ideas, views, facts, feelings, etc., source of communication.
between or among people to create  (ii) Message: It is the content of ideas, 
common understanding. feelings, suggestions, order, etc., 

Some of the definitions given by intended to be communicated.
management experts are presented  (iii) Encoding: It is the process of 
in the box. converting the message into 

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 189

communication symbols such as may be caused to sender, message 
words, pictures, gestures etc., or receiver. Some examples of 

 (iv) Media: It is the path through which noise are:
encoded message is transmitted (a) Ambiguous symbols that lead 
to receiver. The channel may be in to faulty encoding.
written form, face to face, phone (b) A poor telephone connection. 
call, Internet etc., (c) An inattentive receiver.

 (v) Decoding: It is the process of (d) Faulty decoding (attaching 
converting encoded symbols of wrong meanings to message).
the sender. (e) Prejudices obstructing the poor 

 (vi) Receiver: The person who understanding of message.

receives communication of the (f ) Gestures and postures that 

sender. may distort the message.

 (vii) Feedback: It includes all those Importance of Communication
actions of receiver indicating that Communication is one of the most 
he has received and understood central aspects of managerial 
message of sender. activities. It has been estimated that 

 (viii) Noise: Noise means some a manager spends 90 percent of his 
obstruction or hindrance to time in communicating-reading, 
communication. This hindrance writing, listening, guiding, instructing, 

Encoding Decoding

Sender Message Media Receiver

Noise

Feedback

Communication Process

Reprint 2025-26



190 Business Studies

approving, reprimanding, etc. Effect- active working unit that achieves 
iveness of a manager depends common objectives. It is only 
significantly on his ability to communication which makes 
communicate effectively with his smooth working of an enterprise 
superiors, subordinates and external possible. Communication is basic 
agencies such as bankers, suppliers, to an organisation’s existence-
union and government. right from its birth through 

An ex-president of American its continuing life. When 
Management Association once communication stops, organised 
observed that number one management activity ceases to exist.
problem today is communication.  (iii) Acts as basis of decision making: 
Bernard has called it the foundation Communication provides needed 
of all group activities. Communication information for decision making. 
serves as the lubricant fostering In its absence, it may not be 
for the smooth operations of the possible for the managers to take 
management process. The importance any meaningful decision. Only 
of communication in management on the basis of communication 
can be judged from the following: of relevant information one can 
 (i) Acts as basis of coordination: take right decision.

Communication acts as basis  (iv) Increases managerial efficiency: 
of coordination. It provides Communication is essential for 
coordination among departments, quick and effective performance 
activities and persons in the of managerial functions. The 
organisation. Such coordination management conveys the goals 

is provided by explaining about and targets, issues instructions, 

organisational goals, the mode allocates jobs and responsibilities 
and looks after the performance 

 of their achievement and inter 
 of subordinates. Communication 
relationships between different 

is involved in all these aspects. 
individuals, etc. Thus, communication lubricates 

 (ii) Helps in smooth working of the entire organisation and keeps 
an enterprise: Communication the organisation at work with 
makes possible for the smooth efficiency.
and unrestricted working of the  (v) Promotes cooperation and indust­
enterprise. All organisational rial peace: Efficient operation is the 
interactions depend on comm- aim of all prudent management. It 
unications. The job of a manager may be possible only when there 
is to coordinate the human is industrial peace in the factory 
and physical elements of an and mutual cooperation between 
organisation into an efficient and management and workers. The 

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 191

two way communication promotes tion may take place between a superior 
cooperation and mutual underst- and subordinate, a subordinate and 
anding between the management superior or among same cadre emplo-
and workers. yees or managers. The communications 

 (vi) Establishes effective leadership: may be oral or written but generally 
Communication is the basis of recorded and filed in the office.
leadership. Effective commu- Formal communication may be 
nication helps to influence further classified as – Vertical and 
subordinates. While influencing Horizontal.
people, leader should possess Vertical communication flows 
good communication skills. vertically, i.e., upwards or downwards 

 (vii) Boosts morale and provides through formal channels. Upward 

motivation: An efficient system of communications refer to flow of 

communication enables manage- communication from subordinate 

ment to motivate, influence to superior whereas downward 

and satisfy the subordinates. communication indicates commu-

Good communication assists nication from a superior to 

the workers in their adjustment subordinate. The examples of upward 

with the physical and social communication are – application 

aspect of work. It improves good for grant of leave, submission of 

human relations in industry. progress report, request for grants, etc. 

Communication is the basis of Similarly, the examples of downward 

participative and democratic communication include – sending 
pattern of management. Comm- notice to employees to attend a meeting, 

unication helps to boost morale ordering subordinates to complete an 

of employees and managers. assigned work, passing on guidelines 
framed by top management to the 

forMal and InforMal subordinates, etc.
Horizontal or lateral communication 

coMMuncIatIon takes place between one division and 
Communication taking place within another. For example, a production 
an organisation may be broadly manager may contact marketing 
classified as formal and informal manager to discuss about schedule 
communication. of product delivery, product design, 

quality, etc.
Formal Communication

The pattern through which 
Formal communication flows through communication flows within the 
official channels designed in the organisation is generally indicated 
organisation chart. This communica- through communication network. 

Reprint 2025-26



192 Business Studies

Chain Wheel Circular Free Flow Inverted V

Communication Network

Different types of communication  (iv) Free flow: In this network, each 
networks may operate in formal person can communicate with 
organisation. Some of the popular others freely. The flow of commu-
communication networks are nication is fast in this network.
presented and discussed in given  (v) Inverted V: In this network, a 
figure. subordinate is allowed to comm-
 (i) Single chain: This network exists unicate with his immediate 

between a supervisor and his superior as well as his superiors 
subordinates. Since many levels superior. However, in later case, 
exist in an organisation structure, only prescribed communication 
communication flows from every takes place.
superior to his subordinate through 
single chain. Informal Communication

 (ii) Wheel: In wheel network, all Communication that takes place 
subordinates under one superior without following the formal lines of 
communicate through him only communication is said to be informal 
as he acts as a hub of the wheel. communication. Informal system of 
The subordinates are not allowed communication is generally referred to 
to talk among themselves. as the ‘grapevine’ because it spreads 

 (iii) Circular: In circular network, the throughout the organisation with its 
communication moves in a circle. branches going out in all directions 
Each person can communicate in utter disregard to the levels of 
with his adjoining two persons. authority.
In this network, communication The informal communication 
flow is slow. arises out of needs of employees to 

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 193

Gossip Network Probability Network Cluster Network

Grapevine Communication Networks

exchange their views, which cannot should make use of positive aspects 
be done through formal channels. of informal channels and minimise 
Workers chit chating in a canteen negative aspects of this channel 
about the behaviour of the superior, of communication.
discussing about rumours that some Grapevine Network
employees are likely to be transferred Grapevine communication may 
are some examples of informal follow different types of network. 
communications. The grapevine/

In single strand network, each 
informal communication spreads 

person communicates to the other in 
rapidly and sometimes gets distorted. sequence. In gossip network, 
It is very difficult to detect the source each person communicates with 
of such communication. It also leads all on non-selective basis. In 
to generate rumours which are not probability network, the individual 
authentic. People’s behaviour is affected communicates randomly with other 
by rumours and informal discussions individual. In cluster, the individual 
and sometimes may hamper work communicates with only those 
environment. Sometimes, grapevine people whom he trusts. Of these four 
channels may be helpful as they carry types of networks, cluster is the most 
information rapidly and, therefore, popular in organisations.
may be useful to the manager at times. Barriers to Communication
Informal channels are used by the It is generally observed that 
managers to transmit information so managers face several problems due 
as to know the reactions of his/her to communication breakdowns or 
subordinates. An intelligent manager barriers. These barriers may prevent 

Reprint 2025-26

Single Strand Network



194 Business Studies

a communication or filter part of it 
or carry incorrect meaning due to 
which misunder standings may be 
created. Therefore, it is important for 
a manager to identity such barriers 
and take measures to overcome them.

The barriers to communication in the 
organisations can be broadly grouped 
as: semantic barriers, psychological 
barriers, organisational barriers, and 
personal barriers. These are briefly Communication Grapevine
discussed below:

Semantic barriers: Semantics is consider these three sentences 

the branch of linguistics dealing with where the work ‘value’ is used:

the meaning of words and sentences. (a) What is the value of this ring? 

Semantic barriers are concerned (b) I value our friendship.

with problems and obstructions (c) What is the value of learning 
computer skills?

in the process of encoding and 
 You will find that the ‘value’ 

decoding of message into words 
gives different meaning in 

or impressions. Normally, such different contexts. Wrong 
barriers result on account of use of perception leads to comm-
wrong words, faulty translations, unication problems.
different interpretations, etc. These  (iii) Faulty translations: Sometimes 
are discussed below: the communications originally 
 (i) Badly expressed message: Some drafted in one language (e.g., 

times intended meaning may English) need to be translated 
not be conveyed by a manager to the language understandable 

to his subordinates. These to workers (e.g., Hindi). If the 

badly expressed messages may translator is not proficient with 
both the languages, mistakes 

be an account of inadequate 
may creep in causing different 

vocabulary, usage of wrong 
meanings to the communication.

words, omission of needed 
 (iv) Unclarified assumptions: Some 

words, etc. communications may have certain 
 (ii) Symbols with different meanings: assumptions which are subject 

A word may have several mean- to different interpretations. For 
ings. Receiver has to perceive one example, a boss may instruct 
such meaning for the word used his subordinate, “Take care of 
by communicator. For example, our guest”. Boss may mean that 

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 195

subordinate should take care of may be due to pre-conceived 
transport, food, accommodation notions or prejudices against the 
of the guest until he leaves the communication.
place. The subordinate may  (ii) Lack of attention: The pre-
interpret that guest should occupied mind of receiver and the 
be taken to hotel with care. 

resultant non-listening of message 
Actually, the guest suffers due to 
these unclarified assumptions. acts as a major psychological 

 (v) Technical  jargon: It is usually barrier. For instance, an employee 
found that specialists use technical explains about his problems to 
jargon while explaining to persons the boss who is pre-occupied with 
who are not specialists in the an important file before him. The 
concerned field. Therefore, they boss does not grasp the message 
may not understand the actual and the employee is disappointed. 
meaning of many such words.  (iii) Loss by transmission and poor 

 (vi) Body language and gesture 
decoding: Every movement retention: When communication 

of body communicates some passes through various levels, 
meaning. The body movement successive transmissions of 
and gestures of communicator the message results in loss of, 
matters so much in conveying or transmission of inaccurate 
the message. If there is no information. This is more so in 
match between what is said case of oral communication.
and what is expressed in body   Poor retention is another problem. 
movements, communications 

Usually people cannot retain 
may be wrongly perceived.

Psychological barriers: Emotional the information for a long time 
or psychological factors acts as if they are inattentive or not 
barriers to communicators. For interested.
example, a worried person cannot  (iv) Distrust: Distrust between comm-
communicate properly and an angry unicator and communicate 
receiver cannot understand the real acts as a barrier. If the parties 
meaning of message. The state of do not believe each other, they 
mind of both sender and receiver 

can not understand each others 
of communication reflects in the 
effective communication. Some of message in its original sense.

the psychological barriers are: Organisational barriers: The factors 
 (i) Premature evaluation: Some related to organisation structure, 

times people evaluate the authority relationships, rules and 
meaning of message before the regulations may, sometimes, act as 
sender completes his message. barriers to effective communication. 
Such premature evaluation Some of these barriers are:

Reprint 2025-26



196 Business Studies

 (i) Organisational policy: If the of these facilities may create 
organisational policy, explicit communication problems.
or implicit, is not supportive to Personal barriers: The personal 
free flow of communication, it factors of both sender and receiver 
may hamper effectiveness of may exert influence on effective 
communications. For example, communication. Some of the 
in an organisation with highly personal barriers of superiors and 
centralised pattern, people may subordinates are mentioned below:
not be encouraged to have free  (i) Fear of challenge to authority: 
communication. If a superior perceives that a 

 (ii) Rules and regulations: Rigid rules particular communication may 
and cumbersome procedures may adversely affect his authority, he 
be a hurdle to communication. or she may withhold or suppress 
Similarly, communications such communication.
through prescribed channel may  (ii) Lack of confidence of superior 
result in delays. on his subordinates: If superiors 

 (iii) Status: Status of superior do not have confidence on 
may create psychological the competency of their 
distance between him and his subordinates, they may not seek 

subordinates. A status conscious their advice or opinions.

manager also may not allow his  (iii) Unwillingness to communicate: 

subordinates to express their Sometimes, subordinates may 

feelings freely. not be prepared to communicate 

 (iv) Complexity in organisation with their superiors, if they 

structure: In an organisation where perceive that it may adversely 

there are number of managerial affect their interests.

levels, communication gets  (iv) Lack of proper incentives: If there 

delayed and distorted as number is no motivation or incentive for 

of filtering points are more. communication, subordinates 

 (v) may not take initiative to 
Organisational facilities: If 

communicate. For example, if 
facilities for smooth, clear and 

there is no reward or appreciation 
timely communications are not 

for a good suggestion, the 
provided communications may 

subordinates may not be willing 
be hampered. Facilities like 

to offer useful suggestions.
frequent meetings, suggestion 
box, complaint box, social and Improving Communication 
cultural gathering, transparency Effectiveness 

in operations, etc., will encourage The barriers to effective  communi-
free flow of communication. Lack cation exists in all organisations to a 

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 197

greater or lesser degree. Organisations are the important aspects 
keen on developing effective communi- of effective communication. 
cation should adopt suitable measures The language used should be 
to overcome the barriers and improve understandable to the receiver 
communication effectiveness. Some and should not offend the 
such measures are indicated below: sentiments of listeners. The 
 (i) Clarify the ideas before message should be stimulating 

communication:  The problem to evoke response from 

to be communicated to the listeners.
 (v) Convey things of help and value 

subordinates should be clear 
to listeners: While conveying 

in all its perspective to the 
message to others, it is better to 

executive himself. The entire 
know the interests and needs of 

problem should be studied in the people with whom you are 
depth, analysed and stated in communicating. If the message 
such a manner that is clearly relates directly or indirectly 
conveyed to subordinates. to such interests and needs it 

 (ii) Communicate according to certainly evokes response from 
the needs of receiver: The level communicatee.
of understanding of receiver  (vi) Ensure proper feedback: The 
should be crystal clear to the communicator may ensure 
communicator. Manager should the success of communication 
adjust his communication by asking questions regarding 
according to the education the message conveyed. The 
and understanding levels of receiver of communication 
subordinates. may also be encouraged to 

 (iii) Consult others before respond to communication. 

communicating: Before The communication process 
may be improved by the 

actually communicating the 
feedback received to make it 

message, it is better to involve 
more responsive.

others in developing a plan for  (vii) Communicate for present as well 
communication. Participation as future: Generally, commun-
and involvement of subordinates ication is needed to meet the 
may help to gain ready acceptance existing commitments to maintain 
and willing cooperation of consistency, the communication 
subordinates. should aim at future goals of the 

 (iv) Be aware of languages, tone and enterprise also.
content of message: The contents  (viii) Follow up communications: There 
of the message, tone, language should be regular follow up and 
used, manner in which the review on the instructions given 
message is to be communicated to subordinates. Such follow 

Reprint 2025-26



198 Business Studies

up measures help in removing and attentive listening solves 
hurdles if any in implementing half of the problems. Managers 
the instructions. should also give indications of 

 (ix) Be a good listener: Manager their interest in listening to their 
should be a good listener. Patient subordinates. 

Key Terms 

Directing  Supervision  Motives  Motivation  Incentives  
Self actualisation  Egoistic needs  Leadership  Trait approach  
Communication  Encoding  Decoding  Feedback

Semanticism  Formal communication  
Informal communication  Profit sharing  Copartnership   

Quality circles  Stock options 

Summary

Directing is a complex managerial function consisting of all the 
activities that are designed to encourage subordinates to work 
effectively. It includes supervision, motivation, communication 
and leading. The principles which guide effective directing may 
be classified as principles related to the purpose of directing and 
principles related to direction process. 
Supervision: It is an element of direction. It can be understood 
as a process as well as the functions performed by supervisor (a 
position at operative level). Supervision is very important as it is 
closely linked to overseeing the work, guiding and ensuring that 
targets are met by workers and employees. 
Motivation: Motivation is the process of stimulating people to action 
to accomplish desired goals of organisation. It is an internal feeling 
of an individual and leads to goal directed behaviour. Motivation 
is mainly based on needs of individuals. It helps individuals and 
groups in the organisation for improved performance. 

Managers offer incentives to employees both financial and 
non financial. Financial incentives are monetary and may be 
in the form of salary, bonus, profit sharing, pension, etc. Non 
financial incentives provide social and psychological satisfaction. 

Reprint 2025-26



Directing 199

These include status, promotion, responsibility, job enrichment, 
job recognition, job security, employee participation, delegation, 
empowerment etc. 
Leadership: Leadership is most important factor in the 
success of an enterprise. It is the process of influencing 
people to strive willingly for group objectives. The qualities of 
a good leader have been researched by many experts. Some 
of the qualities of good leader include–courage, will power, 
judgement, knowledge, integrity, physical energy, faith, moral 
qualities, fairness, vitality, decisiveness, social skills etc. But 
all these qualities cannot be possessed by one individual nor 
always help in their success. 
Communication: Communication refers to process of exchange 
of ideas between or among persons and create understanding. 
Communication process involves the elements of source, encoding, 
channel, receiver, decoding and feedback. In organisations, both 
formal and informal communications simultaneously takes place. 
Formal communications refers to all official communications in 
the form of orders, memos, appeals, notes, circulars, agenda, 
minutes, etc. Apart from formal communications, informal or 
grapevine communications also exist. Informal communications 
are usually in the form of rumours, whispers, etc. They are 
unofficial, spontaneous, unrecorded, spread very fast and usually 
distorted. A manager should learn to manage with informal 
communication also. In most of the organisations, several barriers 
may exist for effective communications. Some of these barriers 
include – semantic barriers, organisational barriers, language 
barriers, transmission barriers, psychological barriers and 
personal barriers. Managers should take appropriate measures 
to overcome these barriers and promote effective communication 
in the organisation. 

Exercises

 Very Short Answer Type

1. What is informal communication?

2. Which style of leadership does not believe in use of power 
unless it is absolutely essential?

3. Which element in the communication process involves 
converting the message into words, symbols, gestures etc.? 

Reprint 2025-26



200 Business Studies

4. The workers always try to show their inability when any new 
work is given to them. They are always unwilling to take up 
any kind of work. Due to sudden rise in demand a firm wants 
to meet excess orders. The supervisor is finding it difficult 
to cope up with the situation. State the element of directing 
that can help the supervisor in handling the problem.

Short Answer Type

1. What are semantic barriers of communication?

2. Explain the process of motivation with the help of a diagram.

3. State the different networks of grapevine communications.

4. Explain any three principles of Directing. 

5. In an organisation, one of the departmental manager is 
inflexible and once he takes a decision, he does not like to 
be contradicted. As a result, employees always feel they are 
under stress and they take least initiative and fear to express 
their opinions and problems before the manager. What is the 
problem in the way authority is being used by the manager?

6. A reputed hostel, GyanPradan provides medical aid and free 
education to children of its employees. Which incentive is 
being highlighted here? State its category and name any two 
more incentives of the same category.

Long Answer Type

1. Discuss Maslow’s Need Hierarchy theory of motivation.

2. What are the common barriers to effective communication? 
Suggest measures to overcome them.

3. Explain different financial and non-financial incentives used 
to motivate employees of a company?

4. In an organisation all the employees take things easy and 
are free to approach anyone for minor queries and problems. 
This has resulted in everyone taking to each other and thus 
resulting in inefficiency in the office. It has also resulted in 
loss of secrecy and confidential information being leaked 
out. What system do you think the manager should adopt to 
improve communication?

Reprint 2025-26

##8##

CONTROLLING 8
CHAPTER

Departure Control Systems (DCS)

A Departure Control System (DCS) L E A R N I N G 

automates processing an airlines airport O B J E C T I V E S
management operations which includes 
managing the informant required for airport After studying this chapter, 
check-in, printing boarding pass, baggage you should be able to:
acceptance, boarding load control and 
aircraft checks. Today almost 98% of DCS n Explain the meaning of 
manage e-ticket using interface from a controlling;
number of devices including check-in kiosks, 
online check-in, mobile boarding pass and n State the importance of 
baggage handling. DCS are able to identify controlling;
and capture updated reservations from an 
airline computer reservation system for n Describe the relationship 
passengers called passenger name record between planning and 
(PNR). A DCS is used to update reservations controlling;
typically as ckecked-in, boarded, and 
flown or another status. Additionally and n Explain the steps in the 
increasingly a DCS or some city fare sectors process of controlling; and
may also interface with immigration control 
for visa, immigration and passenger no fly n Describe the techniques of 
watch list. controlling.

It is quite clear from the example the standards set in advance so that 
that all managers need to manage organisational goals are achieved.
situations intelligently and take 
corrective action before any damage Meaning of Controlling

is done to the business. Controlling Controlling is one of the important 
function of management comes to functions of a manager. In order 
the rescue of a manager here. It not to seek planned results from the 
only helps in keeping a track on subordinates, a manager needs to 
the progress of activities but also exercise effective control over the 
ensures that activities conform to activities of the subordinates. In other 

Reprint 2025-26



202 Business Studies

words, controlling means ensuring planning in the future periods. Thus, 
that activities in an organisation are controlling only completes one cycle 
performed as per the plans. Controlling of management process and improves 
also ensures that an organisation’s planning in the next cycle.
resources are being used effectively 
and efficiently for the achievement of Importance of Controlling
predetermined goals. Controlling is, Control is an indispensable function 
thus, a goal-oriented function. of management. Without control the 

Controlling function of a manager best of plans can go awry. A good 
is a pervasive function. It is a primary control system helps an organisation 
function of every manager. Managers in the following ways:
at all levels of management— top,  (i) Accomplishing organisational 
middle and lower-need to perform goals: The controlling function 
controlling functions to keep a measures progress towards the 
control over activities in their organisational goals and brings 
areas. Moreover, controlling is as to light the deviations, if any, 
much required in an educational and indicates corrective action. 
institution, military, hospital, and a It, thus, guides the organisation 
club as in any business organisation. and keeps it on the right track so 

Controlling should not be misunde- that organisational goals might 
rstood as the last function of manage- be achieved.
ment. It is a function that brings  (ii) Judging accuracy of standards: 
back the management cycle back to A good control system enables 
the planning function. The controlling management to verify whether 
function finds out how far actual the standards set are accurate 
performance deviates from standards, and objective. An efficient control 
analyses the causes of such deviations system keeps a careful check 
and attempts to take corrective actions on the changes taking place 
based on the same. This process in the organisation and in the 
helps in formulation of future plans environment and helps to review 
in the light of the problems that were and revise the standards in light 
identified and, thus, helps in better of such changes.

Managerial Control implies the measurement of accomplishment against the standard and 
the correction of deviations to assure attainment of objectives according to plans.

Koontz and O’ Donnel

Reprint 2025-26



Controlling 203

 (iii) Making efficient use of The box explains how an import-
resources: By exercising control, export company was able to track 
a manager seeks to reduce wastage dishonest employees by using 
and spoilage of resources. Each computer monitoring as a part 
activity is performed in accordance of their control system.
with predetermined standards  (vi) Facilitating coordination in 
and norms. This ensures that action: Controlling provides 
resources are used in the most direction to all activities and 
effective and efficient manner. efforts for achieving organisational 

 (iv) Improving employee motivation: goals. Each department and 
A good control system ensures employee is governed by pre-
that employees know well in determined standards which 
advance what they are expected are well coordinated with one 
to do and what are the standards another. This ensures that 
of performance on the basis of overall organisational objectives 
which they will be appraised. It, are accomplished.
thus, motivates them and helps 

Limitations of Controlling
them to give better performance.

 (v) Ensuring order and discipline: Although controlling is an important 

Controlling creates an atmosphere function of management, it suffers 

of order and discipline in the from the following limitations.

organisation. It helps to minimise  (i) Difficulty in setting quantitative 
dishonest behaviour on the part standards: Control system loses 
of the employees by keeping a some of its effectiveness when 
close check on their activities. standards cannot be defined in 

Control Through Computer Monitoring

Managers at a New York City import-export company suspected that two employees were 
robbing it. Corporate Defense Strategies (CDS) of Maywood, New Jersey, advised the firm 
to install a software program that could secretly log every single stroke of the suspects’ 
computer keys and send an encrypted e-mail report to CDS. Investigators revealed that 
the two employees were deleting orders from the corporate books after processing them, 
pocketing the revenues, and building their own company from within. The programme 
picked up on their plan to return to the office late one night to steal a large shipment of 
electronics. Police hid in the rafters of the firm’s warehouse, and when the suspects entered, 
they were arrested. The pair was charged with embezzling $3 million over two and a half 
years, a sizable amount of revenue for a $25 million-a-year firm.

Source: Hellriegel Don, Susan E. Jackson and John W. Slocum Jr., Management:  
A Competency-based Approach 

Reprint 2025-26



204 Business Studies

quantitative terms. This makes a strict watch with the help 
measurement of performance and of Closed Circuit Televisions 
their comparison with standards (CCTVs).
a difficult task. Employee morale,  (iv) Costly affair: Control is a costly 
job satisfaction and human affair as it involves a lot of 
behaviour are such areas where expenditure, time and effort. A 
this problem might arise. small enterprise cannot afford 

 (ii) Little  control on external to install an expensive control 
factors:  Generally an enterprise system. It cannot justify the 
cannot control external factors expenses involved. Managers 
such as government policies, must ensure that the costs of 
t e c h n o l o g i c a l  c h a n g e s , installing and operating a control 
competition etc. system should not exceed the 

 (iii) Resistance from employees: benefits derived from it.
Control is often resisted by The box on Control System at 
employees. They see it as a FedEx gives an overview of the 
restriction on their freedom. control system used by FedEx and 
For instance, employees might how it helped FedEx to increase its 
object when they are kept under profits.

Remain level headed  
even when things go wrong

Reprint 2025-26



Controlling 205

Relationship between Planning desired action. Planning is thus, 

and Controlling prescriptive whereas, controlling is 
evaluative.

Planning and controlling are 
It is often said that planning is looking 

inseparable twins of management. 
ahead while controlling is looking 

A system of control presupposes the 
back. However, the statement is only 

existence of certain standards. These 
partially correct. Plans are prepared 

standards of performance which for future and are based on forecasts 
serve as the basis of controlling are about future conditions. Therefore, 
provided by planning. Once a plan planning involves looking ahead and 
becomes operational, controlling is is called a forward-looking function. 
necessary to monitor the progress, On the contrary, controlling is like a 
measure it, discover deviations and postmortem of past activities to find 
initiate corrective measures to ensure out deviations from the standards. In 
that events conform to plans. Thus, that sense, controlling is a backward-
planning without controlling is looking function. However, it should 
meaningless. Similarly, controlling be understood that planning is guided 
is blind without planning. If the by past experiences and the corrective 
standards are not set in advance, action initiated by control function 
managers have nothing to control. aims to improve future performance. 
When there is no plan, there is no Thus, planning and controlling are 
basis of controlling. both backward-looking as well as a 

Planning is clearly a prerequisite forward-looking function.
for controlling. It is utterly foolish Thus, planning and controlling are 
to think that controlling could be interrelated and, in fact, reinforce 
accomplished without planning. each other in the sense that
Without planning there is no  1. Planning based on facts makes 
predetermined understanding of the controlling easier and effective; 
desired performance. Planning seeks and
consistent, integrated and articulated  2. Controlling improves future 
programmes while controlling seeks planning by providing information 
to compel events to conform to plans. derived from past experience.

Planning is basically an intellectual 
process involving thinking, articulation Controlling Process
and analysis to discover and prescribe Controlling is a systematic process 
an appropriate course of action for involving the following steps.
achieving objectives. Controlling,  1. Setting performance standards
on the other hand, checks whether  2. Measurement of actual 
decisions have been translated into performance

Reprint 2025-26



206 Business Studies

 3. Comparison of actual effort must be made to define them 
performance with standards in a manner that would make their 

 4. Analysing deviations measurement easier. For instance, for 
 5. Taking corrective action improving customer satisfaction in a 

Step 1: Setting Performance Stan­ fast food chain having self-service, 

dards: The first step in the controlling standards can be set in terms of time 

process is setting up of performance taken by a customer to wait for a table, 

standards. Standards are the criteria time taken by him to place the order 

against which actual performance and time taken to collect the order.

would be measured. Thus, standards It is important that standards 

serve as benchmarks towards which should be flexible enough to be 

an organisation strives to work. modified whenever required. Due to 
changes taking place in the internal 

Standards can be set in both 
and external business environment, 

quantitative as well as qualitative 
standards may need some modification 

terms. For instance, standards set 
to be realistic in the changed business 

in terms of cost to be incurred, 
environment.

revenue to be earned, product units 
Step 2: Measurement of Actual 

to be produced and sold, time to 
Performance: Once performance 

be spent in performing a task, all 
standards are set, the next step is 

represents quantitative standards. 
measurement of actual performance. 

Sometimes standards may also be Performance should be measured in 
set in qualitative terms. Improving an objective and reliable manner. 
goodwill and motivation level of There are several techniques for 
employees are examples of qualitative measurement of performance. These 
standards. The table in the next page include personal observation, sample 
gives a glimpse of standards used in checking, performance reports, etc. 
different functional areas of business As far as possible, performance 
to gauge performance. should be measured in the same 

At the time of setting standards, a units in which standards are set as 
manager should try to set standards this would make their comparison 
in precise quantitative terms as this easier.
would make their comparison with It is generally believed that 
actual performance much easier. For measurement should be done after 
instance, reduction of defects from 10 the task is completed. However, 
in every 1,000 pieces produced to 5 in wherever possible, measurement 
every 1,000 pieces produced by the of work should be done during the 
end of the quarter. However, whenever performance. For instance, in case of 
qualitative standards are set, an assembling task, each part produced 

Reprint 2025-26



Controlling 207

should be checked before assembling. Thus, in large organisations, certain 
Similarly, in a manufacturing plant, pieces are checked at random for 
levels of gas particles in the air could quality. This is known as sample 
be continuously monitored for safety. checking.

Measurement of performance of an Step 3: Comparing Actual Per­
employee may require preparation of formance with Standards: This 
performance report by his superior. step involves comparison of actual 
Measurement of a company’s performance with the standard. Such 
performance may involve calculation comparison will reveal the deviation 
of certain ratios like gross profit ratio, between actual and desired results. 
net profit ratio, return on investment, Comparison becomes easier when 
etc., at periodic intervals. Progress standards are set in quantitative 
of work in certain operating areas terms. For instance, performance of 
like marketing may be measured a worker in terms of units produced 
by considering the number of units in a week can be easily measured 
sold, increase in market share, etc., against the standard output for the 
whereas, efficiency of production week.
may be measured by counting the Step 4: Analysing Deviations: 
number of pieces produced and Some deviation in performance can 
number of defective pieces in a be expected in all activities. It is, 
batch. In small organisations, each therefore, important to determine the 
piece produced may be checked to acceptable range of deviations. Also, 
ensure that it conforms to quality deviations in key areas of business 
specifications laid down for the need to be attended more urgently 
product. However, this might not as compared to deviations in certain 
be possible in a large organisation. insignificant areas. Critical point 

Standards used in Functional Areas to Gauge Performance

Production Marketing Human Resource Finance and
Management Accounting

Quantity Sales volume Labour relations Capital expenditures

Quality Sales expense Labour turnover Inventories

Cost Advertising Labour absenteeism Flow of capital
expenditures

Individual job Individual Liquidity

Performance Sales-person’s 
performance

Reprint 2025-26



208 Business Studies

control and management by exception significant deviations which go 
should be used by a manager in this beyond the permissible limit 
regard. should be brought to the notice of 
 1. Critical Point Control: It is neither management. Thus, if the plans 

economical nor easy to keep a lay down 2 per cent increase in 
check on each and every activity labour cost as an acceptable range 
in an organisation. Control of deviation in a manufacturing 
should, therefore, focus on key organisation, only increase in 
result areas (KRAs) which are labour cost beyond 2 per cent 
critical to the success of an should be brought to the notice 
organisation. These KRAs are set of the management. However, in 
as the critical points. If anything case of major deviation from the 
goes wrong at the critical points, standard (say, 5 per cent), the 
the entire organisation suffers. matter has to receive immediate 
For instance, in a manufacturing action of management on a 
organisation, an increase of priority basis.
5 per cent in the labour cost The box below highlights the 
may be more troublesome than advantages of critical point control 
a 15 per cent increase in postal and management by exception.
charges. After identifying the deviations that 

 2. Management by Exception: demand managerial attention, these 
Management by exception, which deviations need to be analysed for their 
is often referred to as control causes. Deviations may have multiple 
by exception, is an important causes for their origin. These include 
principle of management control unrealistic standards, defective 
based on the belief that an attempt process, inadequacy of resources, 
to control everything results in structural drawbacks, organisational 
controlling nothing. Thus, only constraints and environmental factors 

Advantages of Critical Point Control and Management by Exception
When a manager sets critical points and focuses attention on significant deviations which 
cross the permissible limit, the following advantages accrue:
1. It saves the time and efforts of managers as they deal with only significant deviations.
2. It focuses managerial attention on important areas. Thus, there is better utilisation of 

managerial talent.
3. The routine problems are left to the subordinates. Management by exception, thus, 

facilitates delegation of authority and increases morale of the employees.
4. It identifies critical problems which need timely action to keep the organisation in right 

track.

Reprint 2025-26



Controlling 209

beyond the control of the organisation. occur again and standards are 
It is necessary to identify the exact accomplished.

cause(s) of deviations, failing which, Corrective action might involve 
training of employees if the production 

an appropriate corrective action might 
target could not be met. Similarly, 

not be possible. The deviations and if an important project is running 
their causes are then reported and behind schedule, corrective action 
corrective action taken at appropriate might involve assigning of additional 
level. workers and equipment to the 
Step 5: Taking Corrective Action: project and permission for overtime 

The final step in the controlling work. In case the deviation cannot 
be corrected through managerial 

process is taking corrective action. 
action, the standards may have to be 

No corrective action is required when 
revised. The table below cites some 

the deviations are within acceptable of the causes of deviations and the 
limits. However, when the deviations respective corrective action that 
go beyond the acceptable range, might be taken by a manager.
especially in the important areas, The information in the box in next page 
it demands immediate managerial gives an account of how Saco Defense 
attention so that deviations do not was able to control a crisis situation.

Remedial Plan of Action:  
Analysing deviations

Reprint 2025-26



210 Business Studies

Key Terms

Controlling  Critical point control  Management by exception

Breakeven analysis  Budgetary control  Return on investment 

Ratio analysis  Responsibility accounting  Management audit 

PERT and CPM  Management  Information system

Summary

n Controlling is the process of ensuring that actual activities 
conform to planned activities.

n The importance of managerial control lies in the fact that it helps 
in accomplishing organisational goals. Controlling also helps in 
judging accuracy of standards, ensuring efficient utilization of 
resources, boosting employee morale, creating an atmosphere 
of order and discipline in the organisation and coordinating 
different activities so that they all work together in one direction 
to meet targets.

n Controlling suffers from certain limitations also. An organisation 
has no control over external factors. The control system of an 
organisation may face resistance from its employees. Sometimes 
controlling turns out to be a costly affair, especially in case of 
small organisations. Moreover, it is not always possible for 
the management to set quantitative standards of performance 
in the absence of which controlling exercise loses some of its 
effectiveness.

n The process of control involves setting performance standards, 
measurement of actual performance, comparison of actual 
performance with standards, analysis of deviations and taking 
corrective action.

n Planning and controlling are inseparable twins of management. 
Planning initiates the process of management and controlling 
completes the process. Plans are the basis of control and without 
control the best laid plans may go astray.

n Personal observation, statistical reports, breakeven analysis 
and budgetary control are traditional techniques of managerial 
control.

n Return on investment, ratio analysis, responsibility accounting, 
management audit, PERT and CPM and Management Information 
System are modern techniques of managerial control. 

Reprint 2025-26



Controlling 211

Exercises

Very Short Answer Type

1.  State the meaning of controlling.

2.  Name the principle that a manager should consider while 
dealing with deviations effectively. State any one situation 
in which an organisation’s control system loses its 
effectiveness.

3.  State any one situation in which an organisation’s control 
system loses is effectiveness. 

4.  Give any two standards that can be used by a company 
to evaluate the performance of its Finance & Accounting 
department. 

5.  Which term is used to indicate the difference between 
standard performance and actual performance? 

Short Answer Type

1.  ‘Planning is looking ahead and controlling is looking back.’ 
Comment.

2.  ‘An effort to control everything may end up in controlling 
nothing.’ Explain.

3.  Explain how management audit serves as an effective 
technique of controlling.

4.  Mr.Arfaaz had been heading the production department of 
Writewell Products Ltd., a firm manufacturing stationary 
items. The firm secured an export order that had to be 
completed on a priority basis and production targets were 
defined for all the employees. One of the workers, Mr.Bhanu 
Prasad, fell short of his daily production target by 10 
units for two days consecutively. Mr.Arfaaz approached 
MsVasundhara, the CEO of the Company, to file a complaint 
against MrBhanu Prasad and requested her to terminate his 
services. Explain the principle of management control that 
MsVasundhara should consider while taking her decision. 
(Hint: Management by exception).

Reprint 2025-26



212 Business Studies

Long Answer Type

1.  Explain the various steps involved in the process of control.

2.  Explain the techniques of managerial control.

3.  Explain the importance of controlling in an organisation. 
What are the problems faced by the organisation in 
implementing an effective control system?

4.  Discuss the relationship between planning and controlling.

5.  A company ‘M’ limited is manufacturing mobile phones 
both for domestic Indian market as well as for export. 
It had enjoyed a substantial market share and also 
had a loyal customer following. But lately it has been 
experiencing problems because its targets have not been 
met with regard to sales and customer satisfaction. Also 
mobile market in India has grown tremendously and new 
players have come with better technology and pricing. 
This is causing problems for the company. It is planning 
to revamp its controlling system and take other steps 
necessary to rectify the problems it is facing.
a.  Identify the benefits the company will derive from a 

good control system.
b.  How can the company relate its planning with control 

in this line of business to ensure that its plans are 
actually implemented and targets attained.

c.  Give the steps in the control process that the company 
should follow to remove the problems it is facing

6.  Mr Shantanu is a chief manager of a reputed company that 
manufactures garments. He called the production manager 
and instructed him to keep a constant and continuous 
check on all the activities related to his department so that 
everything goes as per the set plan. He also suggested him 
to keep a track of the performance of all the employees 
in the organisation so that targets are achieved effectively 
and efficiently. 
a.  Describe any two features of Controlling highlighted 

in the above situation.(Goal Oriented, continuous and 
pervasive – any 2).

b.  Explain any four points of importance of Controlling.

Reprint 2025-26



Notes

Reprint 2025-26



Notes

Reprint 2025-26