Computer Science

TexTbook for  Class xII

Reprint 2025-26



12130 – Computer SCienCe 
ISBN 978-93-5292-338-0

Textbook for Class XII

First Edition
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

September 2020 Bhadrapada 1942  No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the 

Reprinted prior permission of the publisher.

September 2021 Bhadrapada 1943  This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way 
of  trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed off 

December 2021 Agrahayana 1943 without the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover 

October 2022 Kartika 1944 other than that in which it is published.

 The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page. 
March 2024 Chaitra 1946 Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or 

by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.

OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION  

DIVISION, NCERT

PD 25T SU NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road 
© National Council of Educational Hosdakere Halli Extension

Research and Training, 2020 Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446

CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454

CWC Complex 
Maligaon   
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869

 250.00
Publication Team

Head, Publication : Anup Kumar Rajput
Division

Chief Editor : Shveta Uppal

Chief Production Officer : Arun Chitkara

Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar
watermark Manager (In charge)

Assistant Production : Sunil Kumar
Published at the Publication Division Officer
by the Secretary, National Council of 
Educational Research and Training, 
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 Cover and Layout

and printed at Shree Vrindavan Graphics Meetu Sharma, DTP Operator, DESM
(P) Ltd., E-34, Sector-7, Noida 201 301 
Uttar Pradesh

Reprint 2025-26



Foreword 

Computer science as a discipline has evolved over the years and has 
emerged as a driving force of our socio-economic activities. It has made 
continuous inroads into diverse areas — be it business, commerce, science, 
technology, sports, health, transportation or education. With the advent 
of computer and communication technologies, there has been a paradigm 
shift in teaching-learning at the school level. The role and relevance of this 
discipline is in focus because the expectations from the school pass-outs 
have grown to be able to meet the challenges of the 21st century. Today, we 
are living in an interconnected world where computer-based applications 
influence the way we learn, communicate, commute or even socialise!

There is a demand for software engineers in various fields like 
manufacturing, services, etc. Today, there are a large number of successful 
startups delivering different services through software applications. All 
these have resulted in generating interest for this subject among students 
as well as parents.

Development of logical thinking, reasoning and problem-solving skills 
are fundamental building blocks for knowledge acquisition at the higher 
level. Computer plays a key role in problem solving with focus on logical 
representation or reasoning and analysis.

This textbook focuses on the fundamental concepts and 
problem-solving skills while opening a window to the emerging and 
advanced areas of computer science. The newly developed syllabus 
has dealt with the dual challenge of reducing curricular load as well as 
introducing this ever evolving discipline. This textbook also provides space 
to Computational Thinking and Artificial Intelligence, which envisaged in 
National Education Policy, 2020.

As an organisation committed to systemic reforms and continuous 
improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and 
suggestions which will enable us to revise the content of the textbook. 
          

          HrusHikesH senapaty

Director
New Delhi         National Council of Educational
August 2020                      Research and Training 

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26



Preface 

In the present education system of our country, specialised or discipline 
based courses are introduced at the higher secondary stage. This stage 
is crucial as well as challenging because of the transition from general 
to discipline-based curriculum. The syllabus at this stage needs to have 
sufficient rigour and depth while remaining mindful of the comprehension 
level of the learners. Further, the textbook should not be heavily loaded 
with content.

Computers have permeated in every facet of life. Study of basic concepts 
of computer science has been desirable in education. There are courses 
offered in the name of Computer Science, Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT), Information Technology (IT), etc., by various boards and 
schools up to secondary stage, as optional. These mainly focus on using 
computer for word processing, presentation tools and application software.

Computer Science (CS) at the higher secondary stage of school education 
is also offered as an optional subject. At this stage, students usually opt 
for CS with an aim of pursuing a career in software development or related 
areas, after going through professional courses at higher levels. Therefore, 
at higher secondary stage, the curriculum of CS introduces basics of 
computing and sufficient conceptual background of Computer Science.

The primary focus is on fostering the development of computational 
thinking and problem-solving skills. This book has 13 chapters covering 
the following broader themes:

• Data Structure: understanding of important data structure Stack, 
Queue; Searching and Sorting techniques.

• Database: basic understanding of data, database concepts, and 
relational database management system using MySQL. Structured 
query language — data definition, data manipulation and data 
querying.

• Programming: handling errors and exceptions in programs written 
in Python; handling files and performing file operations in Python.

• Network and Communication: fundamentals of Computers 
networks, devices, topologies, Internet, Web and IoT, DNS. Basics 
of Data communication — transmission channel, media; basics of 
protocols, mobile communication generations.

• Security Aspects: introduction to basic concepts related to network 
and Internet security, threats and prevention.

Each chapter has two additional components — (i) activities and (ii) 
think and reflect for self assessment while learning as well as to generate 
further interest in the learner. A number of hands-on examples are given to 
gradually explain methodology to solve different types of problems across 
the Chapters. The programming examples as well as the exercises in the 

Reprint 2025-26



vi

chapters are required to be solved in a computer and verify with the given 
outputs.

Box items are pinned inside the chapters either to explain related 
concepts or to describe additional information related to the topic covered 
in that section. However, these box-items are not to be assessed through 
examinations.

Project Based Learning given as the end includes exemplar projects 
related to real-world problems. Teachers are supposed to assign these or 
similar projects to be developed in groups. Working in such projects may 
promote peer-learning, team spirit and responsiveness.

 The chapters have been written by involving practicing teachers 
as well as subject experts. Several iterations have resulted into this 
book. Thanks are due to the authors and reviewers for their valuable 
contribution. I would like to place on record appreciation for Professor 
Om Vikas for leading the review activities of the book as well as for his 
guidance and motivation to the development team throughout. Comments 
and suggestions are welcome.

New Delhi Rejaul Karim Barbhuiya

20 August 2020 Assistant Professor 
 Central Institute of 
                                                                            Educational Technology 

Reprint 2025-26



Textbook Development Committee  

ChIef advIsor

Om Vikas, Professor (Retd.), Former Director, ABV-IIITM, Gwalior, M.P.

MeMbers

Anju Gupta, Freelance Educationist, Delhi

Anuradha Khattar, Assistant Professor, Miranda House, University of Delhi

Chetna Khanna, Freelance Educationist, Delhi

Faheem Masoodi, Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science, 
University of Kashmir

Harita Ahuja, Assistant Professor, Acharya Narendra Dev College, University 
of Delhi

Mohini Arora, HOD, Computer Science, Air Force Golden Jubilee Institute, 
Subroto Park, Delhi

Mudasir Wani, Assistant Professor, Govt. College for Women Nawakadal, 
Sri Nagar, Jammu and Kashmir

Naeem Ahmad, Assistant Professor, Madanapalle Institute of Technology 
and Science, Madanapalle, Andhra Pradesh

Purvi Kumar, Co-ordinator, Computer Science Department, Ganga 
International School, Rohtak Road, Delhi

Priti Rai Jain, Assistant Professor, Miranda House, University of Delhi

Sangita Chadha, HOD, Computer Science, Ambience Public School, 
Safdarjung Enclave, Delhi

Sharanjit Kaur, Associate Professor, Acharya Narendra Dev College, 
University of Delhi

MeMber-CoordInaTor

Rejaul Karim Barbhuiya, Assistant Professor, CIET, NCERT, Delhi

Reprint 2025-26



Acknowledgements 

The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges 
the valuable contributions of the individuals and organisations involved in 
the development of Computer Science textbook for Class XII.

The Council expresses its gratitude to the syllabus development team 
including MPS Bhatia, Professor, Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology, Delhi; 
T. V. Vijay Kumar, Professor, School of Computer and Systems Sciences, 
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi; Zahid Raza, Associate Professor, 
School of Computer and Systems Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, 
New Delhi; Vipul Shah, Principal Scientist, Tata Consultancy Services, 
and the CSpathshala team; Aasim Zafar, Associate Professor, Department 
of Computer Science, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh; Faisal Anwer, 
Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science, Aligarh Muslim 
University, Aligarh; Smruti Ranjan Sarangi, Associate Professor, Department 
of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi; 
Vikram Goyal, Associate Professor, Indraprastha Institute of Information 
Technology (IIIT), Delhi; and Mamur Ali, Assistant Professor, Department of 
Teacher Training and Non-formal Education (IASE), Faculty of Education, 
Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi.

The Council is thankful to the following resource persons for providing 
valuable inputs in developing this book — Veer Sain Dixit, Assistant Professor, 
Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, University of Delhi; Mukesh Kumar, 
DPS RK Puram, Delhi; Aswin K. Dash, Mother’s International School, Delhi; 
Anamika Gupta, Assistant Professor, Shaheed Sukhdev College of Business 
Studies, University of Delhi, Sajid Yousuf Bhat, Assistant Professor, 
University of Kashmir, Jammu and Kashmir.

The council is grateful to Prof. Sunita Farkya, Head, Department of 
Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT and Prof. Amarendra P. 
Behera, Joint Director, CIET, NCERT for their valuable cooperation and 
support throughout the development of this book.

 The Council also gracefully acknowledges the contributions of Meetu 
Sharma, Graphic Designer cum DTP Operator; Kanika Walecha, DTP Operator; 
Pooja, Junior Project Fellow; in shaping this book. The contributions of the 
office of the APC, DESM and Publication Division, NCERT, New Delhi, in 
bringing out this book are also duly acknowledged.

The Council also acknowledges the contribution of  Ankeeta Bezboruah 
Assistant Editor (Contractual) Publication Division, NCERT for copy editing 
this book. The efforts of Naresh Kumar, DTP Operator (Contractual), 
Publication Division, NCERT are also acknowledged.

Reprint 2025-26



Contents

Foreword  iii

PreFace  v

ChapTer 1 exCepTIon handlIng In pyThon 1
1.1 Introduction 1

1.2 Syntax Errors 1

1.3 Exceptions 3

1.4 Built-in Exceptions 3

1.5 Raising Exceptions 4

1.6 Handling Exceptions 7

1.7 Finally Clause 13

ChapTer 2 fIle handlIng In pyThon 19
2.1 Introduction to Files 19

2.2.Types of Files 20

2.3 Opening and Closing a Text File 21

2.4 Writing to a Text File 23

2.5 Reading from a Text File 25

2.6 Setting Offsets in a File 28

2.7 Creating and Traversing a Text File 29

2.8 The Pickle Module 32

ChapTer 3 sTaCk 39
3.1 Introduction 39

3.2 Stack 40

3.3 Operations on Stack 42

3.4 Implementation of Stack in Python  43

3.5 Notations for Arithmetic Expressions 46

3.6 Conversion from Infix to Postfix Notation 47
3.7 Evaluation of Postfix Expression  49

ChapTer 4 Queue 53
4.1 Introduction to Queue 53

4.2 Operations on Queue      55

Reprint 2025-26



x

4.3 Implementation of Queue using Python 56

4.4 Introduction to Deque 59

4.5 Implementation of Deque Using Python 61

ChapTer 5 sorTIng 67
5.1 Introduction 67

5.2 Bubble Sort 68

5.3 Selection Sort 71

5.4 Insertion Sort 74

5.5 Time Complexity of Algorithms 77

ChapTer 6 searChIng 81
6.1 Introduction 81

6.2 Linear Search 82

6.3 Binary Search 85

6.4 Search by Hashing 90

ChapTer 7 undersTandIng daTa 97
7.1 Introduction to Data 97

7.2 Data Collection 101

7.3 Data Storage 102

7.4 Data Processing 102

7.5 Statistical Techniques for Data Processing 103

ChapTer 8 daTabase  ConCepTs 111
8.1 Introduction 111

8.2 File System 112

8.3 Database Management System 115

8.4 Relational Data Model 120

8.5 Keys in a Relational Database   123

ChapTer 9 sTruCTured Query language (sQl) 131
9.1 Introduction 131

9.2 Structured Query Language (SQL)  131

9.3 Data Types and Constraints in MySQL 133

9.4 SQL for Data Definition 134
9.5 SQL for Data Manipulation 141

9.6 SQL for Data Query  144

9.7 Data Updation and Deletion 154

9.8 Functions in SQL  156

9.9 GROUP BY Clause in SQL 167

Reprint 2025-26



xi

9.10 Operations on Relations  169

9.11 Using Two Relations in a Query 172

ChapTer 10 CoMpuTer neTworks 181
10.1 Introduction to Computer Networks 181

10.2 Evolution of Networking 183

10.3 Types of Networks 184

10.4 Network Devices 187

10.5 Networking Topologies 191

10.6 Identifying Nodes in a Networked Communication  194 

10.7 Internet, Web and the Internet of Things 195

10.8 Domain Name System 197

ChapTer 11 daTa CoMMunICaTIon 203
11.1 Concept of Communication 203

11.2 Components of data Communication 204

11.3 Measuring Capacity of Communication Media 205

11.4 Types of Data Communication 206

11.5 Switching Techniques 208

11.6 Transmission Media  209

11.7 Mobile Telecommunication Technologies 215

11.8 Protocol 216

ChapTer 12 seCurITy aspeCTs 223
12.1 Threats and Prevention 223

12.2 Malware 224

12.3 Antivirus 230

12.4 Spam 231

12.5 HTTP vs HTTPS 231

12.6 Firewall 232

12.7 Cookies 233

12.8 Hackers and Crackers 234

12.9 Network Security Threats 235

ChapTer 13 projeCT based learnIng 241
13.1 Introduction 241

13.2 Approaches for Solving Projects 242

13.3 Teamwork 243

13.4 Project Descriptions  245 

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26



Chapter
##1##
Exception Handling 

1 in Python

“I like my code to be elegant and efficient. The logic 
should be straightforward to make it hard for bugs to hide, 
the dependencies minimal to ease maintenance, error handling 
complete according to an articulated strategy, and performance 

close to optimal so as not to tempt people to make the code messy 
with unprincipled optimization. Clean code does one thing well.” 

— Bjarne Stroustrup

In this Chapter

» Introduction

» Syntax Errors

» Exceptions 1.1 IntroductIon

» Built-in Exceptions Sometimes while executing a Python program, the 
program does not execute at all or the program 

» Raising Exceptions
executes but generates unexpected output or 

» Handling Exceptions
behaves abnormally. These occur when there are 

» Finally Clause syntax errors, runtime errors or logical errors in 
the code. In Python, exceptions are errors that 
get triggered automatically. However, exceptions 
can be forcefully triggered and handled through 
program code. In this chapter, we will learn about 
exception handling in Python programs.

1.2 Syntax ErrorS

Syntax errors are detected when we have not 
followed the rules of the particular programming 
language while writing a program. These errors are 
also known as parsing errors. On encountering a 
syntax error, the interpreter does not execute the 
program unless we rectify the errors, save and 

Reprint 2025-26



rerun the program. When a syntax error is encountered 
while working in shell mode, Python displays the name 
of the error and a small description about the error as 
shown in Figure 1.1.

 

Figure 1.1: A syntax error displayed in Python shell mode

So, a syntax error is reported by the Python 
interpreter giving a brief explanation about the error 
and a suggestion to rectify it. 

Similarly, when a syntax error is encountered while 
running a program in script mode as shown in Figure 
1.2, a dialog box specifying the name of the error (Figure 
1.3) and a small description about the error is displayed. 

Figure 1.2: An error in the script 

Figure 1.3: Error dialog box

2 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



1.3 ExcEptIonS

Even if a statement or expression is syntactically 
correct, there might arise an error during its execution. 
For example, trying to open a file that does not exist, 
division by zero and so on. Such types of errors might 
disrupt the normal execution of the program and are 
called exceptions.

An exception is a Python object that represents an 
error. When an error occurs during the execution of a 
program, an exception is said to have been raised. Such 
an exception needs to be handled by the programmer 
so that the program does not terminate abnormally. 
Therefore, while designing a program, a programmer 
may anticipate such erroneous situations that may arise 
during its execution and can address them by including 
appropriate code to handle that exception.

It is to be noted that SyntaxError shown at Figures 
1.1 and 1.3 is also an exception. But, all other exceptions 
are generated when a program is syntactically correct. 

1.4 BuIlt-In ExcEptIonS

Commonly occurring exceptions are usually defined 
in the compiler/interpreter. These are called built-in 
exceptions. 

Python’s standard library is an extensive collection 
of built-in exceptions that deals with the commonly 
occurring errors (exceptions) by providing the 
standardized solutions for such errors. On the occurrence 
of any built-in exception, the appropriate exception 
handler code is executed which displays the reason 
along with the raised exception name. The programmer 
then has to take appropriate action to handle it. Some 
of the commonly occurring built-in exceptions that can 
be raised in Python are explained in Table 1.1.

Table 1.1 Built-in exceptions in Python

Name of the Built-
S. No Explanation

in Exception

1. SyntaxError It is raised when there is an error in the syntax of the Python code.

2. ValueError It is raised when a built-in method or operation receives an argument 
that has the right data type but mismatched or inappropriate values.

3. IOError It is raised when the file specified in a program statement cannot be 
opened.

eXCeption Handling in pytHon 3

Reprint 2025-26



4 KeyboardInterrupt It is raised when the user accidentally hits the Delete or Esc key 
while executing a program due to which the normal flow of the 
program is interrupted.

5 ImportError It is raised when the requested module definition is not found.
6 EOFError It is raised when the end of file condition is reached without reading 

any data by input().

7 ZeroDivisionError It is raised when the denominator in a division operation is zero.

8 IndexError It is raised when the index or subscript in a sequence is out of range.

9 NameError It is raised when a local or global variable name is not defined.
10 IndentationError It is raised due to incorrect indentation in the program code.

11 TypeError It is raised when an operator is supplied with a value of incorrect 
data type.

12 OverFlowError It is raised when the result of a calculation exceeds the maximum 
limit for numeric data type.

Figure 1.4 shows the built-in exceptions viz, 
ZeroDivisionError, NameEError, and TypeError raised 
by the Python interpreter in different situations.

 
Figure 1.4: Example of built-in exceptions

A programmer can also create custom exceptions to 
suit one’s requirements. These are called user-defined 
exceptions. We will learn how to handle exceptions in 
the next section. 

1.5 raISIng ExcEptIonS

Each time an error is detected in a program, the Python 
interpreter raises (throws) an exception. Exception 

4 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



handlers are designed to execute when a specific 
exception is raised. Programmers can also forcefully 
raise exceptions in a program using the raise and assert 
statements. Once an exception is raised, no further 
statement in the current block of code is executed. So, 
raising an exception involves interrupting the normal 
flow execution of program and jumping to that part of 
the program (exception handler code) which is written 
to handle such exceptional situations.

1.5.1 The raise Statement

The raise statement can be used to throw an exception. 
The syntax of raise statement is:

raise exception-name[(optional argument)]

The argument is generally a string that is displayed 
when the exception is raised. For example, when an 
exception is raised as shown in Figure 1.5, the message 
“OOPS : An Exception has occurred” is displayed along 
with a brief description of the error.

Figure 1.5: Use of the raise statement to throw an exception

The error detected may be a built-in exception or 
may be a user-defined one. Consider the example given 
in Figure 1.6 that uses the raise statement to raise a 
built-in exception called IndexError.

Note: In this case, the user has only raised the exception but 
has not displayed any error message explicitly. 

In Figure 1.6, since the value of variable length 
is greater than the length of the list numbers, an 
IndexError exception will be raised. The statement 
following the raise statement will not be executed. So 
the message “NO EXECUTION” will not be displayed in 
this case.

eXCeption Handling in pytHon 5

Reprint 2025-26



As we can see in Figure 1.6, in addition to the 
error message displayed, Python also displays a stack 
Traceback. This is a structured block of text that 
contains information about the sequence of function 
calls that have been made in the branch of execution of 
code in which the exception was raised. In Figure 1.6, 
the error has been encountered in the most recently 
called function that has been executed.

  
Figure 1.6: Use of raise statement with built-in exception

Note: We will learn about Stack in Chapter 3.

1.5.2 The assert Statement

An assert statement in Python is used to test an 
expression in the program code. If the result after testing 
comes false, then the exception is raised. This statement 
is generally used in the beginning of the function or after 
a function call to check for valid input. The syntax for 
assert statement is:
       assert Expression[,arguments]

On encountering an assert statement, Python 
evaluates the expression given immediately after 
the assert keyword. If this expression is false, an 
AssertionError exception is raised which can be handled 
like any other exception. Consider the code given in 
Program 1-1.   

Program 1-1 Use of assert statement

print("use of assert statement")
def negativecheck(number):
    assert(number>=0), "OOPS... Negative Number"

6 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



    print(number*number)
print (negativecheck(100))
print (negativecheck(-350))

Figure 1.7:  Output of Program 1-1. 

In the code, the assert statement checks for the 
value of the variable number. In case the number gets 
a negative value, AssertionError will be thrown, and 
subsequent statements will not be executed. Hence, 
on passing a negative value (-350) as an argument, it 
results in AssertionError and displays the message 
“OOPS…. Negative Number”. The output of the code is 
shown in Figure 1.7.

1.6 HandlIng ExcEptIonS

Each and every exception has to be handled by the 
programmer to avoid the program from crashing 
abruptly. This is done by writing additional code in 
a program to give proper messages or instructions to 
the user on encountering an exception. This process is 
known as exception handling. 

1.6.1 Need for Exception Handling

Exception handling is being used not only in Python 
programming but in most programming languages like 
C++, Java, Ruby, etc. It is a useful technique that helps 
in capturing runtime errors and handling them so as to 
avoid the program getting crashed. Following are some 

eXCeption Handling in pytHon 7

Reprint 2025-26



of the important points regarding exceptions and their 
handling:

• Python categorises exceptions into distinct types so 
that specific exception handlers (code to handle that 
particular exception) can be created for each type.

• Exception handlers separate the main logic of the 
program from the error detection and correction 
code. The segment of code where there is any 
possibility of error or exception, is placed inside one 
block. The code to be executed in case the exception 
has occurred, is placed inside another block. These 
statements for detection and reporting the exception 
do not affect the main logic of the program.

• The compiler or interpreter keeps track of the exact 
position where the error has occurred.

• Exception handling can be done for both user-defined 
and built-in exceptions.

1.6.2 Process of Handling Exception

When an error occurs, Python interpreter creates an 
object called the exception object. This object contains 
information about the error like its type, file name and 
position in the program where the error has occurred. 
The object is handed over to the runtime system so that 

A runtime system 
refers to the it can find an appropriate code to handle this particular 

execution of the exception. This process of creating an exception object 
statements given in and handing it over to the runtime system is called 
the program. It is a throwing an exception. It is important to note that 
complex mechanism 

when an exception occurs while executing a particular 
consisting of 
hardware and program statement, the control jumps to an exception 
software that handler, abandoning execution of the remaining 

comes into action program statements.
as soon as the 

program, written in The runtime system searches the entire program 
any programming for a block of code, called the exception handler that 

language, is put for can handle the raised exception. It first searches for 
execution.

the method in which the error has occurred and the 
exception has been raised. If not found, then it searches 
the method from which this method (in which exception 
was raised) was called. This hierarchical search in 
reverse order continues till the exception handler is 
found. This entire list of methods is known as call stack. 
When a suitable handler is found in the call stack, it 
is executed by the runtime process. This process of 

8 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



executing a suitable handler is known as catching the 
exception. If the runtime system is not able to find an 
appropriate exception after searching all the methods in 
the call stack, then the program execution stops.

The flowchart in Figure 1.8 describes the exception 
handling process.

 
Figure 1.8: Steps of handling exception

1.6.3 Catching Exceptions

An exception is said to be caught when a code that is 
designed to handle a particular exception is executed. 
Exceptions, if any, are caught in the try block and 

eXCeption Handling in pytHon 9

Reprint 2025-26



handled in the except block. While writing or debugging 
a program, a user might doubt an exception to occur 
in a particular part of the code. Such suspicious 
lines of codes are put inside a try block. Every try 
block is followed by an except block. The appropriate 
code to handle each of the possible exceptions (in 
the code inside the try block) are written inside the 
except clause. 

While executing the program, if an exception is 
encountered, further execution of the code inside the 
try block is stopped and the control is transferred to 
the except block. The syntax of try … except clause 
is as follows:

 try:

[ program statements where exceptions might occur]
except [exception-name]:

[ code for exception handling if the exception-name error is 
encountered]

Consider the Program 1-2 given below:

Program 1-2  Using try..except block

print ("Practicing for try block")
try:
    numerator=50
    denom=int(input("Enter the denominator"))
    quotient=(numerator/denom)
    print(quotient)
    print ("Division performed successfully")
except ZeroDivisionError:
    print ("Denominator as ZERO.... not allowed")
print(“OUTSIDE try..except block”)

In Program 1-2, the ZeroDivisionError exception 
is handled. If the user enters any non-zero value as 
denominator, the quotient will be displayed along with 
the message “Division performed successfully”, as 
shown in Figure 1.10. The except clause will be skipped 
in this case. So, the next statement after the try..except 
block is executed and the message “OUTSIDE try..
except block” is displayed.

However, if the user enters the value of denom as 
zero (0), then the execution of the try block will stop. 
The control will shift to the except block and the 
message “Denominator as Zero…. not allowed” will 
be displayed, as shown in Figure 1.11. Thereafter, the 

10 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



statement following the try..except block is executed 
and the message “OUTSIDE try..except block” is 
displayed in this case also.

Figure 1.9: Output without an error   

Figure 1.10: Output with exception raised

Sometimes, a single piece of code might be suspected 
to have more than one type of error. For handling such 
situations, we can have multiple except blocks for a 
single try block as shown in the Program 1-3.

Program 1-3  Use of multiple except clauses

print ("Handling multiple exceptions")
try:
    numerator=50
    denom=int(input("Enter the denominator: "))
    print (numerator/denom)
    print ("Division performed successfully")
except ZeroDivisionError:
    print ("Denominator as ZERO is not allowed")
except ValueError:
    print ("Only INTEGERS should be entered")

eXCeption Handling in pytHon 11

Reprint 2025-26



In the code, two types of exceptions (ZeroDivisionError 
and ValueError) are handled using two except blocks 
for a single try block. When an exception is raised, 
a search for the matching except block is made till 
it is handled. If no match is found, then the program 
terminates.

However, if an exception is raised for which no 
handler is created by the programmer, then such an 
exception can be handled by adding an except clause 
without specifying any exception. This except clause 
should be added as the last clause of the try..except 
block. The Program 1-4 given below along with the 
output given in Figure 1.11 explains this.

Program 1-4 Use of except without specifying an exception

print ("Handling exceptions without naming them")
try:
    numerator=50
    denom=int(input("Enter the denominator"))
    quotient=(numerator/denom)
    print ("Division performed successfully")
except ValueError:
    print ("Only INTEGERS should be entered")
except:
    print(" OOPS.....SOME EXCEPTION RAISED")

If the above code is executed, and the denominator 
entered is 0 (zero) , the handler for ZeroDivisionError 
exception will be searched. Since it is not present, the 
last except clause (without any specified exception) 
will be executed , so the message “ OOPS.....SOME 
EXCEPTION RAISED” will be displayed.

Figure 1.11: Output of Program 1-4

1.6.4 try...except…else clause

We can put an optional else clause along with the 
try...except clause. An except block will be executed 

12 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



only if some exception is raised in the try block. But if 
there is no error then none of the except blocks will 
be executed. In this case, the statements inside the 
else clause will be executed. Program 1-5 along with 
its output explains the use of else block with the try...
except block.  

Program 1-5 Use of else clause

print ("Handling exception using try...except...else")
try:
    numerator=50
    denom=int(input("Enter the denominator: "))
    quotient=(numerator/denom)
    print ("Division performed successfully")

except ZeroDivisionError:
    print ("Denominator as ZERO is not allowed")

except ValueError:
    print ("Only INTEGERS should be entered")

else:
   print ("The result of division operation is ", quotient)
 

Output:

Figure 1.12:  Output of Program 1-5.

1.7 FInally clauSE

The try statement in Python can also have an optional 
finally clause. The statements inside the finally block 
are always executed regardless of whether an exception 
has occurred in the try block or not. It is a common 
practice to use finally clause while working with files 
to ensure that the file object is closed. If used, finally 
should always be placed at the end of try clause, after 
all except blocks and the else block.

eXCeption Handling in pytHon 13

Reprint 2025-26



Program 1-6 Use of finally clause

print ("Handling exception using try...except...else...finally")
try:
 numerator=50
 denom=int(input("Enter the denominator: "))
 quotient=(numerator/denom)
 print ("Division performed successfully")
except ZeroDivisionError:
 print ("Denominator as ZERO is not allowed")
except ValueError:
 print ("Only INTEGERS should be entered")
else:
 print ("The result of division operation is ", quotient)
finally:
 print ("OVER AND OUT") 

In the above program, the message “OVER AND OUT” 
will be displayed irrespective of whether an exception is 
raised or not.

1.6.1 Recovering and continuing with finally clause
If an error has been detected in the try block and the 
exception has been thrown, the appropriate except 
block will be executed to handle the error. But if the 
exception is not handled by any of the except clauses, 
then it is re-raised after the execution of the finally 
block. For example, Program 1.4 contains only the 
except block for ZeroDivisionError. If any other 
type of error occurs for which there is no handler code 
(except clause) defined, then also the finally clause will 
be executed first. Consider the code given in Program 
1-7 to understand these concepts.

Program 1-7 Recovering through finally clause

print (" Practicing for try block")
try:
 numerator=50
 denom=int(input("Enter the denominator"))
 quotient=(numerator/denom)
 print ("Division performed successfully")
except ZeroDivisionError:
 print ("Denominator as ZERO is not allowed")
else:
 print ("The result of division operation is ", quotient)
finally:
 print ("OVER AND OUT")

14 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



While executing the above code, if we enter a 
non-numeric data as input, the finally block will be 
executed. So, the message “OVER AND OUT” will be 
displayed. Thereafter the exception for which handler is 
not present will be re-raised. The output of Program 1-7 
is shown in Figure 1.13.

Figure 1.13: Output of Program 1-7

After execution of finally block, Python transfers 
the control to a previously entered try or to the next 
higher level default exception handler. In such a case, 
the statements following the finally block is executed. 
That is, unlike except, execution of the finally clause 
does not terminate the exception. Rather, the exception 
continues to be raised after execution of finally.

To summarise, we put a piece of code where there 
are possibilities of errors or exceptions to occur inside 
a try block. Inside each except clause we define handler 
codes to handle the matching exception raised in the 
try block. The optional else clause contains codes to 
be executed if no exception occurs. The optional finally 
block contains codes to be executed irrespective of 
whether an exception occurs or not.

Summary

• Syntax errors or parsing errors are detected when 
we have not followed the rules of the particular 
programming language while writing a program. 

eXCeption Handling in pytHon 15

Reprint 2025-26



notES • When syntax error is encountered, Python displays 
the name of the error and a small description 
about the error.

• The execution of the program will start only after 
the syntax error is rectified.

• An exception is a Python object that represents 
an error.

• Syntax errors are also handled as exceptions.

• The exception needs to be handled by the 
programmer so that the program does not 
terminate abruptly.

• When an exception occurs during execution 
of a program and there is a built-in exception 
defined for that, the error message written in that 
exception is displayed. The programmer then has 
to take appropriate action and handle it. 

• Some of the commonly occurring built-in 
exceptions are SyntaxError, ValueError, 
IOError, KeyboardInterrupt, ImportError, 
EOFError, ZeroDivisionError, IndexError, 
NameError, IndentationError, TypeError,and 
OverFlowerror.

• When an error is encountered in a program, 
Python interpreter raises or throws an exception.

• Exception Handlers are the codes that are 
designed to execute when a specific exception 
is raised. 

• Raising an exception involves interrupting the 
normal flow of the program execution and jumping 
to the exception handler.

• Raise and assert statements are used to raise 
exceptions.

• The process of exception handling involves 
writing additional code to give proper messages 
or instructions to the user. This prevents the 
program from crashing abruptly. The additional 
code is known as an exception handler.

• An exception is said to be caught when a code 
that is designed to handle a particular exception 
is executed. 

• An exception is caught in the try block and 
handles in except block.

16 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



• The statements inside the finally block are always 
executed regardless of whether an exception 
occurred in the try block or not.

ExErcisE

1. “Every syntax error is an exception but every exception 
cannot be a syntax error.” Justify the statement.

2. When are the following built-in exceptions raised? Give 
examples to support your answers.
a) ImportError
b) IOError
c) NameError
d) ZeroDivisionError

3. What is the use of a raise statement? Write a code to 
accept two numbers and display the quotient. Appropriate 
exception should be raised if the user enters the second 
number (denominator) as zero (0).

4. Use assert statement in Question No. 3 to test the 
division expression in the program.

5. Define the following:
a) Exception Handling
b) Throwing an exception
c) Catching an exception

6. Explain catching exceptions using try and except block.

7. Consider the code given below and fill in the blanks.
print (" Learning Exceptions...")

try:

    num1= int(input ("Enter the first number"))
    num2=int(input("Enter the second number"))
    quotient=(num1/num2)

    print ("Both the numbers entered were correct")
except _____________:             # to enter only integers

    print (" Please enter only numbers")
except ____________:      # Denominator should not be zero

    print(" Number 2 should not be zero")
else:

    print(" Great .. you are a good programmer")

___________:               # to be executed at the end
    print(" JOB OVER... GO GET SOME REST")

eXCeption Handling in pytHon 17

Reprint 2025-26



notES 8. You have learnt how to use math module in Class 
XI. Write a code where you use the wrong number of 
arguments for a method (say sqrt() or pow()). Use the 
exception handling process to catch the ValueError 
exception.

9. What is the use of finally clause? Use finally clause in 
the problem given in Question No. 7.

18 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



r
Chapte
##2##
File Handling in 
2 

Python

There are many ways of trying to understand 
programs. People often rely too much on one way, which 

is called "debugging" and consists of running a partly-
understood program to see if it does what you expected. 

Another way, which ML advocates, is to install some means of 
understanding in the very programs themselves.

— Robin Milner

In this Chapter

» Introduction to Files

» Types of Files

» Opening and Closing a 2.1 IntroductIon to FIles

Text File We have so far created programs in Python that 
» Writing to a Text File accept the input, manipulate it and display the 

» Reading from a Text File output. But that output is available only during 
execution of the program and input is to be 

» Setting Offsets in a File
entered through the keyboard. This is because the 

» Creating and Traversing a 
variables used in a program have a lifetime that 

Text File
lasts till the time the program is under execution. 

» The Pickle Module What if we want to store the data that were input 
as well as the generated output permanently so 
that we can reuse it later? Usually, organisations 
would want to permanently store information 
about employees, inventory, sales, etc. to avoid 
repetitive tasks of entering the same data. Hence, 
data are stored permanently on secondary storage 
devices for reusability. We store Python programs 
written in script mode with a .py extension. Each 
program is stored on the secondary device as a 
file. Likewise, the data entered, and the output 
can be stored permanently into a file.

Reprint 2025-26



So, what is a file? A file is a named location on a 
secondary storage media where data are permanently 

Text files contain stored for later access.
only the ASCII 

equivalent of the 
contents of the 2.2. types oF FIles

file whereas a Computers store every file as a collection of 0s and 1s 
.docx file contains i.e., in binary form. Therefore, every file is basically just 
many additional 
information like a series of bytes stored one after the other. There are 

the author's name, mainly two types of data files — text file and binary 
page settings, font file. A text file consists of human readable characters, 
type and size, date which can be opened by any text editor. On the other 

of creation and 
modification, etc. hand, binary files are made up of non-human readable 

characters and symbols, which require specific programs 
to access its contents.

2.2.1 Text file
A text file can be understood as a sequence of characters 
consisting of alphabets, numbers and other special 
symbols. Files with extensions like .txt, .py, .csv, etc. 
are some examples of text files. When we open a text file 
using a text editor (e.g., Notepad), we see several lines 
of text. However, the file contents are not stored in such 
a way internally. Rather, they are stored in sequence 
of bytes consisting of 0s and 1s. In ASCII, UNICODE or 

Activity 2.1
any other encoding scheme, the value of each character 

Create a text file using of the text file is stored as bytes. So, while opening a 
notepad and write text file, the text editor translates each ASCII value 
your name and save it. 
Now, create a .docx file and shows us the equivalent character that is readable 
using Microsoft Word by the human being. For example, the ASCII value 65 
and write your name (binary equivalent 1000001) will be displayed by a text 
and save it as well. editor as the letter ‘A’ since the number 65 in ASCII 
Check and compare 
the file size of both the character set represents ‘A’.
files. You will find that Each line of a text file is terminated by a special 
the size of .txt file is character, called the End of Line (EOL). For example, 
in bytes whereas the default EOL character in Python is the newline 
that of .docx is in 
KBs. (\n). However, other characters can be used to indicate 

EOL. When a text editor or a program interpreter 
encounters the ASCII equivalent of the EOL character, 
it displays the remaining file contents starting from a 
new line. Contents in a text file are usually separated 
by whitespace, but comma (,) and tab (\t) are also 
commonly used to separate values in a text file.

20 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



2.2.2 Binary Files
Binary files are also stored in terms of bytes (0s and 1s), 
but unlike text files, these bytes do not represent the 
ASCII values of characters. Rather, they represent the 
actual content such as image, audio, video, compressed 
versions of other files, executable files, etc. These files 
are not human readable. Thus, trying to open a binary 
file using a text editor will show some garbage values. 
We need specific software to read or write the contents 
of a binary file. 

Binary files are stored in a computer in a sequence 
of bytes. Even a single bit change can corrupt the file 
and make it unreadable to the supporting application. 
Also, it is difficult to remove any error which may occur 
in the binary file as the stored contents are not human 
readable. We can read and write both text and binary 
files through Python programs.

2.3 openIng and closIng a text FIle

In real world applications, computer programs deal 
with data coming from different sources like databases, 
CSV files, HTML, XML, JSON, etc. We broadly access 
files either to write or read data from it. But operations 
on files include creating and opening a file, writing data 
in a file, traversing a file, reading data from a file and 
so on. Python has the io module that contains different 
functions for handling files. 
2.3.1 Opening a file
To open a file in Python, we use the open() function. The 
syntax of open() is as follows:

 file_object= open(file_name, access_mode) The file_object 
establishes a 

This function returns a file object called file handle link between the 
which is stored in the variable file_object. We can program and the 

use this variable to transfer data to and from the file data file stored 
(read and write) by calling the functions defined in the in the permanent 

Python’s io module. If the file does not exist, the above storage.

statement creates a new empty file and assigns it the 
name we specify in the statement.

The file_object has certain attributes that tells us 
basic information about the file, such as:
• <file.closed> returns true if the file is closed and 

false otherwise.

File Handling in pytHon 21

Reprint 2025-26



• <file.mode> returns the access mode in which the 
file was opened.

Activity 2.2 • <file.name> returns the name of the file.
Some of the other The file_name should be the name of the file that 
file access modes are has to be opened. If the file is not in the current working 
<rb+>, <wb>, <w+>, 
<ab>, <ab+>. Find out directory, then we need to specify the complete path of 
for what purpose each the file along with its name.
of these are used. The access_mode is an optional argument that 
Also, find the file 
offset positions in represents the mode in which the file has to be accessed 
each case. by the program. It is also referred to as processing mode. 

Here mode means the operation for which the file has 
to be opened like <r> for reading, <w> for writing, <+> 
for both reading and writing, <a> for appending at the 
end of an existing file. The default is the read mode. In 
addition, we can specify whether the file will be handled 
as binary (<b>) or text mode. By default, files are opened 
in text mode that means strings can be read or written. 
Files containing non-textual data are opened in binary 
mode that means read/write are performed in terms of 
bytes. Table 2.1 lists various file access modes that can 
be used with the open() method. The file offset position 
in the table refers to the position of the file object when 
the file is opened in a particular mode.

Table 2.1 File Open Modes

File Mode Description File Offset position

<r> Opens the file in read-only mode. Beginning of the file
<rb> Opens the file in binary and read-only mode. Beginning of the file

<r+> or <+r> Opens the file in both read and write mode. Beginning of the file
<w> Opens the file in write mode. If the file already exists, all the Beginning of the file

contents will be overwritten. If the file doesn’t exist, then a 
new file will be created.

<wb+> or Opens the file in read,write and binary mode. If the file Beginning of the file
<+wb> already exists, the contents will be overwritten. If the file 

doesn’t exist, then a new file will be created.

<a> Opens the file in append mode. If the file doesn’t exist, then End of the file
a new file will be created.

<a+> or <+a> Opens the file in append and read mode. If the file doesn’t End of the file
exist, then it will create a new file.

Consider the following example.
myObject=open(“myfile.txt”, “a+”)

22 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



In the above statement, the file myfile.txt is opened notes

in append and read modes. The file object will be at the 
end of the file. That means we can write data at the end 
of the file and at the same time we can also read data 
from the file using the file object named myObject.

2.3.2 Closing a file
Once we are done with the read/write operations on a 
file, it is a good practice to close the file. Python provides 
a close() method to do so. While closing a file, the 
system frees the memory allocated to it. The syntax of 
close() is:

file_object.close()
Here, file_object is the object that was returned while 

opening the file. 
Python makes sure that any unwritten or unsaved 

data is flushed off (written) to the file before it is closed. 
Hence, it is always advised to close the file once our 
work is done. Also, if the file object is re-assigned to 
some other file, the previous file is automatically closed.
2.3.3 Opening a file using with clause
In Python, we can also open a file using with clause. 
The syntax of with clause is:

with open (file_name, access_mode) as file_
object:

The advantage of using with clause is that any file 
that is opened using this clause is closed automatically, 
once the control comes outside the with clause. In 
case the user forgets to close the file explicitly or if an 
exception occurs, the file is closed automatically. Also, 
it provides a simpler syntax.

with open(“myfile.txt”,”r+”) as myObject:
 content = myObject.read()

Here, we don’t have to close the file explicitly 
using close() statement. Python will automatically close 
the file.

2.4 WrItIng to a text FIle

For writing to a file, we first need to open it in write or 
append mode. If we open an existing file in write mode, 
the previous data will be erased, and the file object will 
be positioned at the beginning of the file. On the other 

File Handling in pytHon 23

Reprint 2025-26



hand, in append mode, new data will be added at the 
For a newly created end of the previous data as the file object is at the end of 
file, is there any  the file. After opening the file, we can use the following 
difference between methods to write data in the file.
write() and append() 
methods? • write() - for writing a single string

• writelines() - for writing a sequence of strings

2.4.1 The write() method

write() method takes a string as an argument and writes 
it to the text file. It returns the number of characters 
being written on single execution of the write() method. 
Also, we need to add a newline character (\n) at the end 
of every sentence to mark the end of line.

Consider the following piece of code:
>>> myobject=open("myfile.txt",'w')
>>> myobject.write("Hey I have started  
    #using files in Python\n")
41

>>> myobject.close()
On execution, write() returns the number of characters 

written on to the file. Hence, 41, which is the length of 
the string passed as an argument, is displayed.
Note: ‘\n’ is treated as a single character

If numeric data are to be written to a text file, the 
data need to be converted into string before writing to 

We can also use the file. For example:
the flush() method >>>myobject=open("myfile.txt",'w')
to clear the buffer 
and write contents >>> marks=58

in buffer to the #number 58 is converted to a string using  
file. This is how #str() 

programmers can >>> myobject.write(str(marks))
forcefully write 

to the file as and 2

when required. >>>myobject.close()
The write() actually writes data onto a buffer. When 

the close() method is executed, the contents from this 
buffer are moved to the file located on the permanent 
storage.
2.4.2 The writelines() method

This method is used to write multiple strings to a file. 
We need to pass an iterable object like lists, tuple, etc. 
containing strings to the writelines() method. Unlike 

24 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



write(), the writelines() method does not return the Activity 2.3
number of characters written in the file. The following Run the above code 
code explains the use of writelines(). by replacing 

>>> myobject=open("myfile.txt",'w') writelines() with 

>>> lines = ["Hello everyone\n", "Writing write()  and see 
 

    #multiline strings\n", "This is the what happens.
 

    #third line"]
>>> myobject.writelines(lines)
>>>myobject.close()

On opening myfile.txt, using notepad, its content will 
appear as shown in Figure 2.1. Can we pass a 

tuple of numbers  
as an argument to 
writelines()? Will it be 
written to the file or an 
error will be generated?

Figure 2.1: Contents of myfile.txt

2.5 readIng From a text FIle

We can write a program to read the contents of a file. 
Before reading a file, we must make sure that the file is 
opened in “r”, “r+”, “w+” or “a+” mode. There are three 
ways to read the contents of a file:
2.5.1 The read() method
This method is used to read a specified number of bytes 
of data from a data file. The syntax of read() method is:

file_object.read(n)
Consider the following set of statements to understand 

the usage of read() method:
>>>myobject=open("myfile.txt",'r')
>>> myobject.read(10)
'Hello ever'
>>> myobject.close()

If no argument or a negative number is specified in 
read(), the entire file content is read. For example,

>>> myobject=open("myfile.txt",'r')
>>> print(myobject.read())
Hello everyone
Writing multiline strings
This is the third line
>>> myobject.close()

File Handling in pytHon 25

Reprint 2025-26



2.5.2 The readline([n]) method
This method reads one complete line from a file where 
each line terminates with a newline (\n) character. It 
can also be used to read a specified number (n) of bytes 
of data from a file but maximum up to the newline 
character (\n). In the following example, the second 
statement reads the first ten characters of the first line 
of the text file and displays them on the screen.

>>> myobject=open("myfile.txt",'r')
>>> myobject.readline(10)
'Hello ever'
>>> myobject.close()

If no argument or a negative number is specified, it 
reads a complete line and returns string. 

>>>myobject=open("myfile.txt",'r')
Activity 2.4

>>> print (myobject.readline())
Create a file having 
multiline data and 'Hello everyone\n'
use readline() with an To read the entire file line by line using the readline(), 
iterator to read the 

we can use a loop. This process is known as looping/
contents of the 
file line by line iterating over a file object. It returns an empty string 

when EOF is reached.

2.5.3 The readlines() method
The method reads all the lines and returns the lines 
along with newline as a list of strings. The following 
example uses readlines() to read data from the text file 
myfile.txt.

>>> myobject=open("myfile.txt", 'r')
>>> print(myobject.readlines())
['Hello everyone\n', 'Writing multiline 
strings\n', 'This is the third line']
>>> myobject.close()

As shown in the above output, when we read a 
file using readlines() function, lines in the file become 
members of a list, where each list element ends with a 
newline character (‘\n’). 

In case we want to display each word of a line 
separately as an element of a list, then we can use split() 
function. The following code demonstrates the use of 
split() function.

>>> myobject=open("myfile.txt",'r')
>>> d=myobject.readlines()

26 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



>>> for line in d:
        words=line.split()
        print(words)

['Hello', 'everyone']
['Writing', 'multiline', 'strings']
['This', 'is', 'the', 'third', 'line']

In the output, each string is returned as elements 
of a list. However, if splitlines() is used instead of split(), 
then each line is returned as element of a list, as shown 
in the output below:

>>> for line in d:
        words=line.splitlines()
        print(words)
 

['Hello everyone']
['Writing multiline strings']
['This is the third line']

Let us now write a program that accepts a string 
from the user and writes it to a text file. Thereafter, 
the same program reads the text file and displays it on 
the screen.

Program 2-1 Writing and reading to a text file

fobject=open("testfile.txt","w")   # creating a data file
sentence=input("Enter the contents to be written in the file: ")
fobject.write(sentence)    # Writing data to the file
fobject.close()            # Closing a file
print("Now reading the contents of the file: ")
fobject=open("testfile.txt","r")
#looping over the file object to read the file
for str in fobject:   
     print(str)
fobject.close()

In Program 2.1, the file named testfile.txt is opened 
in write mode and the file handle named fobject is 
returned. The string is accepted from the user and 
written in the file using write(). Then the file is closed 
and again opened in read mode. Data is read from the 
file and displayed till the end of file is reached.  

File Handling in pytHon 27

Reprint 2025-26



Output of Program 2-1:
>>> 
 RESTART: Path_to_file\Program2-1.py 
Enter the contents to be written in the file: 
roll_numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
Now reading the contents of the file: 
roll_numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
>>> 

2.6 settIng oFFsets In a FIle

The functions that we have learnt till now are used to 
access the data sequentially from a file. But if we want 
to access data in a random fashion, then Python gives 
us seek() and tell() functions to do so.

2.6.1 The tell() method
This function returns an integer that specifies the 
current position of the file object in the file. The position 
so specified is the byte position from the beginning of 
the file till the current position of the file object. The 
syntax of using tell() is:

file_object.tell()
2.6.2 The seek() method
This method is used to position the file object at a 
particular position in a file. The syntax of seek() is:
file_object.seek(offset [, reference_point])

Does the seek() 
function work in  In the above syntax, offset is the number of bytes by 
the same manner which the file object is to be moved. reference_point 
for text and binary indicates the starting position of the file object. That is, 
files? with reference to which position, the offset has to be 

counted. It can have any of the following values:
  0   -     beginning of the file
  1   -     current position of the file
  2   -     end of file
By default, the value of reference_point is 0, i.e. 

the offset is counted from the beginning of the file. For 
example, the statement fileObject.seek(5,0) will 
position the file object at 5th byte position from the 
beginning of the file. The code in Program 2-2 below 
demonstrates the usage of seek() and tell().

28 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Program 2-2 Application of seek() and tell() 

print("Learning to move the fi le object")
fi leobject=open("testfi le.txt","r+")
str=fi leobject.read()
print(str)
print("Initially, the position of the fi le object is: ",fi leobject.
tell())
fi leobject.seek(0)
print("Now the fi le object is at the beginning of the fi le: 
",fi leobject.tell())
fi leobject.seek(10)
print("We are moving to 10th byte position from the beginning of 
fi le")
print("The position of the fi le object is at", fi leobject.tell())
str=fi leobject.read()
print(str)

Output of Program 2-2:
>>> 
 RESTART: Path_to_fi le\Program2-2.py 
Learning to move the fi le object
roll_numbers = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
Initially, the position of the fi le object is: 33
Now the fi le object is at the beginning of the fi le: 0
We are moving to 10th byte position from the beginning of fi le

The position of the fi le object is at 10
rs = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
>>> 

2.7 CREATING AND TRAVERSING A TEXT FILE

Having learnt various methods that help us to open 
and close a Þle, read and write data in a text Þle, Þnd 
the position of the Þle object and move the Þle object 
at a desired location, let us now perform some basic 
operations on a text Þle. To perform these operations, 
let us assume that we will be working with practice.txt.

2.7.1 Creating a Þle and writing data

To create a text Þle, we use the open() method and 
provide the Þlename and the mode. If the Þle already 
exists with the same name, the open() function will 
behave differently depending on the mode (write or 
append) used. If it is in write mode (w), then all the 
existing contents of Þle will be lost, and an empty Þle 
will be created with the same name. But, if the Þle is 

FILE HANDLING IN PYTHON 29

Reprint 2025-26



created in append mode (a), then the new data will be 
written after the existing data. In both cases, if the file 
does not exist, then a new empty file will be created. In 
Program 2-3, a file, practice.txt is opened in write (w) 
mode and three sentences are stored in it as shown in 
the output screen that follows it

Program 2-3 To create a text file and write data in it

# program to create a text file and add data
fileobject=open("practice.txt","w+")
while True:
    data= input("Enter data to save in the text file: ")
    fileobject.write(data)
    ans=input("Do you wish to enter more data?(y/n): ")
    if ans=='n': break
fileobject.close()

Output of Program 2-3:
>>> 
 RESTART: Path_to_file\Program2-3.py 
Enter data to save in the text file: I am interested to learn about 
Computer Science
Do you wish to enter more data?(y/n): y
Enter data to save in the text file: Python is easy to learn
Do you wish to enter more data?(y/n): n
>>> 

2.7.2 Traversing a file and displaying data
To read and display data that is stored in a text file, we 
will refer to the previous example where we have created 
the file practice.txt. The file will be opened in read mode 
and reading will begin from the beginning of the file.

Program 2-4 To display data from a text file
fileobject=open("practice.txt","r")
str = fileobject.readline()
while str:    
    print(str)
    str=fileobject.readline()
fileobject.close()

In Program 2-4, the readline() is used in the while 
loop to read the data line by line from the text file. The 
lines are displayed using the print(). As the end of file 
is reached, the readline() will return an empty string. 
Finally, the file is closed using the close(). 

30 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Output of Program 2-4:
>>> 
I  a m i nt e r e s t e d t o l e a r n a bout  Comput e r  Sc i e nc e Pyt hon i s  e a s y t o l e a r n

Till now, we have been creating separate programs 
for writing data to a file and for reading the file. Now 
let us create one single program to read and write data 
using a single file object. Since both the operations have 
to be performed using a single file object, the file will be 
opened in w+ mode.

Program 2-5  To perform reading and writing operation in a 
text file

fileobject=open("report.txt", "w+")
print ("WRITING DATA IN THE FILE")
print() # to display a blank line
while True:
    line= input("Enter a sentence ")
    fileobject.write(line)
    fileobject.write('\n')
    choice=input("Do you wish to enter more data? (y/n): ")
    if choice in ('n','N'): break
print("The byte position of file object is ",fileobject.tell())
fileobject.seek(0) #places file object at beginning of file
print()
print("READING DATA FROM THE FILE")
str=fileobject.read()
print(str) 
fileobject.close()

In Program 2-5, the file will be read till the time end 
of file is not reached and the output as shown in below 
is displayed.

Output of Program 2-5:
>>> 
 RESTART: Path_to_file\Program2-5.py 
WRITING DATA IN THE FILE
Enter a sentence I am a student of class XII
Do you wish to enter more data? (y/n): y
Enter a sentence my school contact number is 4390xxx8
Do you wish to enter more data? (y/n): n
The byte position of file object is  67
READING DATA FROM THE FILE
I am a student of class XII
my school contact number is 4390xxx8
>>>

File Handling in pytHon 31

Reprint 2025-26



notes 2.8 the pIckle module

We know that Python considers everything as an object. 
So, all data types including list, tuple, dictionary, etc. 
are also considered as objects. During execution of 
a program, we may require to store current state of 
variables so that we can retrieve them later to its present 
state. Suppose you are playing a video game, and after 
some time, you want to close it. So, the program should 
be able to store the current state of the game, including 
current level/stage, your score, etc. as a Python object. 
Likewise, you may like to store a Python dictionary as 
an object, to be able to retrieve later. To save any object 
structure along with data, Python provides a module 
called Pickle. The module Pickle is used for serializing 
and de-serializing any Python object structure. Pickling 
is a method of preserving food items by placing them 
in some solution, which increases the shelf life. In 
other words, it is a method to store food items for later 
consumption.

Serialization is the process of transforming data or 
an object in memory (RAM) to a stream of bytes called 
byte streams. These byte streams in a binary file can 
then be stored in a disk or in a database or sent through 
a network. Serialization process is also called pickling.

De-serialization or unpickling is the inverse of 
pickling process where a byte stream is converted back 
to Python object. 

The pickle module deals with binary files. Here, data 
are not written but dumped and similarly, data are not 
read but loaded. The Pickle Module must be imported 
to load and dump data. The pickle module provides two 
methods - dump() and load() to work with binary files 
for pickling and unpickling, respectively. 

2.8.1 The dump() method
This   method is used to convert (pickling) Python objects 
for writing data in a binary file. The file in which data 
are to be dumped, needs to be opened in binary write 
mode (wb).  

Syntax of dump() is as follows:
dump(data_object, file_object)

where data_object is the object that has to be 
dumped to the file with the file handle named file_

32 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



object. For example, Program 2-6 writes the record notes

of a student (roll_no, name, gender and marks) in the 
binary file named mybinary.dat using the dump(). We 
need to close the file after pickling.
Program 2-6 Pickling data in Python

import pickle
listvalues=[1,"Geetika",'F', 26]
fileobject=open("mybinary.dat", "wb")
pickle.dump(listvalues,fileobject)
fileobject.close()

2.8.2 The load() method
This method is used to load (unpickling) data from a 
binary file. The file to be loaded is opened in binary read 
(rb) mode. Syntax of load() is as follows:

Store_object = load(file_object)
Here, the pickled Python object is loaded from the 

file having a file handle named file_object and is 
stored in a new file handle called store_object. The 
program 2-7 demonstrates how to read data from the 
file mybinary.dat using the load().

Program 2-7 Unpickling data in Python

import pickle
print("The data that were stored in file are: ")
fileobject=open("mybinary.dat","rb")
objectvar=pickle.load(fileobject)
fileobject.close()
print(objectvar)

Output of Program 2-7:
>>> 
 RESTART: Path_to_file\Program2-7.py 
The data that were stored in file are: 
[1, 'Geetika', 'F', 26]
>>> 

2.8.3 File handling using pickle module
As we read and write data in a text file, similarly we 
will be adding and displaying data for a binary file. 
Program 2-8 accepts a record of an employee from the 
user and appends it in the binary file tv. Thereafter, the 
records are read from the binary file and displayed on 
the screen using the same object. The user may enter 

File Handling in pytHon 33

Reprint 2025-26



as many records as they wish to. The program also 
displays the size of binary files before starting with the 
reading process.

Program 2-8 To perform basic operations on a binary file using pickle module

# Program to write and read employee records in a binary file
i mpor t  pi c kl e
pr i nt ( " WORKI NG WI TH BI NARY FI LES" )
bfile=open("empfile.dat","ab")
recno=1
pr i nt  ( " Ent e r  Re c or ds  of  Empl oye e s " )
pr i nt ( )
#taking data from user and dumping in the file as list object
whi l e  Tr ue :
    print("RECORD No.", recno)
    eno=int(input("\tEmployee number : "))
    ename=input("\tEmployee Name : ")
    ebasic=int(input("\tBasic Salary : "))
    allow=int(input("\tAllowances : "))
    totsal=ebasic+allow
    print("\tTOTAL SALARY : ", totsal)
    edata=[eno,ename,ebasic,allow,totsal]
    pickle.dump(edata,bfile)
    ans=input("Do you wish to enter more records (y/n)? ")
    recno=recno+1
    if ans.lower()=='n':
        pr i nt ( " Re c or d e nt r y OVER " )
        pr i nt ( )
        br e a k
# retrieving the size of file
print("Size of binary file (in bytes):",bfile.tell())
bfile.close()
# Reading the employee records from the file using load() module
print("Now reading the employee records from the file")
pr i nt ( )
readrec=1
t r y:
 with open("empfile.dat","rb") as bfile:
 whi l e  Tr ue :
   edata=pickle.load(bfile)
        print("Record Number : ",readrec)
   pr i nt ( e da t a )
  readrec=readrec+1
e xc e pt  EOFEr r or :
    pa s s
bfile.close()    

34 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



notes

Output of Program 2-8:
>>> 
 RESTART: Path_to_file\Program2-8.py 
WORKING WITH BINARY FILES
Enter Records of Employees
RECORD No. 1
  Employee number : 11
  Employee Name : D N Ravi
  Basic Salary : 32600
  Allowances : 4400
  TOTAL SALARY :  37000
Do you wish to enter more records (y/n)? y
RECORD No. 2
 Employee number : 12
 Employee Name : Farida Ahmed
 Basic Salary : 38250
 Allowances : 5300
 TOTAL SALARY :  43550
Do you wish to enter more records (y/n)? n
Record entry OVER 
Size of binary file (in bytes): 216
Now reading the employee records from the file
Record Number :  1
[11, 'D N Ravi', 32600, 4400, 37000]
Record Number :  2
[12, 'Farida Ahmed', 38250, 5300, 43550]
>>> 

As each employee record is stored as a list in the 
file empfile.dat, hence while reading the file, a list is 
displayed showing record of each employee. Notice that 
in Program 2-8, we have also used try.. except block to 
handle the end-of-file exception. 

summary

• A file is a named location on a secondary storage 
media where data are permanently stored for 
later access.

• A text file contains only textual information 
consisting of alphabets, numbers and other 

File Handling in pytHon 35

Reprint 2025-26



notes special symbols. Such files are stored with 
extensions like .txt, .py, .c, .csv, .html, etc. Each 
byte of a text file represents a character.

• Each line of a text file is stored as a sequence 
of ASCII equivalent of the characters and is 
terminated by a special character, called the End 
of Line (EOL).

• Binary file consists of data stored as a stream 
of bytes.

• open() method is used to open a file in Python and 
it returns a file object called file handle. The file 
handle is used to transfer data to and from the file 
by calling the functions defined in the Python’s 
io module. 

• close() method is used to close the file. While 
closing a file, the system frees up all the resources 
like processor and memory allocated to it. 

• write() method takes a string as an argument 
and writes it to the text file.

• writelines() method is used to write multiple 
strings to a file. We need to pass an iterable 
object like lists, tuple etc. containing strings to 
writelines() method. 

• read([n]) method is used to read a specified 
number of bytes (n) of data from a data file. 

• readline([n]) method reads one complete line 
from a file where lines are ending with a newline 
(\n). It can also be used to read a specified number 
(n) of bytes of data from a file but maximum up to 
the newline character (\n). 

• readlines() method reads all the lines and 
returns the lines along with newline character, as 
a list of strings. 

• tell() method returns an integer that specifies 
the current position of the file object. The position 
so specified is the byte position from the beginning 
of the file till the current position of the file object.

• seek()method is used to position the file object 
at a particular position in a file. 

36 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



• Pickling is the process by which a Python object is NotEs

converted to a byte stream. 
• dump( )  method is used to write the objects in a 

binary file. 
• l oa d( )  method is used to read data from a binary 

file.

ExErcisE

1. Differentiate between:
a) text file and binary file
b) readline() and readlines()
c) write() and writelines()

2. Write the use and syntax for the following methods:
a) open()
b) read()
c) seek()
d) dump()

3. Write the file mode that will be used for opening the 
following files. Also, write the Python statements to open 
the following files: 
a) a text file “example.txt” in both read and write mode
b) a binary file “bfile.dat” in write mode
c) a text file “try.txt” in append and read mode
d) a binary file “btry.dat” in read only mode.

4. Why is it advised to close a file after we are done with 
the read and write operations? What will happen if we do 
not close it? Will some error message be flashed?

5. What is the difference between the following set of 
statements (a) and (b):
a) P = open(“practice.txt”,”r”) 

P.read(10)
b) with open(“practice.txt”, “r”) as P: 

     x = P.read()

6. Write a command(s) to write the following lines to the 
text file named hello.txt. Assume that the file is opened 
in append mode.

“ Welcome my class”
“It is a fun place”
“You will learn and play”

File Handling in pytHon 37

Reprint 2025-26



notes 7. Write a Python program to open the file hello.txt used in 
question no 6 in read mode to display its contents. What 
will be the difference if the file was opened in write mode 
instead of append mode?

8. Write a program to accept string/sentences from the 
user till the user enters “END” to. Save the data in a text 
file and then display only those sentences which begin 
with an uppercase alphabet.

9. Define pickling in Python. Explain serialization and 
deserialization of Python object.

10. Write a program to enter the following records in a binary 
file:

Item No  integer
Item_Name           string
Qty   integer
Price   float 

Number of records to be entered should be accepted 
from the user. Read the file to display the records in the 
following format:

Item No:  
Item Name :   
Quantity:
Price per item:
Amount:  ( to be calculated as Price * Qty)

38 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26


##3##
Chapter

3 Stack

“We're going to be able to ask our 
computers to monitor things for us, and when 

certain conditions happen, are triggered, the 
computers will take certain actions and inform 

us after the fact.”

— Steve Jobs

In this Chapter

» Introduction

» Stack

» Operations on Stack 3.1 IntroductIon

» Implementation of Stack We have learnt about different data types in 
in Python Python for handling values in Class XI. Recall 

» Notations for Arithmetic that String, List, Set, Tuple, etc. are the sequence 
Expressions data types that can be used to represent collection 

of elements either of the same type or different 
» Conversion From Infix To 

Postfix Notation types. Multiple data elements are grouped in a 
particular way for faster accessibility and efficient 

» Evaluation of  Postfix 
Expression storage of data. That is why we have used different 

data types in python for storing data values. Such 
grouping is referred as a data structure.  

A data structure defines a mechanism to store, 
organise and access data along with operations 
(processing) that can be efficiently performed on 
the data. For example, string is a data structure 
containing a sequence of elements where each 
element is a character. On the other hand, list is 
a sequence data structure in which each element 
may be of different types. We can apply different 
operations like reversal, slicing, counting of 

Reprint 2025-26



elements, etc. on list and string. Hence, a data structure 
organises multiple elements in a way so that certain 
operations on each element as well as the collective 
data unit could be performed easily. 

Other important 
data structures Stack and Queue are two other popular data 

in Computer structures used in programming. Although not directly 
Science include available in Python, it is important to learn these 
Array, Linked concepts as they are extensively used in a number of 

List, Binary Trees, 
programming languages. In this chapter, we will study 

Heaps, Graph, 
Sparse Matrix, about stack, its implementation using Python as well as 

etc. its applications.

3.2 Stack

We have seen piles of books in the library or stack of 
plates at home (Figure 3.1). To put another book or 
another plate in such a pile, we always place (add to 
the pile) the object at the top only. Likewise, to remove 
a book or a plate from such a pile, we always remove 
(delete from the pile) the object from the top only. This 
is because in a large pile, it is inconvenient to add or 
remove an object from in between or bottom. Such an 
arrangement of elements in a linear order is called a 

A data structure 
stack. We add new elements or remove existing elements 

in which elements 
are organised from the same end, commonly referred to as the top of 

in a sequence is the stack. It thus follows the Last-In-First-out (LIFO) 
called linear data principle. That is, the element which was inserted last 

structure. (the most recent element) will be the first one to be taken 
out from the stack.

                                                      

Figure 3.1: Stack of plates and books

40 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



3.2.1  APPLICATIONS OF STACK
How does a compiler 

Some of the applications of stack in real-life are:
or an interpreter 

• Pile of clothes in an almirah handle function calls  
in a program?

• Multiple chairs in a vertical pile

• Bangles worn on wrist 

• Pile of boxes of eatables in pantry or on a kitchen 
shelf

Some examples of application of stack in programming 
are as follows:

• When we need to reverse a string, the string is 
traversed from the last character till the first 
character. i.e. characters are traversed in the reverse 
order of their appearance in the string. This is very 
easily done by putting the characters of a string in 
a stack.

• We use text/image editor for editing the text/image 
where we have options to redo/undo the editing 
done. When we click on the redo /undo icon, the 
most recent editing is redone/undone. In this 
scenario, the system uses a stack to keep track of 
changes made. 

• While browsing the web, we move from one web page 
to another by accessing links between them. In order 

The operating 
to go back to the last visited web page, we may use the 

system in computer 
back button on the browser. Let us say we accessed or mobile allocates  
a web page P1 from where we moved to web page P2 memory to different 
followed by browsing of web page P3. Currently, we applications for 

are on web page P3 and want to revisit web page P1. their execution. How 
does an operating 

We may go to a previously visited web page by using 
system keep track 

the BACK button of the browser.  On clicking the of the free memory 
BACK button once, we are taken from web page P3 that can be allocated 
to web page P2, another click on BACK shows web among programs/

page P1. In this case, the history of browsed pages is applications to be 
executed?

maintained as stack.

• While writing any arithmetic expression in a program, 
we may use parentheses to order the evaluation 
of operators. While executing the program, the 
compiler checks for matched parentheses i.e. each 
opening parenthesis should have a corresponding 
closing parenthesis and the pairs of parentheses 
are properly nested. In case of parentheses are 

StaCk 41

Reprint 2025-26



mismatched, the compiler needs to throw an error. 
To handle matching of parentheses, stack is used.

3.3 operatIonS on Stack

As explained in the previous section, a stack is a 
mechanism that implements LIFO arrangement hence 
elements are added and deleted from the stack at one 
end only. The end from which elements are added or 
deleted is called TOP of the stack. Two fundamental 
operations performed on the stack are PUSH and POP. 
In this section, we will learn about them and implement 
them using Python.

3.3.1 PUSH and POP Operations   

• PUSH adds a new element at the TOP of the stack. 
It is an insertion operation. We can add elements 
to a stack until it is full. A stack is full when no 
more elements can be added to it. Trying to add an 
element to a full stack results in an exception called 
‘overflow’. 

• POP operation is used to remove the top most element 
of the stack, that is, the element at the TOP of the 
stack. It is a delete operation. We can delete elements 
from a stack until it is empty i.e. there is no element 
in it. Trying to delete an element from an empty stack 
results in an exception called ‘underflow’.

A stack is used 
to insert and delete 
elements in LIFO 

Top 2 Top 3
Top order. Same principle 

1 1 Top 1 1
is followed in adding 

(i) Empty (ii) Push 1 (iii) Push 2 (iv) Pop (v) Push 3 and removing glasses 
    Stack (2 will be from a pile of glasses. 

removed)
Let us create a stack of 
glasses assuming that 

Top 4 each glass is numbered. 
3 Top 3 Visual representations 
1 1 Top 1 of PUSH and POP 

(vi) Push 4 (vii) Pop (viii) Pop (ix) Pop (x) Empty operations on a stack 
(4 will be (3 will be (1 will be     Stack of glasses are shown in 
removed) removed) removed)

Figure 3.2.

Figure 3.2: PUSH and POP operations on the stack of glasses

42 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



3.4 ImplementatIon of Stack In python noteS

We have learnt so far that a stack is a linear and ordered 
collection of elements. The simple way to implement a 
stack in Python is using the data type list.  We can fix 
either of the sides of the list as TOP to insert/remove 
elements. It is to be noted that we are using  built-in 
methods append() and pop() of the list for implementation 
of the stack. As these built-in methods insert/delete 
elements at the rightmost end of the list, hence explicit 
declaration of TOP is not needed.  

Let us write a program to create a STACK (stack of 
glasses as given in Figure 3.2) in which we will:

• insert/delete elements (glasses) 

• check if the  STACK is empty (no glasses in the stack) 

• find the  number of elements (glasses) in the STACK 
• read the value of the topmost element (number on 

the topmost glass) in the STACK 

The program shall define the following functions to 
perform these operations:

• Let us create an empty stack named glassStack. 
We will do so by assigning an empty list to the 
identifier named glassStack:

glassStack = list()

• A function named isEmpty to check whether the 
stack glassStack is empty or not. Remember trying 
to remove an element from an empty stack would 
result in ‘underflow’. This function returns True if 
the stack is empty, else returns False.

def isEmpty(glassStack):

    if len(glassStack)==0:

        return True

    else:

        return False

• A function named opPush to insert (PUSH) a new 
element in stack. This function has two parameters 
- the name of the stack in which the element is to be 
inserted (glassStack) and the element that needs 
to be inserted. We know that insertion of an element 
is always done at the TOP of the stack. Hence, we 

StaCk 43

Reprint 2025-26



noteS shall use the built-in method append() of list to 
add an element to the stack that always adds at the 
end of the list. As there is no limit on the size of list 
in  Python, the implemented stack will never be full 
unless there is no more space available in memory. 
Hence, we will never face ‘overflow’  (no space for new 
element) condition for stack.

def opPush(glassStack,element):

    glassStack.append(element)

• A function named size to read the number of 
elements in the glassStack. We will use the len() 
function of list in Python to find the number of 
elements in the glassStack.

def size(glassStack):

    return len(glassStack)

• A function named top to read the most recent element 
(TOP) in the glassStack.

def top(glassStack):

    if isEmpty(glassStack):

           print('Stack is empty')

          return None

    else:

          x =len(glassStack)

          element=glassStack[x-1]

          return element

• A function named opPop to delete the topmost 
element from the stack. It takes one parameter - the 
name of the stack (glassStack) from which element 
is to be deleted and returns the value of the deleted 
element. The function first checks whether the stack 
is empty or not. If it is not empty, it removes the 
topmost element from it. We shall use the built-
in method pop() of Python list that removes the 
element from the end of the list.

def opPop(glassStack):

    if isEmpty(glassStack):

        print('underflow')
        return None

    else:

        return(glassStack.pop()) 

44 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



• A function  named display  to show the contents of Notes
the stack. 

de f  di s pl a y( gl a s s St a c k) :

    x=l e n( gl a s s St a c k)

    pr i nt ( " Cur r e nt  e l e me nt s  i n  t he  s t a c k 
a r e :  " )

    f or  i  i n  r a nge ( x- 1, - 1, - 1) :

        pr i nt ( gl a s s St a c k[ i ] )

Once we define the above functions we can use 
the following Python code to implement a stack of 
glasses. 

gl a s s St a c k = l i s t ( )   #  c r e a t e  e mpt y s t a c k

#a dd e l e me nt s  t o  s t a c k

e l e me nt =' gl a s s 1 '

pr i nt ( " Pus hi ng e l e me nt  " , e l e me nt )

opPus h( gl a s s St a c k, e l e me nt )

e l e me nt =' gl a s s 2 '

pr i nt ( " Pus hi ng e l e me nt  " , e l e me nt )

opPus h( gl a s s St a c k, e l e me nt )

#di s pl a y numbe r  of  e l e me nt s  i n  s t a c k

pr i nt ( " Cur r e nt  numbe r  of  e l e me nt s  i n  s t a c k 
i s " , s i z e ( gl a s s St a c k) )

#de l e t e  a n e l e me nt  f r om t he  s t a c k

e l e me nt =opPop( gl a s s St a c k)

pr i nt ( " Poppe d e l e me nt  i s " , e l e me nt )

#a dd ne w e l e me nt  t o  s t a c k

e l e me nt =' gl a s s 3 '

pr i nt ( " Pus hi ng e l e me nt  " , e l e me nt )

opPus h( gl a s s St a c k, e l e me nt )

#di s pl a y t he  l a s t  e l e me nt  a dde d t o  t he      
#s t a c k

pr i nt ( " t op e l e me nt  i s " , t op( gl a s s St a c k) )  

#di s pl a y a l l  e l e me nt s  i n  t he  s t a c k

di s pl a y( gl a s s St a c k)

StaCk 45

Reprint 2025-26



Notes #de l e t e  a l l  e l e me nt s  f r om s t a c k

whi l e  Tr ue :

 i t e m=opPop( gl a s s St a c k)

 i f  i t e m == None :     

  pr i nt ( " St a c k i s  e mpt y now" )

  br e a k

 e l s e :

    pr i nt ( " Poppe d e l e me nt  i s " , i t e m)

The  out put  of  t he  a bove  pr ogr a m wi l l  be  a s  
f ol l ows :

Pus hi ng e l e me nt   gl a s s 1

Pus hi ng e l e me nt   gl a s s 2

Cur r e nt  numbe r  of  e l e me nt s  i n  s t a c k i s  2

Poppe d e l e me nt  i s  gl a s s 2

Pus hi ng e l e me nt   gl a s s 3

t op e l e me nt  i s  gl a s s 3

Cur r e nt  e l e me nt s  i n  t he  s t a c k a r e :

gl a s s 3

gl a s s 1

Poppe d e l e me nt  i s  gl a s s 3

Poppe d e l e me nt  i s  gl a s s 1

Underflow
St a c k i s  e mpt y now

3.5 NotatioNs for arithmetic expressioNs

We write arithmetic expressions using operators in 
between operands, like x + y, 2 - 3 * y, etc. and use 
parentheses () to order the evaluation of operators in 
complex expressions. These expressions follow infix 
representation and are evaluated using BODMAS rule. 

Polish mathematician Jan Lukasiewicz in the 
1920's introduced a different way of representing 
arithmetic expression, called polish notation. In such 
notation, operators are written before their operands. 
So the order of operations and operands determines the 
result, making parentheses unnecessary. For example, 
we can write x+y in polish notation as +xy. This is 
also called prefix notation as we prefix the operator before 
operands.

By reversing this logic, we can write an expression 
by putting operators after their operands. For example, 
x+y can be written as xy+. This is called reverse polish 

46 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



notation or postfix notation. To summarise, any 
arithmetic expression can be represented in any of the 
three notations viz. Infix, Prefix and Postfix and are 
listed in Table 3.1 with examples. 

Table 3.1 Infix, Prefix and Postfix Notations
Type of 

Expression Description Example

Infix Operators are placed in x * y + z
between the operands 3 *(4 + 5)

(x + y)/(z * 5)

Prefix Operators are placed  +z*xy 
(Polish) before the corresponding *3+45

operands /+xy*z5

Postfix Operators are placed xy*z+
(Reverse Polish) after the corresponding 345+*

operands xy+z5*/

3.6 converSIon from InfIx to poStfIx notatIon

It is easy for humans to evaluate an infix expression. 
Consider an infix expression x + y / z. While going 
from left to right we first encounter + operator, but we 
do not add x + y and rather evaluate y/z, followed by 
addition operation. This is because we know the order 
of precedence of operators that follows BODMAS rule. 
But, how do we pass this precedence knowledge to the 
computer through an expression? 

In contrast, prefix/postfix expressions do not have 
to deal with such precedence because the operators are 
already positioned according to their order of evaluation. 
Hence a single traversal from left to right is sufficient to 
evaluate the expression. In this section, we will learn 
about the conversion of an arithmetic expression written 

Write an algorithm 
in infix notation to its equivalent expression in postfix to convert an infix 
notation using a stack. expression into  

equivalent prefix 
During such conversion, a stack is used to keep track 

expression using 
of the operators encountered in the infix expression. A stack.
variable of string type is used to store the equivalent 
postfix expression. Algorithm 3.1 converts an expression 
in infix notation to postfix notation:

Algorithm 3.1: Conversion of expression from infix to postfix notation 
Step 1: Create an empty string named postExp to store the  converted postfix expression.
Step 2: INPUT infix expression in a variable, say inExp
Step 3: For each character in inExp, REPEAT Step 4 

StaCk 47

Reprint 2025-26



Step 4: IF character is a left parenthesis THEN PUSH on the Stack

   ELSE IF character is a right parenthesis

             THEN POP the elements from the Stack and append to string

      postExp until the corresponding left parenthesis is popped

      while discarding both left and right parentheses

   ELSE IF character is an operator 

            THEN IF its precedence is lower than that of operator at the top of Stack 
                  THEN POP  elements from  the Stack till an

                   operator with precedence less than the current

            operator is encountered and append to string

                   postExp before pushing this operator on the 

                    postStack

                      ELSE PUSH  operator on the Stack

         ELSE  Append the character to postExp

Step 5: Pop  elements from the Stack and append to postExp until Stack is empty

Step 6: OUTPUT postExp

Example 3.1 
Let us now use this algorithm to convert a given infix 
expression (x + y)/(z*8) into equivalent postfix expression 
using a stack. Figure 3.3 shows the steps to be followed 
on encountering an operator or an operand in the 
given infix expression. Note here that stack is used 
to track the operators and parentheses, and a string 
variable contains the equivalent postfix expression. 
Initially both are empty. Each character in the given 
infix expression is processed from left to right and the 
appropriate action is taken as detailed in the algorithm. 
When each character in the given infix expression has 
been processed, the string will contain the equivalent 
postfix expression.

SYMBOL : ( x + y

ACTION  : PUSH Append PUSH Append 
to string to string
postExp postExp

Initial
Stack + +

(Empty) ( ( ( (

POSTFIX empty x x x y
STRING (postExp)

48 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Figure 3.3: Conversion of infix expression (x + y)/(z*8) to postfix notation

3.7 evaluatIon of poStfIx expreSSIon 

Stacks can be used to evaluate an expression in postfix 
notation. For simplification, we are assuming that 
operators used in expressions are binary operators. 
The detailed step by step procedure is given in 
Algorithm 3.2.

Algorithm 3.2: Evaluation of postfix expression 
Step 1: INPUT  postfix expression in a variable, say postExp
Step 2: For each character in postExp, REPEAT Step 3
Step 3: IF character is an operand

       THEN PUSH character on the Stack

                     ELSE POP two elements from the Stack, apply the operator on

StaCk 49

Reprint 2025-26



  the popped elements and  PUSH the computed value onto

  the Stack
Step 4: IF Stack has a single element 

THEN POP the element and OUTPUT as the net result

ELSE OUTPUT “Invaild Postfix expression”

Example 3.2 
Figure 3.4 shows the step-by-step process of evaluation 
of the postfix expression 7 8 2 * 4 / + using Algorithm 
3.2 .

SYMBOL :     7  8            2 

ACTION :   PUSH PUSH PUSH

Initial
Stack 2

(Empty) 8 8
7 7 7

SYMBOL :             *          4         /

ACTION : POP two PUSH POP two 
Write an algorithm to elements, apply elements, apply 
evaluate any prefix the operator  the operator  and 
expression using a  and push back push back the 

stack. the result result

4
16 16 4
7 7 7

SYMBOL :         + End of 
Input 

Expression

ACTION : POP two POP
elements, apply 

the operator  
and push back 

the result

Final 
Stack Result = 11

(Empty)
11

EMPTY

Figure 3.4: Evaluation of postfix expression 7 8 2 * 4 /+

50 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



noteS
Summary

• Stack is a data structure in which insertion 
and deletion is done from one end only, usually 
referred to as TOP.

• Stack follows LIFO principle using which an 
element  inserted in the last will be the first one 
to be out.

• PUSH and POP are two basic operations performed 
on a stack for insertion and deletion of elements, 
respectively.

• Trying to pop an element from an empty stack 
results into a special condition underflow.

• In Python, list is used for implementing a stack 
and its built-in-functions append and pop are 
used for insertion and deletion, respectively. 
Hence, no explicit declaration of TOP is needed.

• Any arithmetic expression can be represented 
in any of the three notations viz. Infix, Prefix 
and Postfix.

• While programming, Infix notation is used for 
writing an expression in which binary operators 
are written in between the operands.

• A single traversal from left to right of Prefix/
Postfix expression is sufficient to evaluate the 
expression as operators are correctly placed as 
per their order of precedence.

• Stack is commonly used data structure to convert 
an Infix expression into equivalent Prefix/Postfix 
notation.

• While conversion of an Infix notation to its 
equivalent Prefix/Postfix notation, only operators 
are PUSHed onto the Stack.

• When evaluating any Postfix expression using 
Stack, only operands are PUSHed onto it. 

StaCk 51

Reprint 2025-26



Notes
exercise

1.  State TRUE or FALSE for the following cases:
a) Stack is a linear data structure
b) Stack does not follow LIFO rule
c) PUSH operation may result into underflow condition
d) In POSTFIX notation for expression, operators are 

placed after operands

2. Find the output of the following code:
a) result=0
 numberList=[10,20,30]
 numberList.append(40)
 result=result+numberList.pop()
 result=result+numberList.pop()
 print(“Result=”,result)

b) answer=[]; output=''
 answer.append('T')
 answer.append('A')
 answer.append('M')
 ch=answer.pop()
 output=output+ch
 ch=answer.pop()
 output=output+ch
 ch=answer.pop()
 output=output+ch
 print(“Result=”,output)

3. Write a program to reverse a string using stack.

4. For the following arithmetic expression:
    ((2+3)*(4/2))+2

   Show step-by-step process for matching parentheses 
using stack data structure.

5.  Evaluate following postfix expressions while showing 
status of stack after each operation given A=3, B=5, 
C=1, D=4
a) A B + C *
b) A B * C / D *

6. Convert the following infix notations to postfix notations, 
showing stack and string contents at each step.
a) A + B - C * D
b) A * (( C + D)/E)

7. Write a program to create a Stack for storing only odd 
numbers out of all the numbers entered by the user. 
Display the content of the Stack along with the largest 
odd number in the Stack. (Hint. Keep popping out the 
elements from stack and maintain the largest element 
retrieved so far in a variable. Repeat till Stack is empty)

52 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26


##4##
Chapter

4 Queue

“We could say we want the Web to reflect 
a vision of the world where everything is done 

democratically. To do that, we get computers 
to talk with each other in such a way as to 

promote that ideal.”

— Tim Berners-Lee

In this Chapter
» Introduction to Queue

» Operations on Queue

» Implementation of Queue 4.1 IntroductIon to Queue
using Python

In the previous chapter we learned about a data 
» Introduction to Deque structure called Stack, which works on Last-In-
» Implementation of Deque First-Out (LIFO) principle. In this chapter, we will 

using Python learn about another data structure called Queue 
which works on First-In-First-Out (FIFO) principle. 
Queue is an ordered linear list of elements, having 

different ends for adding 
and removing elements 

Cashier
Next in it.

Examples of queue in 
our everyday life include 
students standing in 
a queue for morning 
assembly, customers 
forming a queue at the 
cash counter in a bank 
(Figure 4.1), vehicles 
queued at fuel pumps 

Figure 4.1: Queue of people at a bank  (Figure 4.2), etc.

Reprint 2025-26



notes

     
Figure 4.2: Queue of cars in a petrol pump

4.1.1 First In First Out (FIFO)

Queue follows the principle of First In First Out (FIFO), 
since the element entering first in the queue will be the 
first one to come out of it. Thus, the element that has 
been longest in the queue will be removed first. It is also 
known as a First Come First Served (FCFS) approach. 
Queue is an arrangement in which new objects/items 
always get added at one end, usually called the REAR, 
and objects/items always get removed from the other 
end, usually called the FRONT of the queue. REAR is 
also known as TAIL and FRONT as HEAD of a queue. 

4.1.2 Applications of Queue

(A) The concept of queue has many applications in 
real-life: 

• If a train ticket is in the waiting list (such as W/L1), 
it means the ticket is in a queue of tickets waiting to 
get confirmed, as per the increasing order of waiting 
numbers. If a confirmed ticket is cancelled, the W/
L1 numbered ticket is removed from the FRONT of 
the waiting queue and confirmed.

• Sometimes on calling a customer service centre, the 
Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS) tells us to 
wait till a support person is available. Here the call is 
put into a queue of customers waiting to be serviced.

• Imagine there is a single-lane one-way road, then the 
vehicle that entered first will exit first, following the 
concept of queue. Likewise, vehicles in a highway toll 
tax booth are served following the principle of FIFO. 

54 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



(B) Following are some examples of application of 
queue in computer science:

• Suppose there is a web-server hosting a web-site to 
declare result(s). This server can handle a maximum 
of 50 concurrent requests to view result(s). So, to 
serve thousands of user requests, a Queue would be 
the most appropriate data structure to use.

• Some Operating Systems (OS) are required to handle 
multiple tasks called - jobs, seeking to use the 
processor. But we know that a processor can handle 
only one task at a time. Therefore, in a multitasking In the web-server 

example (for result 
operating system, jobs are lined up (queued) and then  

declaration), suppose 
given access to the processor according to some order. the server receives 
The simplest way is to give access to the processor on a request from an 
a FIFO basis, that is according to the order in which Administrator to 

the jobs arrive with a request for the processor. access the result of a 
school on an urgent 

• When we send print commands from multiple files basis, along with 

from the same computer or from different computers other requests from 

using a shared printer. The OS puts these print students to check 
individual results. 

requests in a queue and sends them to the printer Can you suggest some 
one by one on a FIFO basis. strategy to ensure 

service to all as per 
their urgency?

4.2 operatIons on Queue

Following the FIFO approach, data structure queue 
supports the following operations:

• ENQUEUE: is used to insert a new element to the 
queue at the rear end. We can insert elements in 
the queue till there is space in the queue for adding 
more elements. Inserting elements beyond capacity 
of the queue will result in an exception - known as 
Overflow. 

• DEQUEUE: is used to remove one element at a time 
from the front of the queue. We can delete elements 
from a queue until it is empty, trying to delete an 
element from an empty queue will result in exception 
- known as Underflow. 
To perform enqueue and dequeue efficiently on a 

queue, following operations are also required:

• IS EMPTY : used to check whether the queue has any 
element or not, so as to avoid Underflow exception 
while performing dequeue operation.

Queue 55

Reprint 2025-26



• PEEK : used to view elements at the front of the queue, 
without removing it from the queue.

While using a 
list to implement • IS FULL : used to check whether any more elements 
queue, we can can be added to the queue or not, to avoid Overflow 

designate either exceptions while performing enqueue operation.
end of the list 

as Front or Rear Figure 4.3 shows the various stages of a simple 
of the queue. queue containing alphabets. In the figure, Front of the 

But we have to 
fix either of the queue is on the left and Rear on the right.

ends index[0] 
Operation performed Status of queue after operation 

or index[n-1] as 
Front and fix the enqueue(z)

      F Z R
opposite end as 

Rear. enqueue(x)
      F Z X R

enqueue(c)
      F Z X C R

dequeue()
      F X C R

enqueue(v)
      F X C V R

dequeue()
      F C V R

dequeue()
      F V R

Figure 4.3: Various Stages of Stack Operations

4.3 ImplementatIon of Queue usIng python

There are many ways in which queues can be implemented 
in a computer program, one way is using the list data 
type of Python. For creating a queue structure in the 
program, following functions need to be defined:
• Let’s create a queue named myQueue. We can create 

it by assigning an empty list. 

myQueue = list()

• A function (enqueue) to insert a new element at 
the end of queue. The function has two parameters 
- name of the queue and  element which is to be 
inserted in the queue. 

def enqueue(myQueue, element):

    myQueue.append(element)

Note: append() function always adds an element at the end of the 

list, hence Rear of queue.

• We don’t need to implement Is Full, as Python 
being a dynamic language, does not ask for the 

56 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



creation of list having fixed size. Hence, we will never 
encounter a situation when the queue is full.

• A function (isEmpty) to check, if the queue has an 
element or not? This can be done by checking the 
length of the queue. The function has a parameter 
-- name of the queue and returns True if the queue 
is empty False otherwise.

def isEmpty(myQueue):

   if len(myQueue)==0:    

       return True Can you implement a 
queue data structure 

  else:  
using tuple or 

       return False dictionary?

• A function (dequeue) to delete an element from the 
front of the queue. It has one parameter - name 
of the queue and returns the deleted element. The 
function first checks if the queue is empty or not, for 
successful deletion. 

def dequeue(myQueue):

 if not (isEmpty(myQueue)):

     return myQueue.pop(0)   

 else :

     print(“Queue is empty”)

Note: The pop() function with  index[0] will delete the element from 
the beginning of the list, hence Front of queue.

• A function (size) to get the number of elements in 
the queue. We can use the len() function of Python’s 
list to find the number of elements in the queue. The 
function has one parameter - name of the queue and 
returns the number of elements in the queue. 

def size(myQueue):

    return len(myQueue)

• A function (peek) to simply read, but not to delete, 
the element at the front end of the queue. For this, 
we can read the element at index[0] of the queue. While choosing 

The function has one parameter - name of the queue the name of above 
functions general 

and returns the value of element at Front if queue is 
naming convention 

not empty, None otherwise. w.r.t. the queue is 
def peek(myQueue): followed. As these 

    if isEmpty(myQueue): are user defined 
functions any 

          print('Queue is empty')
other name can 

         return None also be used.
    else:

          return myQueue[0]

Queue 57

Reprint 2025-26



Activity 4.1 Let us consider the example of a queue that people 

How can you avoid form while waiting at a bank cash counter. Usually, 
printing of None, following are the events that occur in queue:
when trying to • Two friends come together and go to the cash 
print an empty 
queue? counter, i.e. they form a queue - enqueue operation 

is performed two times.

• As soon as the person at the front is serviced, he will 
be removed from the queue - thus dequeue  operation 
is performed. Cashier calls Next to serve the next 

Activity 4.2
person who is now at the front of the queue.

What if the content of 
the complete queue • Cashier wants to know the length of the queue - size 
is to be listed? of the queue is checked.
Write a function 
for it. • Meanwhile, a few more people walk in the bank, and 

three of them join the queue at the cash counter, i.e. 
enqueue happens 3 times.

• Another person gets served and leaves the counter, 
i.e. dequeue is performed. Cashier calls Next to serve 
another person.

• The Next three people get served one after another, 
i.e. dequeue is performed thrice. 

• Cashier calls Next and realises that there are no more 
people to be served - underflow situation happens
Now, let us write the code for the above scenario of 

the bank.

Program 4-1
myQueue = list()

# each person to be assigned a code as P1, P2, P3,...

element = input("enter person’s code to enter in queue :”)

enqueue(myQueue,element)

element = input("enter person’s code for insertion in queue :")

enqueue(myQueue,element)

print("person removed from queue is:", dequeue(myQueue))

print(“Number of people in the queue is :”,size(myQueue))

element = input("enter person’s code to enter in queue :")

enqueue(myQueue,element)

element = input("enter person’s code to enter in queue :")

enqueue(myQueue,element)

element = input("enter person’s code to enter in queue :")

enqueue(myQueue,element)

58 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



print("Now we are going to remove remaining people from the 
queue")

while not isEmpty(myQueue):

 print("person removed from queue is ",               
 dequeue(myQueue))

 Output

enter person’s code to enter in queue :P1

enter person’s code to enter in queue :P2

person removed from the queue is :p1

number of people in the queue is :1

enter person’s code to enter in queue :P3

enter person’s code to enter in queue :P4

enter person’s code to enter in queue :P5

Now we are going to remove remaining people from the queue

person removed from the queue is :p2

person removed from the queue is :p3

person removed from the queue is :p4

person removed from the queue is :p5

Queue is empty

4.4  IntroductIon to deQue

Deque (pronounced as “deck”) is an arrangement in 
which addition and removal of element(s) can happen 
from any end, i.e.  head/front or tail/rear. This data 
structure does not apply any restriction on the side from 
which addition/removal of elements should happen, 
so it can be used to implement stack or queue in the 
program. It is also known as Double ended queue, 
because it permits insertion, deletion operations from 
any end.  

(insertion) Push Push (insertion) 

(deletion) Pop Pop (deletion)

Front Rear

Figure 4.4: Basic deque structure displaying head and tail to implement stack or queue.

4.4.1 Applications of Deque

• At a train ticket purchasing counter, a normal queue 
of people is formed for purchasing a ticket. A person 
at the front purchased the ticket and left the counter. 
After a while they return back to the counter to ask 

Queue 59

Reprint 2025-26



something. As they have already purchased a ticket, 
they may have the privilege to join the queue from 
the front.

• Vehicles in a highway toll tax booth are served 
following the principle of queue. There are multiple 
queues if there are parallel booths at the toll gate. In 
case all vehicles of a booth are served then vehicles 
from the other booth(s) are asked to form a queue in 
front of the vacant booth. So, vehicles at the end of 
those queues will leave (removed from the end from 
where queue was joined) current booth and join 

Activity 4.3 queue at the vacant booth.

In a deque, if insertion Following are some examples where data structure 
and deletion of deque maybe applied in computer science:
elements is done from 
the same end, it will • To maintain browser history (URL), usually a stack 
behave as is used, because once a tab is closed and if you press 
1) Queue ctrl+shift+T, the most recently closed URL is opened 
2) Stack first. As the number of URLs which can be stored in 
3) List
4) None of the  history is fixed, so when this list of URLs becomes 
    above large, URLs from the end of the list (i.e. which were 

least visited) gets deleted.

• Same happens for providing the Do and Undo option 
in any text editor.

• To check whether a given string is palindrome or not? 
Activity 4.4 Process string left to right (character wise) and insert 

it in deque from tail/rear like a normal queue. Once 
In a deque, if insertion 
and deletion of the entire string is processed (i.e. inserted in deque) 
elements is done from we will take out (delete) a character from both the 
the opposite end, it will ends and match them till there is no character left 
behave as or only one character left in deque. In either case, 
1) Queue string is palindrome.
2) Stack
3) List

4.4.2 Operations on Deque
4) None of the  
    above • INSERTFRONT: This operation is used to insert a 

new element at the front of the deque. 

• INSERTREAR: This operation is the same as a 
normal queue, i.e.  insert a new element at the rear 
of the deque.

• DELETIONFRONT: This operation is the same as 
normal queue, i.e. to remove an element from the 
front of the deque.

• DELETIONREAR:  This operation is used to remove 
one element at a time from the rear of the deque. 

60 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



To perform above operations efficiently on a deque, notes
we will need all supporting operations used in normal 
queue viz Is Empty, Peek, Size.

Let’s understand how these operations work for 
checking whether a string is palindrome or not, using a 
deque through the following algorithm.

Algorithm 4.1

Step1:  Start traversing string (madam) from left side, a 

           character at a time.

Step 2:    Insert the character in deque as normal queue using 

              INSERTREAR.
Step 3:   Repeat Step 1 and Step 2 for  all characters of  
              string (madam)

m a d a insertrear
(m)

Front Rear

Figure 4.5: Status of Deque after 4th iteration

Step 4:  Remove one character from the front and one 
character from the rear end of deque  using 
DELETIONFRONT and DELETIONREAR we can 
do it.

removefront a d a insertrear
(m) (m)

Front Rear

Figure 4.6: Status of Deque after removing  one character from both 
the ends.

Step 5: Match these two removed characters. 
Step 6: If they are same then  
               repeat Step 4 and 5 till deque is empty or left 
               with only one character, 

               eventually string is Palindrome 
     else  stop as string is not palindrome

4.5 ImplementatIon of deQue usIng python

Like queue, deque is also an ordered linear list, hence 
we use list data type to create deque in our program. 
The program should have the following functions/ 
statement(s) defined in it:

Queue 61

Reprint 2025-26



notes • A statement to create deque, with name myDeque. 
myDeque = list()

• A function insertFront(), to insert an element at the 
front of deque having two parameters - name of 
deque and  element to be inserted. As the element is 
to be inserted in the beginning, we will use insert() 
with index 0 for it.

def  insertFront(myDeque, element):

     myDeque.insert(0,element)

• A function insertRear(), to insert an element at the 
rear of deque. It’s implementation will be the same as 
enqueue() of normal queue requiring two parameters 
same as insertFront().

• A function isEmpty(), to check the presence of 
element(s) in deque will be the same as the function, 
with the same name, defined for normal queue.

• A function deletionRear(), to delete an element from 
the rear of the deque. It only requires the name of 
deque and returns the deleted element. We will use 
pop() without parameter(s) to delete the last element 
of the deque.

   def deletionRear(myDeque):

     if not (isEmpty()):

      return myDeque.pop()   
       # removing data from end of list

     else :

      print(“Deque empty”)

• A function deletionFront(), to delete an element from 
the front of deque. It’s implementation will be the 
same as dequeue() of normal queue.  

• A function getFront(), to read value from the front of 
deque, without removing it from the queue when the 
queue is not empty. It accepts the name of deque as 
parameter and returns a copy of value.

 def  getFront(mydeque):

     if not (isEmpty()):

      return mydeque[0]  

     else :

     print(“ Queue empty”)

• A function getRear(), to read value from the rear of 
the deque, without removing it from the deque. The 

62 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



function accepts deque as argument and returns a Notes
copy of  value, when the queue is not empty.

 de f   ge t Re a r ( myde que ) :
     i f  not  ( i s e mpt y( ) ) :
      r e t ur n myde que [ l e n( myde que ) - 1]   
     e l s e  :
      pr i nt ( “  De que  e mpt y” )

Let us  write a main(),  function to invoke various 
Deque functions :

Program 4-2 Implementation of Deque in Python

de f  i ns e r t Fr ont ( myDe que , e l e me nt ) :
    myDe que . i ns e r t ( 0 , e l e me nt )

de f  ge t Fr ont ( myDe que ) :
    i f  not  ( i s Empt y( myDe que ) ) :
     r e t ur n myDe que [ 0]
    e l s e :
	 	 			print("Queue	underflow")
de f  ge t Re a r ( myDe que ) :
    i f  not  ( i s Empt y( myDe que ) ) :
     r e t ur n myDe que [ l e n( myDe que ) - 1]
    e l s e :
	 	 			print	("Queue	underflow")
de f  i ns e r t Re a r ( myDe que , e l e me nt ) :
    myDe que . a ppe nd( e l e me nt )

de f  i s Empt y( myDe que ) :
    i f  l e n( myDe que )  == 0:
     r e t ur n Tr ue
    e l s e :
     r e t ur n Fa l s e

de f  de l e t i onRe a r ( myDe que ) :
    i f  not  i s Empt y( myDe que ) :
     r e t ur n myDe que . pop( )
    e l s e :
	 	 			print("Queue	underflow")
de f  de l e t i onFr ont ( myDe que ) :
    i f  i s Empt y( myDe que ) :

Queue 63

Reprint 2025-26



	 	 			print("Queue	underflow")
    else:
     return myDeque.pop(0)

def main():
    dQu = list()
    choice = int(input('enter 1 to use as normal queue 2 otherwise  
  : '))
    if choice == 1:
     element = input("data for insertion at rear ")
     insertRear(dQu,element)
      element = getFront(dQu)
     print("data at the beginning of queue is ", element)
        element = input("data for insertion at front ")
     insertRear(dQu,element)
     print('data removed from front of queue is ', deletionFront(dQu))
     print('data removed from front of queue is ', deletionFront(dQu))

Output
enter 1 to use as normal queue 2 otherwise : 1
data for insertion at rear    23
data at the beginning of queue is    23
data for insertion at rear   45
data removed from front of queue is    23
data removed from front of queue is    45
Queue	underflow
data removed from front of queue is    None

enter 1 to use as normal queue 2 otherwise : 2
data for insertion at front    34
data at the end of queue is    34
data for insertion at front    56
data removed from rear of queue is    34
data removed from rear of queue is    56
Queue	underflow
data removed from rear of queue is    None

summary

• Queue is an ordered linear data structure, 
following FIFO strategy. 

• Front and Rear are used to indicate beginning 
and end of queue. 

• In Python, the use of predefined methods takes 
care of Front and Rear.

64 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



	 	 			print("Queue	underflow")
• Insertion in a queue happens at the rear end. notes

Deletion happens at the front. 
• Insertion operation is known as enqueue and 

deletion operation is known as dequeue. 

• To support enqueue and dequeue operations, 
isEmpty, isfull and peek operations are used 

• Deque is a version of queue, which allows insertion 
and deletion at both ends. 

• A deque can support both stack and queue 
operations. 

• Other operations supported by deque are 
insertfront, insertrear, deletefront, deleterear, 
getfront, getrear, isempty and isfull.

exercIse

1. Fill in the blank
a) ____________________ is a linear list of elements 

Queue	underflow in which insertion and deletion takes place from 
different ends.

b) Operations on a queue are performed in 
__________________ order.

c) Insertion operation in a queue is called ______________ 
and deletion operation in a queue is called 
____________________.

d) Deletion of elements is performed from _______________ 
Queue	underflow end of the queue.

e) Elements ‘A’,’S’,’D’ and ‘F’ are present in the queue, and 
they are deleted one at a time, ________________________ 
is the sequence of element received.

f) _______________ is a data structure where elements 
can be added or removed at either end, but not in the 
middle.

g) A deque contains ‘z’,’x’,’c’,’v’ and ‘b’ . Elements 
received after deletion are ‘z’,’b’,’v’,’x’ and ‘c’. ________
__________________________ is the sequence of deletion 
operation performed on deque.

2. Compare and contrast queue with stack.

3. How does FIFO describe queue?

Queue 65

Reprint 2025-26



notes 4. Write a menu driven python program using queue, to 
implement movement of shuttlecock in it’s box.

5. How is queue data type different from deque data type?

6. Show the status of queue after each operation
enqueue(34)
enqueue(54)
dequeue()
enqueue(12)
dequeue()
enqueue(61)
peek()
dequeue()
dequeue()
dequeue()
dequeue()
enqueue(1)

7. Show the status of deque after each operation
peek()
insertFront(12)
insertRear(67)
deletionFront()
insertRear(43)
deletionRear()
deletionFront()
deletionRear()

8. Write a python program to check whether the given 
string is palindrome or not, using deque. (Hint : refer to 
algorithm 4.1)

66 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26

##5##

pter
Cha

5 Sorting

“Every one of today's smartphones has 
thousands of times more processing power 
than the computers that guided astronauts to 

the moon.”

— Peter Thiel

In this Chapter

» Introduction

» Bubble Sort

» Selection Sort

» Insertion Sort 5.1 IntroductIon

» Time Complexity of Sorting is the process of ordering or arranging a 
Algorithms given collection of elements in some particular 

order. We can sort a collection of numbers in 
ascending (increasing) or descending (decreasing) 
order. If the collection is of strings, we can sort it 
in an alphabetical order (a-z or z-a) or according 
to the length of the string. For example, words in a 
dictionary are sorted in alphabetical order; seats 
in an examination hall are ordered according to 
candidates’ roll number. We can also sort a list of 
students based on their height or weight. 

Imagine finding the meaning of a word from 
a dictionary that is not ordered. We will have to 
search for the word on each page till we find the 
word, which will be very tedious. That is why 
dictionaries have the words in alphabetical order 
and it ease the process of searching.

Reprint 2025-26



Sorting a large number of items can take a substantial 
Can you identify amount of time. However, this extra time (called 
other examples 
where sorting plays  overhead) is worth when compared to the amount of time 

needed to find an element from an unsorted list. Sorting 
an important role in 
computers? is an important area of study in computer science, and 

many sorting algorithms have been developed and 
analysed from their performance point of view. In this 
chapter, we will learn about three sorting methods and 
implement them using Python. Bubble sort is discussed 
in section 5.2, followed by discussion on selection sort 
and insertion sort in section 5.3 and 5.4, respectively

5.2 BuBBle Sort

The first sorting technique we are going to understand is 
Bubble sort. It sorts a given list of elements by repeatedly 
comparing the adjacent elements and swapping them 
if they are unordered. Swapping two elements means 
changing their positions with each other. In algorithm, 
every iteration through each element of a list is called a 
pass. For a list with n elements, the bubble sort makes 
a total of n – 1 passes to sort the list. In each pass, the 
required pairs of adjacent elements of the list will be 
compared. In order to arrange elements in ascending 
order, the largest element is identified after each pass 
and placed at the correct position in the list. This can 
be considered as the largest element being ‘bubbled up’. 
Hence the name Bubble sort. This sorted element is not 
considered in the remaining passes and thus the list of 

In Figure 5.1, we can 
see that  the list got elements gets reduced in successive passes. 
sorted in the 4th pass  
itself. Still the bubble Figure 5.1 demonstrates the working of the bubble 
sort technique made sort method to arrange a list in ascending order. Let 
a redundant 5th pass us consider a list having 6 elements as numList = [8, 
which did not result 7, 13, 1, -9, 4]. In the figure, elements being compared 
in any swap. If there are highlighted with blue colour and sorted elements 
is no swapping in any 
pass, it means the are highlighted with green colour.  To begin sorting, 
list  is already sorted, the element at index 0 is compared with the element at 
hence the sorting index 1. If the first element is bigger, it is swapped with 
operation needs to the second. Else, no change is done. Next, the element 
be stopped. Can you at index 1 is compared with the element at index 2. This 
think of making any 
improvement in the continues till the end of the list is reached. After the 
Algorithm 5.1 so that first pass, the largest element will reach the end of the 
it stops when the list list as shown in Figure 5.1 with green colour.
becomes sorted?

68 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



numList 8 7 13 1 -9 4
Index

0 1 2 3 4 5

Comparison in Pass 1 Comparison in Pass 2

Swap No Change

8 7 13 1 -9 4 7 8 1 -9 4 13

No Change Swap

7 8 13 1 -9 4 7 8 1 -9 4 13

Swap Swap

7 8 13 1 -9 4 7 1 8 -9 4 13

Swap Swap

7 8 1 13 -9 4 7 1 -9 8 4 13

Swap Swap

7 8 1 -9 13 4 7 1 -9 4 8 13

7 8 1 -9 4 13

Comparison in Pass 3 Comparison in Pass 4
Swap Swap

7 1 -9 4 8 13 1 -9 4 7 8 13

Swap No Change

1 7 -9 4 8 13 -9 1 4 7 8 13

Swap

1 -9 7 4 8 13 -9 1 4 7 8 13

Swap

1 -9 4 7 8 13

Sorting 69

Reprint 2025-26



Comparison in Pass 5

Swap

-9 1 4 7 8 13

Indicates elements to be swapped

-9 1 4 7 8 13 Indicates elements already sorted

Figure 5.1: Comparisons done in different passes of Bubble sort

Algorithm 5.1 shows the steps followed for the bubble 
sort that takes numList as a list  of n elements, and 
sorts the list in ascending order:

Activity 5.1
Algorithm 5.1: Bubble Sort

Algorithm 5.1  sorts  a 
list in ascending order. BUBBLESORT( numList, n)
Write a bubble sort 

Step 1: SET i = 0 
algorithm to sort a 
list in descending 

Step 2: WHILE i< n REPEAT STEPS 3 to 8
order?  

Step 3:  SET j = 0

Step 4:  WHILE j< n-i-1,REPEAT STEPS 5 to 7

Step 5: IF numList[j] > numList[j+1] THEN

Step 6:  swap(numList[j],numList[j+1])

Step 7:      SET j=j+1

Step 8:  SET i=i+1

Program 5-1 Implementation of bubble sort using Python.

def bubble_Sort(list1):

   n = len(list1)

   for i in range(n):     # Number of passes

   for j in range(0, n-i-1):       

   # size -i-1 because last i elements are already sorted  
      #in previous passes

   if list1[j] > list1[j+1] :    

   # Swap element at jth position with (j+1)th position

              list1[j], list1[j+1] = list1[j+1], list1[j]

numList = [8, 7, 13, 1, -9, 4]

bubble_Sort(numList)

70 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



pr i nt  ( “ The  s or t e d l i s t  i s  : ” ) Activity 5.2

f or  i  i n  r a nge ( l e n( numLi s t ) ) : Apply bubble sort 

    pr i nt  ( numLi s t [ i ] ,  e nd="  " ) technique to sort a list 
of elements numList2 

Output: = [8, 7, 6, 5, 4]. Show 

The  s or t e d l i s t  i s  : the positions of 
elements in the list 

- 9  1  4  7  8 13 after each pass. 
In which pass 
the last swap 

5.3 Selection Sort
happens?  

Selection sort is another sorting technique. To sort a 
list having n elements, the selection sort makes (n-1) 
number of passes through the list. The list is considered 
to be divided into two lists --  the left list containing 
the sorted elements, and the right list containing the 
unsorted elements. Initially, the left list is empty, and 
the right list contains all the elements. 

For arranging elements in ascending order, in the first 
pass, all the elements in the unsorted list are traversed 
to find the smallest element. The smallest element is 
then swapped with the leftmost element of the unsorted 
list. This element occupies the first position in the 
sorted list, and it is not considered in further passes. In 
the second pass, the next smallest element is selected 
from the remaining elements in the unsorted list and 
swapped with the leftmost element of the unsorted list. 
This element occupies the second position in the sorted 
list, and the unsorted list reduces by one element for 
the third pass. 

This process continues until n-1 smallest elements 
are found and moved to their respective places. The nth 
element is the last, and it is already in place. Figure 
5.2  demonstrates the working of selection sort method 
to arrange a list in ascending order. In this Figure, 
elements being compared are shown using arrows and 
the smaller element in a comparison is highlighted with 
blue colour. The sorted elements are highlighted —

Sorting 71

Reprint 2025-26



numList 8 7 13 1 -9 4
Index

0 1 2 3 4 5

Comparison in Pass 1 Comparison in Pass 2

8 7 13 1 -9 4 -9 8 7 13 1 4

8 7 13 1 -9 4 -9 8 7 13 1 4

8 7 13 1 -9 4 -9 8 7 13 1 4

8 7 13 1 -9 4 -9 8 7 13 1 4

8 7 13 1 -9 4
-9 8 7 13 1 4

Swap

8 7 13 1 -9 4
-9 1 7 13 8 4

Swap

-9 8 7 13 1 4

   

Comparison in Pass 3 Comparison in Pass 4

-9 1 7 13 8 4 -9 1 4 13 8 7

-9 1 7 13 8 4 -9 1 4 13 8 7

-9 1 7 13 8 4 -9 1 4 13 8 7

Swap

-9 1 7 13 8 4 -9 1 4 7 8 13

Swap

-9 1 4 13 8 7

72 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Comparison in Pass 5

-9 1 4 7 8 13 Indicates the smaller element in a 
comparisson

Indicates the elements in the sorted list

-9 1 4 7 8 13 Sorted List

Unsorted List

Indicates elements being compared
-9 1 4 7 8 13

Figure 5.2: Comparisons done in different passes of Selection sort 

The following is an algorithm for the selection sort 
that takes numList as a list consisting of n elements, 
and sorts the list in ascending order:

Algorithm 5.2 shows the steps followed for the 
selection sort that takes numList as a list of n elements, 
and sorts the list in ascending order:

Algorithm 5.2: Selection Sort

SELECTIONSORT( numList, n)

Step 1: SET i=0

Step 2: WHILE i< n REPEAT STEPS 3 to 11

Step 3:  SET min = i, flag = 0

Step 4:  SET j= i+1

Step 5:  WHILE j<n, REPEAT STEPS 6 to 10

Step 6:   IF numList[j] < numList[min] THEN

Activity 5.3
Step 7:   min = j

Consider a list of 10 
Step 8:   flag = 1 elements:  

randList = 
Step 9:  IF flag = 1 THEN [7,11,3,10,17,23,1,4,21,5]. 

Determine the partially 
Step 10: swap(numList[i],numList[min]) sorted list after 

four complete 
Step 11:  SET i=i+1 passes of 

selection sort.

Sorting 73

Reprint 2025-26



Program 5-2 Implementation of selection sort using Python.

de f  s e l e c t i on_Sor t ( l i s t 2) :
	 flag	=	0	 #to	decide	when	to	swap
	 n=len(list2)
	 for	i	in	range(n):	#	Traverse	through	all	list	elements
	 	 min	=	i
	 	 for	j	in	range(i	+	1,	len(list2)):	#the	left	elements	
	 	 #are	already	sorted	in	previous	passes
	 	 			if	list2[j]	<	list2[min]: #	element	at	j	is	smaller	
	 	 			#than	the	current	min	element
	 	 min	=	j
	 	 flag	=	1
	 	 if	flag	==	1	:		#	next	smallest	element	is	found
	 	 list2[min],	list2[i]	=	list2[i],	list2[min]
numList	=	[8,	7,	13,	1,	-9,	4]
selection_Sort(numList)
print	("The	sorted	list	is	:")
for	i	in	range(len(numList)):
	 print	(numList[i],	end="	")

Output:
The	sorted	list	is	:
-9	1	4	7	8	13

5.4 InsertIon sort

Insertion sort is another sorting algorithm that can 
arrange elements of a given list in ascending or 
descending order. Like Selection sort, in Insertion sort 
also, the list is divided into two parts - one of sorted 
elements and another of unsorted elements. Each 
element in the unsorted list is considered one by one 
and is inserted into the sorted list at its appropriate 
position. In each pass, the sorted list is traversed from 
the backward direction to find the position where the 
unsorted element could be inserted. Hence the sorting 
method is called insertion sort.

In pass 1, the unsorted list has n-1 elements and the 
sorted list has a single element (say element s). The first 
element of the unsorted list (say element e) is compared 
with the element s of sorted list.  If element e is smaller 
than element s, then element s is shifted to the right 
making space for inserting element e. This shifting 
will now make sorted list of size 2 and unsorted list of 
size n-2.

In pass 2, the first element (say element e) of unsorted 
list will be compared with each element of sorted list 

74 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



starting from the backward direction till the appropriate 
position for insertion is found. The elements of sorted 
list will be shifted towards right making space for the 
element e where it could be inserted.

This continues till all the elements in unsorted lists 
are inserted at appropriate positions in the sorted list. 
This results into a sorted list in which elements are 
arranged in ascending order.

Figure 5.3  demonstrates the working of the insertion 
sort to arrange a list in ascending order.

numList 8 7 13 1 -9 4
Index

0 1 2 3 4 5

Comparison in Pass 1 Comparison in Pass 2
No Change

8 7 13 1 -9 4 7 8 13 1 -9 4

Swap

8 7 13 1 -9 4 7 8 13 1 -9 4

7 8 13 1 -9 4

Comparison in Pass 3 Comparison in Pass 4
Swap Swap

7 8 13 1 -9 4 1 7 8 13 -9 4

Swap Swap

7 8 1 13 -9 4 1 7 8 -9 13 4

Swap Swap

7 1 8 13 -9 4 1 7 -9 8 13 4

Swap

1 7 8 13 -9 4 -9 1 7 8 13 4

-9 1 7 8 13 4

Sorting 75

Reprint 2025-26



Comparison in Pass 5

Swap

Indicates element(s) in sorted list 
-9 1 7 8 13 4

Swap

-9 1 7 8 4 13

Swap

-9 1 7 4 8 13

No Change

-9 1 4 7 8 13

-9 1 4 7 8 13

Figure 5.3: Comparisons done in different passes of Insertion sort 

Let us consider that numList is a list consisting 
of n elements. Algorithm 5.3 sorts the list numList in 
ascending order using insertion sort technique.

Algorithm  5.3: Insertion Sort

INSERTIONSORT( numList, n)

Step 1: SET i=1 

Step 2: WHILE i< n REPEAT STEPS 3 to 9

Step 3:  temp = numList[i]
Activity 5.4

Consider a list of 10 Step 4:  SET j = i-1
elements: 
Array = Step 5:  WHILE j> = 0 and numList[j]>temp,REPEAT 
[7,11,3,10,17,23,1,4,21,5]     STEPS 6 to 7
Determine the partially 
sorted list after Step 6:  numList[j+1] = numList[j] 
three complete 
passes of Step 7:  SET j=j-1
insertion sort.

Step 8: numList[j+1] = temp #insert  
   temp at position j

Step 9:   set i=i+1

76 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Program 5-3  Implementation of insertion sort using 
Python.

de f  i ns e r t i on_Sor t ( l i s t 3) :
     n= l e n( l i s t 3)
     f or  i  i n  r a nge ( n) :  #  Tr a ve r s e  t hr ough a l l  e l e me nt s
          t e mp = l i s t 3[ i ]
          j  = i - 1
          whi l e  j  >=0 a nd t e mp< l i s t 3[ j ]  :
         l i s t 3[ j +1]  = l i s t 3[ j ]  
                 j  = j - 1
         l i s t 3[ j +1]  = t e mp

numLi s t  = [ 8,  7 ,  13,  1 ,  - 9 ,  4]
i ns e r t i on_Sor t ( numLi s t )
pr i nt  ( “ The  s or t e d l i s t  i s  : ” )
f or  i  i n  r a nge ( l e n( numLi s t ) ) :
    pr i nt  ( numLi s t [ i ] ,  e nd="  " )

Output:
The  s or t e d l i s t  i s  :
- 9  1  4  7  8  13

5.5 Time ComplexiTy of AlgoriThms

We have studied that there can be more than one approach 
to solve a problem using a computer. In Class XI, we 
compared four different algorithms to check whether a 
given number is prime or not. For the same problem, one 
algorithm  may require more processing time than the 
other. The amount of time an algorithm takes to process 
a given data can be called its time complexity.

For a small set of data elements shown in examples 
of this chapter so far, the time and memory required by 
different algorithms do not differ significantly. However, 
in the real world, sorting algorithms are required to 
work on huge amounts of data. In such cases, the 
total time utilisation becomes significant, and therefore 
it is important to consider the time complexity of an 
algorithm before being used in a real world data set.

Computer scientists proposing different techniques 
for sorting are always interested to find out their time 
complexity. The aim is to find out how a sorting algorithm 
behaves if the order of input elements changes or if the 
number of elements in the list increases or decreases. 
Such comparisons help to decide which algorithm is 
more suitable for which kind of data and application.

Sorting 77

Reprint 2025-26



noteS Calculating the complexity of different algorithms 
involves mathematical calculations and detailed 
analysis, and it is beyond the scope of this textbook to 
discuss them in detail. However, we will discuss some 
basics of complexity to get some ideas. The following 
tips will guide us in estimating the time complexity of 
an algorithm.

• Any algorithm that does not have any loop will have 
time complexity as 1 since the number of instructions 
to be executed will be constant, irrespective of the 
data size. Such algorithms are known as Constant 
time algorithms.

• Any algorithm that has a loop (usually 1 to n) will 
have the time complexity as n because the loop will 
execute the statement inside its body n number of 
times. Such algorithms are known as Linear time 
algorithms.

• A loop within a loop (nested loop) will have the time 
complexity as n2. Such algorithms are known as 
Quadratic time algorithms.

• If there is a nested loop and also a single loop, the 
time complexity will be estimated on the basis of the 
nested loop only.

Now, look at the Python programs of the three sorting 
techniques discussed in this chapter, you will notice that 
in each of the three programs, there is a nested loop, 
i.e., one inside another. So according to the above rules, 
all the sorting algorithms namely, bubble sort, selection 
sort and insertion sort have a time complexity of n2.

SummAry

• The process of placing or rearranging a collection 
of elements into a particular order is known as 
sorting.

• Bubble sort is the simplest sorting algorithm 
that works by repeatedly swapping the adjacent 
elements in case they are unordered in n-1 passes.

• In Selection Sort, the smallest element is selected 
from the unsorted array and swapped with the 

78 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



leftmost element, and that element becomes a noteS

part of the sorted array. The process continues for 
the next element in the unsorted array till the list 
is sorted.

• Insertion Sort places the element of a list at 
its suitable place in each pass. It is similar to 
the placing of cards at its right position while 
playing cards.

• Complexity analysis is performed to explain 
how an algorithm will perform when the input 
grows larger.

exercISe

1. Consider a list of 10 elements: 

numList =[7,11,3,10,17,23,1,4,21,5]. 

Display the partially sorted list after three complete 
passes of Bubble sort.

2. Identify the number of swaps required for sorting the 
following list using selection sort and bubble sort and 
identify which is the better sorting technique with 
respect to the number of comparisons.

  List 1 : 63 42 21 9

3. Consider the following lists:

  List 1:  2 3 5 7 11

  List 2:  11 7 5 3 2

     If the lists are sorted using Insertion sort then 
which of the lists List1 or List 2 will make the minimum 
number of comparisons? Justify using diagrammatic 
representation.

4. Write a program using user defined functions that 
accepts a List of numbers as an argument and finds its 
median. (Hint : Use bubble sort to sort the accepted list. 
If there are  odd number of terms, the median is the 
center term. If there are even number of terms, add the 
two middle terms and divide by 2 get median)

Sorting 79

Reprint 2025-26



noteS 5. All the branches of XYZ school conducted an aptitude 
test for all the students in the age group 14 - 16. There 
were a total of n students. The marks of n students are 
stored in a list. Write a program using a user defined 
function that accepts a list of marks as an argument 
and calculates the ‘xth’ percentile (where x is any number 
between 0 and 100).You are required to perform the 
following steps to be able to calculate the ‘xth’ percentile. 

  Note: Percentile is a measure of relative performance i.e. It is 
calculated based on a candidate’s performance with respect 
to others. For example : If a candidate's score is in the 90th 
percentile, that means she/he scored better than 90% of 

people who took the test.

Steps to calculate the xth percentile:

 I. Order all the values in the data set from smallest to 
largest using Selection Sort. In general any of the 
sorting methods can be used.

 II. Calculate index by multiplying x percent 
by the total number of values, n.  

For example: to find 90th percentile for 120 students:  

              0.90*120 = 108

 III. Ensure that the index is a whole number by using 
math.round() 

 VI. Display the value at the index obtained in Step 3.

The corresponding value in the list is the xth percentile.

6. During admission in a course, the names of the students 
are inserted in ascending order. Thus, performing the 
sorting operation at the time of inserting elements in 
a list. Identify the type of sorting technique being used 
and write a program using a user defined function that 
is invoked every time a name is input and stores the 
name in ascending order of names in the list. 

80 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26

##6##

Chapter

6 Searching

“Even though most people won't be directly 
involved with programming, everyone is affected 

by computers, so an educated person should have 
a good understanding of how computer hardware, 

software, and networks operate.”

— Brian Kernighan

In this Chapter

» Introduction

» Linear Search

» Binary Search
6.1 IntroductIon

» Search by Hashing
We store many things in our home and find them 
out later as and when required. Sometimes we 
remember the exact location of a required item. 
But, sometimes we do not remember the exact 
location and in that case we need to search for 
the required item. A computer also stores lots of 
data to be retrieved later as and when demanded 
by a user or a program.

Searching means locating a particular 
element in a collection of elements. Search result 
determines whether that particular element is 
present in the collection or not. If it is present, 
we can also find out the position of that element 
in the given collection. Searching is an important 
technique in computer science. In order to design 
algorithms, programmers need to understand the 
different ways in which a collection of data can be 
searched for retrieval.

Reprint 2025-26



6.2 LInear Search

Linear search is the most fundamental and the simplest 
search method. It is an exhaustive searching technique 
where every element of a given list is compared with 
the item to be searched (usually referred to as ‘key’). 
So, each element in the list is compared one by one 
with the key. This process continues until an element 
matching the key is found and we declare that the 
search is successful. If no element matches the key and 
we have traversed the entire list, we declare the search 
is unsuccessful i.e., the key is not present in the list. 
This item by item comparison is done in the order, in 
which the elements are present in the list, beginning at 
the first element of the list and moving towards the last. 
Thus, it is also called sequential search or serial search. 
This technique is useful for collection of items that are 
small in size and are unordered.

Given a list numList of n elements and key value K, 
Algorithm 6.1 uses a linear search algorithm to find the 
position of the key K in numList.

Algorithm 6.1 : Linear Search

LinearSearch(numList, key, n)

Step 1: SET index = 0

Step 2: WHILE  index < n, REPEAT Step 3

Activity 6.1 Step 3: IF numlist[index]= key THEN

Consider a list of 15         PRINT “Element found at position”, index+1

elements:         STOP
L=[2,3,9,7,-    ELSE
6,11,12,17,45,23,29, 
31,-37,41,43].         index = index+1

Determine the number Step 4: PRINT “Search unsuccessful”
of comparisons 
linear search Example 6.1 Assume that the numList has seven elements 
makes to search [8, -4, 7, 17, 0, 2, 19] so, n = 7. We need to search for the key, 
for key = 12. say 17 in numList. Table 6.1 shows the elements in the given 

list along with their index values.

Table 6.1 Elements in numList alongwith their index value

Index in numList 0 1 2 3 4 5 6

Value 8 -4 7 17 0 2 19

The step-by-step process of linear search using 
Algorithm 6.1. is given in Table 6.2.

82 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Table 6.2 Linear search for key 17 in numList of Table 6.1

index index < n numList[index]= key index=index+1
0 0 < 7 ? Yes 8 = 17? No 1

1 1 < 7 ? Yes -4 = 17? No 2

2 2 < 7 ? Yes 7 = 17? No 3

3 3 < 7 ? Yes 17 = 17? Yes

Observe that after four comparisons, the algorithm 
found the key 17 and will display ‘Element found at 
position 4’.

Let us now assume another arrangement of the 
elements in numList as [17, 8, -4, 7, 0, 2, 19] and search 
for the key K=17 in numList.

Table 6.3 Elements in numList alongwith their index value

Index in numList 0 1 2 3 4 5 6

Value 17 8 -4 7 0 2 19

Table 6.4 Linear search for key 17 in numList given in Table 6.3

numList[index]= 
index index < n key index=index+1

0 0 < 7 ? Yes 17 = 17? Yes 1

From Table 6.4, it is clear that the algorithm had 
Activity 6.2

to make only 1 comparison to display ‘Element found 
at position 1’. Thus, if the key to be searched is the In the list : L = [7,-1, 

first element in the list, the linear search algorithm 11,32,17,19,23,29,31, 
37,43] 

will always have to make only 1 comparison. This is Determine the number 
the minimum amount of work that the linear search of comparisons 
algorithm would have to do. linear search takes 

to search for key 
Let us now assume another arrangement of the 

= 43.
elements in numList as [8, -4, 7, 0, 2, 19, 17] and search 
for the key K =17 in numList.

On a dry run, we can find out that the linear search 
algorithm has to compare each element in the list till 
the end to display ‘Element found at position 7’. Thus, 
if the key to be searched is the last element in the 
list, the linear search algorithm will have to make n 
comparisons, where n is the number of elements in the 
list. This is in fact the maximum amount of work the 
linear search algorithm would have to do.

SearChing 83

Reprint 2025-26



Let us now assume another case, where the key 
being searched is not present in the list. For example, 
we are searching for key = 10 in the numList.

In this case also, the algorithm has to compare each 
element in the list till the end to display ‘Element is 
not found in the list’. Thus, if the key is not present in 
the list, the linear search algorithm will have to make 
n comparisons. This again is a case where maximum 
work is done. Let us now understand the program of 
a Linear Search. It takes a list of elements and the key 
to be searched as input and returns either the position 
of the element in the list or display that the key is not 
present in the list. 

Program 6-1 Linear Search

de f  l i ne a r Se a r c h( l i s t ,  ke y) :   #f unc t i on t o  pe r f or m t he  s e a r c h
    f or  i nde x i n  r a nge ( 0, l e n( l i s t ) ) :
        i f  l i s t [ i nde x]  == ke y:  #ke y i s  pr e s e nt  
            r e t ur n i nde x+1  #pos i t i on of  ke y i n  l i s t
    r e t ur n None   #ke y i s  not  i n  l i s t
#e nd of  f unc t i on

l i s t 1  = [ ]  #Cr e a t e  a n e mpt y l i s t
ma xi mum = i nt ( i nput ( " How ma ny e l e me nt s  i n  your  l i s t ?  " ) )
pr i nt ( " Ent e r  e a c h e l e me nt  a nd pr e s s  e nt e r :  " )  
f or  i  i n  r a nge ( 0, ma xi mum) :
    n  = i nt ( i nput ( ) )
    l i s t 1 . a ppe nd( n)  #a ppe nd e l e me nt s  t o  t he  l i s t  
pr i nt ( " The  Li s t  c ont e nt s  a r e : " ,  l i s t 1)

ke y = i nt ( i nput ( " Ent e r  t he  numbe r  t o  be  s e a r c he d: " ) )  
pos i t i on = l i ne a r Se a r c h( l i s t 1 ,  ke y)
i f  pos i t i on i s  None :
    pr i nt ( " Numbe r " , ke y, " i s  not  pr e s e nt  i n  t he  l i s t " )
e l s e :
    pr i nt ( " Numbe r " , ke y, " i s  pr e s e nt  a t  pos i t i on" , pos i t i on)

Output
How ma ny e l e me nt s  i n  your  l i s t ?  4
Ent e r  e a c h e l e me nt  a nd pr e s s  e nt e r :  
12
23
3
- 45
The  Li s t  c ont e nt s  a r e :  [ 12,  23,  3 ,  - 45]
Ent e r  t he  numbe r  t o  be  s e a r c he d: 23
Numbe r  23 i s  pr e s e nt  a t  pos i t i on 2

84 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



noteS

6.3 BInary Search

Consider a scenario where we have to find the meaning 
of the word Zoology in an English dictionary. Where do 
we search it in the dictionary? 

1. in the first half?
2. around the middle?
3. in the second half?

It is certainly more prudent to look for the word in the 
second half of the dictionary as the word starts with the 
alphabet ‘Z’. On the other hand, if we were to find the 
meaning of the word Biology, we would have searched 
in the first half of the dictionary.

We were able to decide where to search in the 
dictionary because we are aware of the fact that all words 
in an English dictionary are placed in alphabetical order. 
Taking advantage of this, we could avoid unnecessary 
comparison through each word beginning from the first 
word of the dictionary and moving towards the end till 
we found the desired word. However, if the words in the 
dictionary were not alphabetically arranged, we would 
have to do linear search to find the meaning of a word.

The binary search is a search technique that makes 
use of the ordering of elements in the list to quickly 
search a key. For numeric values, the elements in the 
list may be arranged either in ascending or descending 
order of their key values. For textual data, it may 
be arranged alphabetically starting from a to z or 
from z to a. 

In binary search, the key to be searched is compared 
with the element in the middle of a sorted list. This 
could result in either of the three possibilities:

i) the element at the middle position itself matches 
the key or

ii) the element at the middle position is greater than 
the key or

iii) the element at the middle position is smaller than 
the key

If the element at the middle position matches the 
key, we declare the search successful and the searching 
process ends.

SearChing 85

Reprint 2025-26



If the middle element is greater than the key it means 
that if the key is present in the list, it must surely be 

We are using the in the first half. We can thus straight away ignore the 
term iteration and 

second half of the list and repeat the searching process 
not comparison 

in binary search, only in the first half. 
because after If the middle element is less than the key, it means 

every unsuccessful 
if the key is present in the list, it must be in the second 

comparison, we 
change the search half. We can thus straight away ignore the first half of 

area redefining the list and repeat the searching process only in the 
the first, mid and second half. This splitting and reduction in list size 

last position before continued till the key is either found or the remaining 
making subsequent 

list consists of only one item. If that item is not the 
comparisons. 

key, then the search is unsuccessful as the key is not 
in the list.

Thus, it is evident that unlike linear search of 
elements one-by-one, we can search more efficiently 
using binary search provided the list from which we 
want to search is arranged in some order. That is, the 
list needs to be sorted.

Activity 6.3
If the list to be searched contains an even number 

Consider the numList of elements, the mid value is calculated using the floor 
[17, 8, -4, 7, 0, 2, 
19]. Sort it using division (//) operator. If there are 10 elements in the list, 
the sort() function of then the middle position (mid) = 10//2 = 5. Therefore, 
Python’s Lists. Now the sixth element in the list is considered the middle 
apply binary search element as we know that the first element in list has 
to search for the 

index value 0. If required, the list is further divided into 
key 7. Determine 
the number two parts where the first half contains 5 elements and 
of iterations the second half contains 4 elements.
required.

It is interesting to note that the intermediate 
comparisons which do not find the key still give us 
information about the part of the list where the key 
may be found! They reveal whether the key is before or 
after the current middle position in the list, and we use 
this information to narrow down or reduce our search 

Activity 6.4 area. Thus, each unsuccessful comparison reduces the 
Consider a list [-4, 0, number of elements remaining to be searched by half, 
2, 7, 8, 17, 19]. Apply hence the name binary search. Let us now discuss the 
binary search to find  algorithm of binary search.
element -4. Determine 
the number of key Given a list numList of n elements and key value K, 
comparisons Algorithm 6.2 shows steps for finding position of the 
required. key K in the numList using binary search algorithm.

86 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Algorithm 6.2: Binary Search

BinarySearch(numList, key)

Step 1: SET first = 0, last = n-1

Step 2: Calculate mid = (first+last)//2

Step 3: WHILE  first <= last REPEAT Step 4 The binary search 
algorithm does 

Step 4:      IF numList[mid] = key not change the 
list. Rather, after 

               PRINT “Element found at  position”,     every pass of the 
               " mid+1 algorithm, the 
              STOP search area gets 

        ELSE reduced by half. 
That is, only the 

              IF numList[mid] > key, THEN last  index of the element 
              = mid-1 to be compared with 
              ELSE first = mid + 1 the key changes in 

each iteration.
Step 5: PRINT “Search unsuccessful”

Example 6.2 Consider a sorted list comprising of 15 elements:
numList = [2,3,5,7,10,11,12,17,19,23,29,31,3
7,41,43]

We need to search for the key, say 17 in numList. The 
first, middle and last element identified in numList 
alongwith their index values are shown in Table 6.5.

Table 6.5 Elements in sorted numList alongwith their index value

first mid last

Index in 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
numList

Value 2 3 5 7 10 11 12 17 19 23 29 31 37 41 43

Table 6.6 Working of binary search using steps given in Algorithm 6.2.

first irst <= 
last mid numList[mid] == K key < L f

mid? last

At Start 0 14 (0+14)// Not known Not known 0 <= 14? 
2=7 True

0 14 7 17 = 17? Key is 
Iteration Yes found. The 

1 search 
terminates

Note that the algorithm had to make only 1 iteration 
to display ‘Element found at position 8’. This is because 
the key being searched is the middle element in the list. 
Thus, binary search requires only 1 iteration when the 
key to be searched is the middle value in the list. This 

SearChing 87

Reprint 2025-26



is the minimum amount of work binary search would 
have to do to confirm that a key is present in the list.

Now, let us search for key 2 in the list. 
numList = [2,3,5,7,10,11,12,17,19,23,29,3

Activity 6.5 1,37,41,43]

 For L = [2,3,5,7,10,1 In the first iteration, we have the mid value as 17. As 
1,12,17,19,23,29,31, 2 is smaller than the mid value (17), we have to search 
37,41,43]. Fill up the for the first half of the list in the second iteration. We 
Table 6.8 for the given now consider only 7 elements. As 2 is smaller than the 
key values 2, 43, 17 new mid value (7), we have to search for the first half of 
and 9. What do you 
infer from Table 6.8 the remaining list in the third iteration. We now consider 
regarding performance only 3 elements. Observe that the number of elements 
of both the in the numList is halved each time. It reduces from 15 
algorithms in elements  in iteration 1 to 7 elements in iteration 2, 
different cases? 

and to 3 elements in iteration 3. In the 3rd iteration, 
the algorithm finds that key 2 is smaller than the 
new mid value (3), we have to search in the first half 
of the remaining list. The list now has only 1 element 
in the fourth iteration and on comparison, it is found 
that the element is the same as key. Hence, the search 
terminates successfully and returns the position of key. 
Steps followed for binary search are given in Table 6.7. 

Table 6.7 Searching key = 2 in the numList using binary search

first numList]
last mid K < numList[ first <= last

 == K mid]
mid]

0 14 (0+14)//2= Not known Not known True
At Start

7

0 14 (0+14)//2= 17 = 2? 2 < 17? 0 <= 14?
Iteration 1 7 No True True

0 6 (0+6)//2= 3 7 = 2? 2 < 7? 0 <= 6?
Iteration 2 No True True

0 2 (0+2)//2= 1 3 = 2? 2 < 3? 0 <= 2?
Iteration 3 No True True

0 0 (0+0)//2= 0 2 = 2? Key found, search 
Iteration 4 Yes Terminates, return 

position as (mid+1)=1

As we can see, the binary search algorithm had to 
make 4 iterations to narrow down the list to a single 
element and decide that the search key is the first 
element of list. This is clearly the maximum work 
required to find a key in the given list.

88 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Program 6-2  Binary Search

de f  bi na r ySe a r c h( l i s t ,  ke y) :
        first = 0
        last = len(list) - 1
        while(first <= last):
                mid = (first + last)//2
                if list[mid] == key:
                        r e t ur n mi d
                e l i f  ke y > l i s t [ mi d] :
                        first = mid + 1
                elif key < list[mid]:
                        last = mid - 1
        return -1
list1 = [] #Create an empty list
print ("Create a list by entering elements in ascending order")
print ("press enter after each element, press -999 to stop")
num = int(input())
while num!=-999:
    list1.append(num)
    num = int(input())
n = int(input("Enter the key to be searched: "))
pos = binarySearch(list1,n)
if(pos != -1):
    print( n,"is found at position", pos+1)
e l s e :
    print (n,"is not found in the list ")

Output
Create a list by entering elements in ascending order
press enter after each element, press -999 to stop
1
3
4
5
-999
Enter the number to be searched: 4
4 is found at position 3
Second run of the program with different data:
Create a list by entering elements in ascending order
press enter after each element, press -999 to stop
12
8
3
-999
Enter the number to be searched: 4
4 is not found in the list

SearChing 89

Reprint 2025-26



6.3.1 Applications of Binary Search

• Binary search has numerous applications including 
– searching a dictionary or a telephone directory, 
finding the element with minimum value or maximum 
value in a sorted list, etc.

• Modified binary search techniques have far reaching 
applications such as indexing in databases, 
implementing routing tables in routers, data 
compression code, etc.

6.4 Search By haShIng

Hashing is a technique which can be used to know the 
presence of a key in a list in just one step. The idea is if 
we already know the value at every index position in a 
list, it would require only a single comparison to check 
the presence or absence of a key in that list. Hashing 

Suppose a list has makes searching operations very efficient. A formula 
more than one 
element whose  called hash function is used to calculate the value at an 

index in the list.
modulo division 
results in same Thus, a hash function takes elements of a list one 
remainder value. In by one and generates an index value for every element. 
such situations, what 

This will generate a new list called the hash table. Each 
kind of hashing may 
be useful? index of the hash table can hold only one item and the 

positions are indexed by integer values starting from 0. 
Note that the size of the hash table can be larger than 
the size of the list.

A simple hash function that works with numeric 
values is known as the remainder method. It takes 
an element from a list and divides it by the size of the 
hash table. The remainder so generated is called the 
hash value. 

h(element) = element % size(hash table)

 We can easily implement a hash table using a 
Python’s List. Let us consider an empty hash table 
having 10 positions  as shown in Table 6.8: 

Table 6.8 An Empty hash table with 10 positions

Index/ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
position
Value None None None None None None None None None None

Let us consider a list of numbers (34, 16, 2, 93, 
80, 77, 51). We can use the hash function remainder 

90 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



method explained earlier to create a hash table as 
shown in Table 6.9.

Table 6.9 hash function element % 10 applied on the elements of list 

Element 34 16 2 93 80 77 51

Hash Value 34%10=4 16%10=6 2%10=2 93%10=3 80%10=0 77%10=7 51%10=1

After computing the hash values, each element is 
inserted at its designated position in the hash table 
shown in Table 6.10

Table 6.10 hash table generated for elements given in Table 6.10

index 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

Value 80 51 2 93 34 None 16 77 None None

Now, to search for a key, we can calculate its index 
using the hashing function and compare the element at 
that index with the key to declare whether the element is 
present in the list or not. This search operation involves 
just one comparison and hence the same amount of 
time is always required to search a key irrespective of 
the size of the list.

Program 6-3 Use of hashing to find a key in the given list L 

#Function to check if a key is present or not 
def hashFind(key,hashTable):
    if (hashTable[key % 10] == key): #key is present 
        return ((key % 10)+1)   #return the position
    else:
        return None  #key is not present
#end of function

#create hashTable with 10 empty positions
hashTable=[None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, 
None]
print("We have created a hashTable of 10 positions:")
print(hashTable)

L = [34, 16, 2, 93, 80, 77, 51] 
print("The given list is", L[::] )

# Apply hash function
for i in range(0,len(L)): 
    hashTable[L[i]%10] = L[i]

SearChing 91

Reprint 2025-26



print("The hash table contents are: " )
for i in range(0,len(hashTable)): 
    print("hashindex=", i," , value =", hashTable[i])

key = int(input("Enter the number to be searched:")) 

position = hashFind(key,hashTable)
if position is None:
    print("Number",key,"is not present in the hash table")
else:
    print("Number ",key," present at ",position, " position")

Output:
We have created a hashTable of 10 positions:
[None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None]
The given list is [34, 16, 2, 93, 80, 77, 51]
The hash table contents are: 
hashindex= 0  , value = 80
hashindex= 1  , value = 51
hashindex= 2  , value = 2
hashindex= 3  , value = 93
hashindex= 4  , value = 34
hashindex= 5  , value = None
hashindex= 6  , value = 16
hashindex= 7  , value = 77
hashindex= 8  , value = None
hashindex= 9  , value = None
Enter the number to be searched:16
Number  16  present at  7  position

6.4.1 COLLISION

The hashing technique works fine if each element of the 
list maps to a unique location in the hash table. Consider 
a list [34, 16, 2, 26, 80]. While applying the 
hash function say, list [i]%10, two elements (16 and 
26) would have a hash value 6. This is a problematic 
situation, because according to our definition, two or 
more elements cannot be in the same position in the 
list. This situation is called collision in hashing.

We must have a mechanism for placing the other 
items with the same hash value in the hash table. This 
process is called collision resolution. Collision can be 
resolved in many ways, but it is beyond the scope of this 
book to discuss collision resolution methods.

92 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



If every item of the list maps to a unique index in noteS

the hash table, the hash function is called a perfect 
hash function. If a hash function is perfect, collision will 
never occur.

Apart from modulo division method, hash functions 
may be based on several other techniques like integer 
division, shift folding, boundary folding, mid-square 
function, extraction, radix transformation, etc. 
Again, it is beyond the scope of this book to discuss 
these methods. 

The time taken by different hash functions may be 
different, but it remains constant for a particular hash 
function. The advantage of hashing is that the time 
required to compute the index value is independent of 
the number of items in the search list. It is to remember 
that the cost of computing a hash function must be 
small enough to make a hashing-based searching more 
efficient than other search methods.

Summary

• Searching means trying to locate a particular 
element called key in a collection of elements. 
Search specifies whether that key is present in the 
collection or not. Also, if the key is present, it tells 
the position of that key in the given collection.

• Linear search checks the elements of a list, one at 
a time, without skipping any element. It is useful 
when we need to search for an item in a small 
unsorted list, but it is slow and time-consuming 
when the list contains a large number of items. 
The time taken to search the list increases as the 
size of the list increases.

• Binary search takes a sorted/ordered list and 
divides it in the middle. It then compares the 
middle element with the key to be searched. If 
the middle element matches the key, the search 
is declared successful and the program ends. If 
the middle element is greater than the key, the 
search repeats only in the first half of the list. 
If the middle element is lesser than the key, the 
search repeats only in the second half of the list. 

SearChing 93

Reprint 2025-26



noteS This splitting and reduction in list size continue 
till the key is found or the remaining list consists 
of only one item.

• In binary search, comparisons that do not find the 
key still give us idea about the location where the 
key may probably be found! They reveal whether 
the key is before or after the current middle position 
in the list, and we can use this information to 
narrow down or reduce our searching efforts.

• Hash based searching requires only one key 
comparison to discover the presence or absence 
of a key, provided every element is present at its 
designated position decided by a hash function. 
It calculates the position of the key in the list 
using a formula called the hash function and the 
key  itself.

• When two elements map to the same slot in the 
hash table, it is called collision.

• The process of identifying a slot for the second 
and further items in the hash table in the event of 
collision, is called collision resolution. 

• A perfect hash function maps every input key 
to a unique index in the hash table. If the hash 
function is perfect, collisions will never occur.

exercISe

1. Using linear search determine the position of 8, 1, 99 
and 44 in the list:

  [1, -2, 32, 8, 17, 19, 42, 13, 0, 44]

   Draw a detailed table showing the values of the 
variables and the decisions taken in each pass of linear 
search.

2. Use the linear search program to search the key with 
value 8 in the list having duplicate values such as [42, 
-2, 32, 8, 17, 19, 42, 13, 8, 44]. What is the 
position returned? What does this mean?

3. Write a program that takes as input a list having a mix 
of 10 negative and positive numbers and a key value. 

94 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Apply linear search to find whether the key is present in noteS

the list or not. If the key is present it should display the 
position of the key in the list otherwise it should print 
an appropriate message. Run the program for at least 3 
different keys and note the result.

4. Write a program that takes as input a list of 10 integers 
and a key value and applies binary search to find 
whether the key is present in the list or not. If the key is 
present it should display the position of the key in the 
list otherwise it should print an appropriate message. 
Run the program for at least 3 different key values and 
note the results.

5. Following is a list of unsorted/unordered numbers:

  [50, 31, 21, 28, 72, 41, 73, 93, 68, 43, 45, 78, 
5, 17, 97, 71, 69, 61, 88, 75, 99, 44, 55,9]

• Use linear search to determine the position of 1, 5, 
55 and 99 in the list. Also note the number of key 
comparisons required to find each of these numbers 
in the list.

• Use a Python function to sort/arrange the list in 
ascending order.

• Again, use linear search to determine the position of 
1, 5, 55 and 99 in the list and note the number of 
key comparisons required to find these numbers in 
the list.

• Use binary search to determine the position of 1, 5, 
55 and 99 in the sorted list. Record the number of 
iterations required in each case.

6.  Write a program that takes as input the following 
unsorted list of English words:

  [Perfect, Stupendous, Wondrous, Gorgeous, Awesome, 
Mirthful, Fabulous, Splendid, Incredible, 
Outstanding, Propitious, Remarkable, Stellar, 
Unbelievable, Super, Amazing].

• Use linear search to find the position of Amazing, 
Perfect, Great and Wondrous in the list. Also 
note the number of key comparisons required to find 
these words in the list.

• Use a Python function to sort the list.
• Again, use linear search to determine the position of 

Amazing, Perfect, Great and Wondrous in the 
list and note the number of key comparisons required 
to find these words in the list.

• Use binary search to determine the position of 
Amazing, Perfect, Great and Wondrous in the 
sorted list. Record the number of iterations required 
in each case.

SearChing 95

Reprint 2025-26



noteS 7. Estimate the number of key comparisons required in 
binary search and linear search if we need to find the 
details of a person in a sorted database having 230 
(1,073,741,824) records when details of the person being 
searched lies at the middle position in the database. 
What do you interpret from your findings?

8. Use the hash function: h(element)= element%11 
to store the collection of numbers: [44, 121, 55, 
33, 110, 77, 22, 66] in a hash table. Display the 
hash table created. Search if the values 11, 44, 88 
and 121 are present in the hash table, and display the 
search results.

9. Write a Python program by considering a mapping of list 
of countries and their capital cities such as:

   CountryCapital= {'India':'New Delhi','UK':  
        'London','France':'Paris',  
                 'Switzerland': 'Berne',  
                 'Australia': 'Canberra'}

Let us presume that our hash function is the length 
of the Country Name. Take two lists of appropriate size: 
one for keys (Country) and one for values (Capital). To put 
an element in the hash table, compute its hash code by 
counting the number of characters in Country, then put 
the key and value in both the lists at the corresponding 
indices. For example, India has a hash code of 5. So, we 
store India at the 5th position (index 4) in the keys list, 
and New Delhi at the 5th position (index 4) in the values 
list and so on. So that we end up with:

hash index = length 
List of Keys List of Values

of key - 1

0 None None

1 UK London

2 None None

3 Cuba Havana

4 India New Delhi

5 France Paris

6 None None

7 None None

8 Australia Canberra

9 None None

10 Switzerland Berne

 Now search the capital of India, France and the USA 
in the hash table and display your result.

96 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26

##7##

Chapter

7 Understanding Data

“Data is not information, Information 
is not knowledge, Knowledge is not 
understanding, Understanding is not 

wisdom.”
— Gary Schubert 

In this Chapter

» Introduction to Data 

» Data Collection
7.1 IntroductIon to data

» Data Storage

» Data Processing Many a time, people take decisions based on 
certain data or information. For example, while 

» Statistical Techniques for 
Data Processing choosing a college for getting admission, one looks 

at placement data of previous years of that college, 
educational qualification and experience of the 
faculty members, laboratory and hostel facilities, 
fees, etc. So we can say that identification of a 
college is based on various data and their analysis. 
Governments systematically collect and record 
data about the population through a process 
called census. Census data contains valuable 
information which are helpful is planning and 
formulating policies. Likewise, the coaching staff 
of a sports team analyses previous performances 
of opponent teams for making strategies. Banks 
maintain data about the customers, their account 
details and transactions. All these examples 
highlight the need of data in various fields. Data 
are indeed crucial for decision making. 

Reprint 2025-26



In the previous examples, one cannot make decisions 
by looking at the data itself. In our example of choosing 
a college, suppose the placement cell of the college has 
maintained data of about 2000 students placed with 
different companies at different salary packages in the 
last 3 years. Looking at such data, one cannot make 
any remark about the placement of students of that 
college. The college processes and analyses this data 
and the results are given in the placement brochure of 
the college through summarisation as well as visuals for 
easy understanding. Hence, data need to be gathered, 
processed and analysed for making decisions. 

In general, data is a collection of characters, numbers, 
A knowledge base is and other symbols that represents values of some 

a store of information situations or variables. Data is plural and singular of the 
consisting of facts, 

word data is “datum”. Using computers, data are stored 
assumptions and 
rules which an AI in electronic forms because data processing becomes 
system can use for faster and easier as compared to manual data processing 
decision making. done by people. The Information and Communication 

Technology (ICT) revolution led by computer, mobile and 
Internet has resulted in generation of large volume of 
data and at a very fast pace. The following list contains 
some examples of data that we often come across.

• Name, age, gender, contact details, etc., of a person
• Transactions data generated through banking, 

ticketing, shopping, etc. whether online or offline
• Images, graphics, animations, audio, video
• Documents and web pages
• Online posts, comments and messages 
• Signals generated by sensors
• Satellite data including meteorological data, 

communication data, earth observation data, etc.

7.1.1 Importance of Data

Human beings rely on data for making decisions. 
Besides, large amount of data when processed with the 
help of a computer, show us the possibilities or hidden 
traits which are otherwise not visible to humans. When 
one withdraws money from ATM, the bank needs to debit 
the withdrawn amount from the linked account. So the 
bank needs to maintain data and update it as and when 
required. The meteorological offices continuously keep 
on monitoring satellite data for any upcoming cyclone 
or heavy rain. 

98 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



In a competitive business environment, it is important notes
for business organisations to continuously monitor and 
analyse market behaviour with respect to their products 
and take actions accordingly. Besides, companies 
identify customer demands as well as feedbacks, and 
make changes in their products or services accordingly. 

The dynamic pricing concept used by airlines and 
railway is another example where they decide the price 
based on relationships between demand and supply. 
The cab booking Apps increase or decrease the price 
based on demand for cabs at a particular time. Certain 
restaurants offer discounted price (called happy hours), 
they decide when and how much discount to offer by 
analysing sales data at different time periods. 

Besides business, following are some other scenarios 
where data are also stored and analysed for making 
decisions: 

• The electronic voting machines are used for recording 
the votes cast. Subsequently, the voting data from 
all the machines are accumulated to declare election 
results in a short time as compared to manual 
counting of ballot papers. 

• Scientists record data while doing experiments to 
calculate and compare results. 

• Pharmaceutical companies record data while trying 
out a new medicine to see its effectiveness. 

• Libraries maintain data about books in the library 
and the membership of the library.

• The search engines give us results after analysing 
large volume of data available on the websites across 
World Wide Web (www).

• Weather alerts are generated by analysing data 
received from various satellites.

7.1.2 Types of Data

As data come from different sources, they can be in 
different formats. For example, an image is a collection 
of pixels; a video is made up of frames; a fee slip is 
made up of few numeric and non-numeric entries; and 
messages/chats are made up of texts, icons (emoticons) 
and images/videos. Two broad categories in which data 
can be classified on the basis of their format are:
(A) Structured Data
Data which is organised and can be recorded in a well 
defined format is called structured data. Structured 

underStanding data 99

Reprint 2025-26



Activity 7.1 data is usually stored in computer in a tabular (in rows 

Observe Voter Identity and columns) format where each column represents 
cards of your family different data for a particular parameter called attribute/
members and identify characteristic/variable and each row represents data of 
the data fields under an observation for different attributes. Table 7.1 shows 
which data are structured data related to an inventory of kitchen items 
organised. Are 
they same for maintained by a shop. 
all? 

Table 7.1 Structured data about kitchen items in a shop

ModelNo ProductName Unit Price Discount(%) Items_in_Inventory

ABC1 Water bottle 126 8 13

ABC2 Melamine Plates 320 5 45

ABC3 Dinner Set 4200 10 8

GH67 Jug 80 0 10

GH78 Table Spoon 120 5 14

GH81 Bucket 190 12 6

NK2 Kitchen Towel 25 0 32

Given this data, using a spreadsheet or other such 
software, the shop owner can find out how many total 
items are there by summing the column Items_in_
Inventory of Table 7.1 The owner of the shop can also 
calculate the total value of all items in the inventory 
by multiplying each entry of column 3 (Unit Price) with 
corresponding entry of column 5 (Items_in_Inventory) 
and finding their sum. 

Table 7.2 shows more examples of structured data 
recorded for different attributes. 

Table 7.2 Attributes maintained for different activities

Entity/Activities Data Fields/Parameters/Attributes

Books at a shop BookTitle, Author, Price, YearofPublication 

Depositing fees in a school StudentName, Class, RollNo, FeesAmount, DepositDate
Amount withdrawal from ATM AccHolderName, AccountNo, TypeofAcc, DateofWithdrawal, 

AmountWithdrawn, ATMid, TimeOfWithdrawal

(B) Unstructured Data
A newspaper contains various types of news items 
which are also called data. But there is no fixed pattern 
that a newspaper follows in placing news articles. One 
day there might be three images of different sizes on 
a page along with five news items and one or more 
advertisements. While on another day there, might be 
one big image with three textual news items. So there is 

100 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



no particular format nor any fixed structure for printing 
news. Another example is the content of an email. 
There is no fixed structure about how many lines or 
paragraphs one has to write in an email or how many 
files are to be attached with an email. In summary, 
data which are not in the traditional row and column 
structure is called unstructured data. 

Examples of unstructured data include web pages 
consisting of text as well as multimedia contents 
(image, graphics, audio/video). Other examples include 

When we click a 
text documents, business reports, books, audio/video 

photograph using 
files, social media messages. Although there are ways our digital or mobile  
to process unstructured data, we are going to focus on camera, does it have 

handling structured data only in this book. some metadata 
associated with it?

Unstructured data are sometimes described with 
the help of some other data called metadata. Metadata 
is basically data about data. For example, we describe 
different parts of an email as subject, recipient, main 
body, attachment, etc. These are the metadata for the 
email data. Likewise, we can have some metadata for an 
image file as image size (in KB or MB), image type (for 
example, JPEG, PNG), image resolution, etc.

7.2 data collectIon

For processing data, we need to collect or gather data 
first. We can then store the data in a file or database 
for later use. Data collection here means identifying 
already available data or collecting from the appropriate 
sources. Suppose there are three different scenarios 
where sales data in a grocery store are available:
• Sales data are available with the shopkeeper in a 

diary or register. In this case we should enter the 
data in a digital format for example, in a spreadsheet.

• Data are already available in a digital format, say in 
a CSV (comma separated values) file.

• The shopkeeper has so far not recorded any data in 
either form but wants to get a software developed for 
maintaining sales data and accounts. The software 
may be developed using a programming language 
such as Python which can be used to store and retrieve 
data from a CSV file or a database management 
system like MySQL, which will be discussed further.

underStanding data 101

Reprint 2025-26



Data are continuously being generated at different 
sources. Our interactions with digital medium are 
continuously generating huge volumes of data. Hospitals 
are collecting data about patients for improving their 
services. Shopping malls are collecting data about the 
items being purchased by people. On analysing such 
data, suppose it appears that bedsheets and groceries 
are frequently bought together. Hence, the shop owner 
may decide to display bedsheets near the grocery section 

Identify attributes in the mall to increase the sales. Likewise, a political 
needed for creating analyst may look at the data contained in the posts and 
an Aadhaar Card.  

messages at a social media platform and analyse to see 
public opinion before an election. Organisations like 
World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) are 
collecting data related to various economic parameters 
from different countries for making economic forecasts.

7.3 data storage

Once we gather data and process them to get results, we 
may not then simply discard the data. Rather, we would 
like to store them for future use as well. Data storage 
is the process of storing data on storage devices so that 
data can be retrieved later. Now a days large volume of 
data are being generated at a very high rate. As a result, 
data storage has become a challenging task. However, 
the decrease in the cost of digital storage devices has 
helped in simplifying this task. There are numerous 
digital storage devices available in the market like, Hard 
Disk Drive (HDD), Solid State Drive (SSD), CD/DVD, 
Tape Drive, Pen Drive, Memory Card, etc.

We store data like images, documents, audios/
videos, etc. as files in our computers. Likewise, school/

Is it necessary to hospital data are stored in data files. We use computers 
store data in files  to add, modify or delete data in these files or process 
before processing?

these data files to get results. However, file processing 
has certain limitations, which can be overcome through 
Database Management System (DBMS). 

7.4 data ProcessIng

We are interested in understanding data as they hold 
valuable facts and information that can be useful in 
our decision making process. However, by looking at 
the vast or large amount of data, one cannot arrive 
at a conclusion. Rather, data need to be processed to 

102 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



get results and after 
analysing those results, INFORMATION

RAW DATA Data Processing
we make conclusions or (Numbers/ (In the form

Text/Image) of table/
decisions. chart/text)

We find automated 
data processing in 

Data Process Cycle
situations like online bill 
payment, registration Input Processing Output

of complaints, booking 
Data Collection Store Reports

tickets, etc. Figure 7.1 
Data Prepration Retrieve Results

illustrates basic steps Data Entry Classify Processing System
used to process the data Update
to get the output. 

Figure 7.1: Steps in data processing
Figure 7.2 shows 

some tasks along with data, processing and generated 
output/information.

7.5 statIstIcal technIques for data ProcessIng

Given a set of data values, we need to process them to get 
information. There are various techniques which help 
us to have preliminary understanding about the data. 

A website handling online filling of student details for a competitive examination and generating admit card
Student details like name, address, Processing of filled in details for 

qualification, marks, mobile correctness of data received, 

number, photo and sign, center eligibility as per advertisement or Examination Admit card specifying 
choice, online fee payment details not, fees paid or not, photo and roll number, center address, date 
like credit/debit card, net banking signature uploaded or not. Then, and time of test.

or other mode of payment, etc. generate a roll number and add this 
applicant in the list of eligible 

applicants.

A Bank handling withdrawals of cash through ATMs of its own branch

ATM PIN number, account type, Checking for valid PIN number, 
account number, card number, existing bank balance, if satisfied, Currency notes, printed slip with 
ATM location from where money then deduction of amount from that transaction details

was withdrawn, date and time, and account and counting of rupees and 
amount to be withdrawn. initiate printing of receipt

Issue of train ticket

Journey start and end stations, Verify login details and check 
date of journey, number of tickets availability of berth in that class. If 

required, class of travel payment done, issue tickets and Generate ticket with berth and 
(Sleeper/AC/other), berth deduct that number from the total coach number, or issue ticket with 

preference (if any), passenger available tickets on that coach. a waiting list number
name(s) and age(s), mobile and Allocate PNR number and berths or 

email id, payment related details, generate a waiting number for that 
etc. ticket.

Problem Statement Inputs against which Processing Output
data are collected

Figure 7.2: Data based problem statements

underStanding data 103

Reprint 2025-26



notes Summarisation methods are applied on tabular data 
for its easy comprehension. Commonly used statistical 
techniques for data summarisation are given below:

7.5.1 Measures of Central Tendency

A measure of central tendency is a single value that 
gives us some idea about the data. Three most common 
measures of central tendency are the mean, median, 
and mode. Instead of looking at each individual data 
values, we can calculate the mean, median and mode 
of the data to get an idea about average, middle value 
and frequency of occurrence of a particular value, 
respectively. Selection of a measure of central tendency 
depends on certain characteristics of data.

(A) Mean
Mean is simply the average of numeric values of an 
attribute. Mean is also called average. Suppose there 
are data on weight of 40 students in a class. Instead 
of looking at each of the data values, we can calculate 
the average to get an idea about the average weight of 
students in that class.

Definition: Given n values x , x , x ,...x , mean is 
1 2 3 n

n

computed as xi .

i

n

Example 7.1  
Assume that height (in cm) of students in a class are as 
follows [90,102,110,115,85,90,100,110,110]. Mean or 
average height of the class is 

Mean is not a suitable choice if there are outliers 
in the data. To calculate mean, the outliers or extreme 
values should be removed from the given data and then 
calculate mean of the remaining data.
Note: An outlier is an exceptionally large or small value, in 
comparison to other values of the data. Usually, outliers are 
considered as error since they can influence/affect the average or 
other statistical calculation based on the data.

(B) Median 
Median is also computed for a single attribute/variable 
at a time. When all the values are sorted in ascending or 
descending order, the middle value is called the Median. 
When there are odd number of values, then median is 

104 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



the value at the middle position. If the list has even 
number of values, then median is the average of the two 
middle values. Median represents the central value at 
which the given data is equally divided into two parts.

Example 7.2  
Consider the previous data of height of students used 
in calculation of mean value. In order to compute the 
median, the first step is to sort data in ascending or 
descending order. We have sorted the height data in 
ascending order as [85,90,90,100,102,110,110,110, 
115]. As there are total 9 values (odd number), the 
median is the value at position 5, that is 102 cm, 

Out of Mean and 
whether counted from left to right or from right to left. Median, which one 
Median represents the actual central value at which the  

is more sensitive to 
given data is equally divided into two parts. outliers in data?

(C)	 Mode	
Value that appears most number of times in the given 
data of an attribute/variable is called Mode. It is 
computed on the basis of frequency of occurrence of 
distinct values in the given data. A data set has no mode 
if each value occurs only once. There may be multiple 
modes in the data if more than one values have same 
highest frequency. Mode can be found for numeric as 
well as non-numeric data.

Example 7.3  
In the list of height of students, mode is 110 as its 
frequency of occurrence in the list is 3, which is larger 
than the frequency of rest of the values. 

7.5.2 Measures of Variability

The measures of variability refer to the spread or variation 
of the values around the mean. They are also called 
measures of dispersion that indicate the degree of diversity 
in a data set. They also indicate difference within the group. 
Two different data sets can have the same mean, median 
or mode but completely different levels of dispersion, or 
vice versa. Common measures of dispersion or variability 
are Range and Standard Deviation.
(A) Range 
It is the difference between maximum and minimum 
values of the data (the largest value minus the 
smallest value). Range can be calculated only for 
numerical data. It is a measure of dispersion and 
tells about coverage/spread of data values. For 

underStanding data 105

Reprint 2025-26



example difference in salaries of employees, marks of 
a student, price of toys, etc. As range is calculated 
based on the two extreme values, any outlier in the 
data badly influences the result.

Let M be the largest or maximum value and S is the 
smallest or minimum value in the data, then Range is 
the difference between two extreme values i.e. M – S or 
Maximum – Minimum. 

Example 7.4  
In the above example, minimum hight value is 85 cm 
and maximum hight value is 115 cm. Hence, range is 
115-85 = 30 cm.

(B) Standard deviation 
Standard deviation refers to differences within the group 
or set of data of a variable. Like Range, it also measures 
the spread of data. However, unlike Range which only 
uses two extreme values in the data, calculation of 
standard deviation considers all the given data. It is 
calculated as the positive square root of the average of 
squared difference of each value from the mean value 
of data. Smaller value of standard deviation means 
data are less spread while a larger value of standard 
deviation means data are more spread.

Given n values x , x , x ,...x , and their mean x, the 
1 2 3 n

standard deviation, represented as σ (greek letter sigma) 
is computed as

n

(Xi − X)
2

i=1
σ =

n

Example 7.5   
Let us compute the standard deviation of the height 
of nine students that we used while calculating 
Mean. The Mean (x) was calculated to be 101.33 cm. 
Subtract each value from the mean and take square 
of that value. Dividing the sum of square values by 
total number of values and taking its square not 
gives the standard deviation in data. See Table 7.3 
for details.

Table 7.3 Standard deviation of attendance of 9 students
_

Height (x) in cm x _
_

 x (x _ x)2

90 -11.33 128.37 n

(Xi − X)
2

102 0.67 0.36 i=1
=

n
110 8.67 75.17 

115 13.67 186.87 

106 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



85 -16.33 266.67 

90 -11.33 128.37 
n

100 -1.33 1.77 (Xi − X)
2

i=1

110 8.67 75.17 σ =
n

 110 8.67 75.17 
_ _

           n = 9 ∑(x-x) = 0.03 ∑(x-x)2 = 938.00
_ 

 x =101.33

Let us look at the following problems and select 
the suitable statistical technique to be applied (Mean/
Median/Mode/Range/Standard Deviation):

Choose suitable 
Problem Statement

statistical method

The management of a company wants to know about disparity in salaries of 
all employees.

Teacher wants to know about the average performance of the whole class in 
a test.

Compare height of residents of two cities

Find the dominant value from a set of values 

Compare income of residents of two cities

Find the popular color for car after surveying the car owners of a small city.

It is important to understand statistical techniques 
so that one can decide which statistical technique to 
use to arrive at a decision. Different programming tools 
are available for efficient analysis of large volumes of 
data. These tools make use of statistical techniques for 
data analysis. One such programming tool is Python 
and it has libraries specially built for data processing 
and analysis. We will be covering some of them in the 
following chapters.

summary

• Data refer to unorganised facts that can be 
processed to generate meaningful result or 
information.

• Data can be structured or unstructured.
• Hard Disk, SSD, CD/DVD, Pen Drive, Memory 

Card, etc. are some of the commonly used storage 
devices.

underStanding data 107

Reprint 2025-26



notes • Data Processing cycle involves input and storage 
of data, its processing and generating output.

• Summarising data using statistical techniques 
aids in revealing data characteristics.

• Mean, Median, Mode, Range, and Standard 
Deviation are some of the statistical techniques 
used for data summarisation.

• Mean is the average of given values.

• Median is the mid value when data are sorted in 
ascending/descending order.

• Mode is the data value that appears most  number 
of times. 

• Range is the difference between the maximum 
and minimum values.

• Standard deviation is the positive square root of 
the average of squared difference of each value 
from  the mean.

exercIse

1. Identify data required to be maintained to perform the 
following services:
a) Declare exam results and print e-certificates
b) Register participants in an exhibition and issue 

biometric ID cards
c) To search for an image by a search engine
d) To book an OPD appointment with a hospital in a 

specific department
2. A school having 500 students wants to identify 

beneficiaries of the merit-cum means scholarship, 
achieving more than 75% for two consecutive years 
and having family income less than 5 lakh per annum. 
Briefly describe data processing steps to be taken by the 
to beneficial prepare the list of school.

3. A bank ‘xyz’ wants to know about its popularity among 
the residents of a city ‘ABC’ on the basis of number of 
bank accounts each family has and the average monthly 
account balance of each person. Briefly describe the 
steps to be taken for collecting data and what results 
can be checked through processing of the collected data. 

108 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



4. Identify type of data being collected/generated in the notes
following scenarios:
a) Recording a video
b) Marking attendance by teacher
c) Writing tweets
d) Filling an application form online

5. Consider the temperature (in Celsius) of 7 days of a week 
as 34, 34, 27, 28, 27, 34, 34. Identify the appropriate 
statistical technique to be used to calculate the following:
a) Find the average temperature.
b) Find the temperature Range of that week.
c) Find the standard deviation temperature.

6. A school teacher wants to analyse results. Identify the 
appropriate statistical technique to be used along with 
its justification for the following cases:
a) Teacher wants to compare performance in terms of 

division secured by students in Class XII A and Class 
XII B where each class strength is same.

b) Teacher has conducted five unit tests for that class in 
months July to November and wants to compare the 
class performance in these five months.

7. Suppose annual day of your school is to be celebrated. 
The school has decided to felicitate those parents of the 
students studying in classes XI and XII, who are the 
alumni of the same school. In this context, answer the 
following questions:

a) Which statistical technique should be used to find 
out the number of students whose both parents are 
alumni of this school?

b) How varied are the age of parents of the students of 
that school?

8. For the annual day celebrations, the teacher is looking 
for an anchor in a class of 42 students. The teacher would 
make selection of an anchor on the basis of singing skill, 
writing skill, as well as monitoring skill. 
a) Which mode of data collection should be used?
b) How would you represent the skill of students as 

data?

9. Differentiate between structured and unstructured data 
giving one example.

    The principal of a school wants to do following analysis 
on the basis of food items procured and sold in the 
canteen:
a) Compare the purchase and sale price of fruit juice 

and biscuits.

underStanding data 109

Reprint 2025-26



notes b) Compare sales of fruit juice, biscuits and samosa.
c) Variation in sale price of fruit juices of different 

companies for same quantity (in ml).

Create an appropriate dataset for these items (fruit juice, 
biscuits, samosa) by listing their purchase price and 
sale price. Apply basic statistical techniques to make 
the comparisons.

110 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26


##8##
Chapter

8 Database  Concepts

“Inconsistency of your mind… Can 
damage your memory… Remove the 

inconsistent data… And keep the original 
one !!!” 

                                                   — Nisarga Jain           

In this Chapter
» Introduction

» File System

» Database Management 
System 8.1 IntroductIon

» Rational Data Model After learning about importance of data in the 
» Keys in a Relational previous chapter, we need to explore the methods 

Database to store and manage data electronically. Let us 
take an example of a school that maintains data 
about its students, along with their attendance 
record and guardian details.

The class teacher marks daily attendance of the 
students in the attendance register. The teacher 
records ‘P’ for present or ‘A’ for absent against 
each student’s roll number on each working day. 
If class strength is 50 and total working days 
in a month are 26, the teacher needs to record 
50 × 26 records manually in the register every 
month. As the volume of data increases, manual 
data entry becomes tedious. Following are some 
of the limitations of manual record keeping in 
this example:

Reprint 2025-26



Activity 8.1 1) Entry of student details (Roll number and name) 
in the new attendance register when the student is 

Visit a few shops where 
promoted to the next class.

records are maintained 
manually and identify 2) Writing student details on each month’s attendance 
a few limitations of page where inconsistency may happen due to 
manual record 
keeping faced by incorrectly written names, skipped student 
them.  records, etc.

3) Loss of data in case attendance register is lost 
or damaged.

4) Erroneous calculation while consolidating 
attendance record manually.

The office staff also manually maintain student details 
viz. Roll Number, Name and Date of Birth with respective 
guardian details viz. Guardian name, Contact Number 
and Address. This is required for correspondence with 
guardian regarding student attendance and result.

Finding information from a huge volume of papers 
or deleting/modifying an entry is a difficult task in pen 
and paper based approach. To overcome the hassles 
faced in manual record keeping, it is desirable to store 
attendance record and student details on separate data 
files on a computerised system, so that office staff and 
teachers can:
1) Simply copy the student details to the new 

attendance file from the old attendance file when 
students are promoted to next class.

2) Find any data about student or guardian.

3) Add more details to existing data whenever a new 
student joins the school.

4) Modify stored data like details of student or guardian 
whenever required.

5) Remove/delete data whenever a student leaves 
the school.

8.2 FIle SyStem

A file can be understood as a container to store data in 
a computer. Files can be stored on the storage device 
of a computer system. Contents of a file can be texts, 
computer program code, comma separated values 
(CSV), etc. Likewise, pictures, audios/videos, web pages 
are also files.

Files stored on a computer can be accessed directly 
and searched for desired data. But to access data of a 

112 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



file through software, for example, to display monthly 
attendance report on school website, one has to write 
computer programs to access data from files.

Continuing the example of attendance at school, 
we need to store data about students and attendance 
in two separate files. Table 8.1 shows the contents of 
STUDENT file which has six columns, as detailed below: 

RollNumber – Roll number of the student
SName  – Name of the student
SDateofBirth –  Date of birth of the student
GName  –  Name of the guardian
GPhone  – Phone number of the student guardian
GAddress  –  Address of the guardian of the student

Table 8.1 STUDENT file maintained by office staff
Roll

Number SName SDateof 
Birth GName GPhone GAddress

1 Atharv Ahuja 2003-05-15 Amit Ahuja 5711492685 G-35, Ashok Vihar, 
Delhi

2 Daizy Bhutia 2002-02-28 Baichung 7110047139 Flat no. 5, Darjeeling 
Bhutia Appt., Shimla

3 Taleem Shah 2002-02-28 Himanshu Shah 9818184855 26/77, West Patel 
Nagar, Ahmedabad

4 John Dsouza 2003-08-18 Danny Dsouza S -13, Ashok Village, 
Daman

5 Ali Shah 2003-07-05 Himanshu Shah 9818184855 26/77, West Patel 
Nagar, Ahmedabad

6 Manika P. 2002-03-10 Sujata P. 7802983674 HNO-13, B- block, Preet 
Vihar, Madurai

Table 8.2 shows another file called ATTENDANCE 
which has four columns, as detailed below: 

AttendanceDate  –  Date for which attendance was marked

RollNumber  –  Roll number of the student

SName –  Name of the student

AttendanceStatus –  Marked as P (present) or A (absent)

Table 8.2 ATTENDANCE file maintained by class teacher
AttendanceDate RollNumber SName AttendanceStatus

2018-09-01 1 Atharv Ahuja P

2018-09-01 2 Daizy Bhutia P

2018-09-01 3 Taleem Shah A

2018-09-01 4 John Dsouza P

2018-09-01 5 Ali Shah A

2018-09-01 6 Manika P. P

DatabaSe ConCeptS 113

Reprint 2025-26



2018-09-02 1 Atharv Ahuja P

2018-09-02 2 Daizy Bhutia P

2018-09-02 3 Taleem Shah A

2018-09-02 4 John Dsouza A

2018-09-02 5 Ali Shah P

2018-09-02 6 Manika P. P

8.2.1 Limitations of a File System
File system becomes difficult to handle when number of 
files increases and volume of data also grows. Following 
are some of the limitations of file system:
(A) Difficulty in Access
Files themselves do not provide any mechanism to 
retrieve data. Data maintained in a file system are 
accessed through application programs. While writing 
such programs, the developer may not anticipate all 
the possible ways in which data may be accessed. So, 
sometimes it is difficult to access data in the required 
format and one has to write application program to 
access data. 

(B) Data Redundancy
Redundancy means same data are duplicated in 
different places (files). In our example, student names 
are maintained in both the files. Besides, in Table 
8.1, students with roll numbers 3 and 5 have same 
guardian name and therefore same guardian name 
is maintained twice. Both these are examples of 
redundancy which is difficult to avoid in a file system. 
Redundancy leads to excess storage use and may 
cause data inconsistency also.

(C) Data Inconsistency
Data inconsistency occurs when same data maintained 
in different places do not match. If a student wants to 
get changed the spelling of her name, it needs to be 
changed in SName column in both the files. Likewise, if 
a student leaves school, the details need to be deleted 
from both the files. As the files are being maintained by 
different people, the changes may not happen in one of 
the files. In that case, the student name will be different 
(inconsistent) in both the files. 
(D) Data Isolation 
Both the files presented at Table 8.1 (STUDENT) and at 
Table 8.2 (ATTENDANCE) are related to students. But 

114 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



there is no link or mapping between them. The school noteS

will have to write separate programs to access these two 
files. This is because data mapping is not supported in 
file system. In a more complex system where data files 
are generated by different person at different times, files 
being created in isolation may be of different formats. 
In such case, it is difficult to write new application 
programs to retrieve data from different files maintained 
at multiple places, as one has to understand the 
underlying structure of each file as well.
(E) Data Dependence
Data are stored in a specific format or structure in a file. 
If the structure or format itself is changed, all the existing 
application programs accessing that file also need to 
be changed. Otherwise, the programs may not work 
correctly. This is data dependency. Hence, updating the 
structure of a data file requires modification in all the 
application programs accessing that file.
(F) Controlled Data Sharing
There can be different category of users like teacher, 
office staff and parents. Ideally, not every user should 
be able to access all the data. As an example, guardians 
and office staff can only see the student attendance data 
but should not be able to modify/delete it. It means 
these users should be given limited access (read only) 
to the ATTENDANCE file. Only the teacher should be 
able to update the attendance data. It is very difficult to 
enforce this kind of access control in a file system while 
accessing files through application programs.

8.3 databaSe management SyStem

Limitations faced in file system can be overcome by 
storing the data in a database where data are logically 
related. We can organise related data in a database so 
that it can be managed in an efficient and easy way.

A database management system (DBMS) or database 
system in short, is a software that can be used to 
create and manage databases. DBMS lets users to 
create a database, store, manage, update/modify and 
retrieve data from that database by users or application 
programs. Some examples of open source and 
commercial DBMS include MySQL, Oracle, PostgreSQL, 
SQL Server, Microsoft Access, MongoDB.

DatabaSe ConCeptS 115

Reprint 2025-26



A database system hides certain details about 
how data are actually stored and maintained. Thus, 

Some database it provides users with an abstract view of the data. A 
management database system has a set of programs through which 

systems include users or other programs can access, modify and retrieve 
a graphical user the stored data.

interface for users to 
create and manage The DBMS serves as an interface between the 
databases. Other database and end users or application programs. 
database systems Retrieving data from a database through special type of 
use a command commands is called querying the database. In addition, 

line interface that 
requires users to users can modify the structure of the database itself 
use programming through a DBMS. 

commands to Databases are widely used in various fields. Some 
create and manage applications are given in Table 8.3.

databases.

Table 8.3 Use of Database in Real-life Applications
Application Database to maintain data about
Banking customer information, account details, loan details, 

transaction details, etc.

Crop Loan kisan credit card data, farmer’s personal data, land 
area and cultivation data, loan history, repayment 
data, etc.

Inventory product details, customer information, order details, 
Management delivery data, etc. 

Organisation employee records, salary details, department 
Resource information, branch locations, etc.
Management

Online items description, user login details, users 
Shopping preferences details, etc.

8.3.1 File System to DBMS
Let us revisit our school example where two data files 
were maintained (Table 8.1 by office and Table 8.2 by 
teacher). Let us now design a database to store data of 
those two files. We know that tables in a database are 
linked or related through one or more common columns 
or fields. In our example, the STUDENT (Table 8.1) file 
and ATTENDANCE (Table 8.2) file have RollNumber 
and SName as common field names. In order to convert 
these two files into a database, we need to incorporate 
the following changes:

a) SName need not be maintained in ATTENDANCE 
file as it is already there in STUDENT. Details for a 
student can be retrieved through the common field 
RollNumber in both the files.

116 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



b) If two siblings are in the same class, then same 
guardian details (GName, GPhone and GAddress) 
are maintained for both the siblings. We know this 
is a redundancy and by using a database we can 
avoid this. So let us split the STUDENT file into two High Cost is incurred 

file (STUDENT file and GUARDIAN) file so that each while shifting from file 
guardian data are maintained only once. system to DBMS: 

• Purchasing 
c) One and more guardians can have the same name. sophisticated 

So it will not be possible to identify which guardian hardware and 
is related to which student. In such case, we need software. 

to create an additional column, say GUID (Guardian • Training users for 

ID) that will take unique value for each record in querying.

the GUARDIAN file. The column GUID will also be • Recurrent cost 

kept with STUDENT file for relating these two files. to take regular 
backup and perform 

Note: We could distinguish guardians by their phone numbers recovery operations.

also. But, phone number can change, and therefore may not 
truly distinguish guardian.

Figure 8.1 shows the related data files for the 
STUDENT, GUARDIAN and ATTENDANCE details. Note 
that this is not the complete database schema since it 
does not show any relationship among tables.

STUDENT GUARDIAN ATTENDANCE

RollNumber GUID AttendanceDate
SName GName RollNumber
SDateofBirth GPhone AttendanceStatus
GUID GAddress

Figure 8.1: Record structure of three files in 
STUDENTATTENDANCE database

The tables shown at Figure 8.1 are empty, which are 
to be populated with actual data as shown in Table 8.4, 
8.5 and 8.6. 

Table 8.4 Snapshot of STUDENT table
RollNumber SName SDateofBirth GUID

1 Atharv Ahuja 2003-05-15 444444444444

2 Daizy Bhutia 2002-02-28 111111111111

3 Taleem Shah 2002-02-28
4 John Dsouza 2003-08-18 333333333333

5 Ali Shah 2003-07-05 101010101010

6 Manika P. 2002-03-10 466444444666

DatabaSe ConCeptS 117

Reprint 2025-26



Table 8.5 Snapshot of GUARDIAN table

GUID GName GPhone GAddress

444444444444 Amit Ahuja 5711492685 G-35, Ashok Vihar, Delhi

111111111111 Baichung Bhutia 3612967082 Flat no. 5, Darjeeling Appt., Shimla

101010101010 Himanshu Shah 4726309212 26/77, West Patel Nagar, Ahmedabad

333333333333 Danny Dsouza S -13, Ashok Village, Daman

466444444666 Sujata P. 3801923168 HNO-13, B- block, Preet Vihar, Madurai

Table 8.6 Snapshot of ATTENDANCE table

Date RollNumber Status

2018-09-01 1 P

2018-09-01 2 P

2018-09-01 3 A

2018-09-01 4 P

2018-09-01 5 A

2018-09-01 6 P

2018-09-02 1 P

2018-09-02 2 P

2018-09-02 3 A

2018-09-02 4 A

2018-09-02 5 P

2018-09-02 6 P

 Figure 8.2 shows a simplified database called 
STUDENTATTENDANCE, which is used to maintain 
data about the student, guardian and attendance. As 
shown here, the DBMS maintains a single repository 
of data at a centralised location and can be used by 
multiple users (office staff, teacher) at the same time.

8.3.2 Key Concepts in DBMS

In order to efficiently manage data using a DBMS, let us 
understand certain key terms: 

(A) Database Schema 

Database Schema is the design of a database. It is the 
skeleton of the database that represents the structure 
(table names and their fields/columns), the type of data 
each column can hold, constraints on the data to be 
stored (if any), and the relationships among the tables. 
Database schema is also called the visual or logical 
architecture as it tells us how the data are organised in 
a database.

118 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Teacher Office Staff

DBMS Software processes Query

DBMS Software access database and its definition

Student 

Database 
Guardian Catalog

Attendance

Figure 8.2: STUDENTATTENDANCE database environment

(B) Data Constraint
Sometimes we put certain restrictions or limitations on 
the type of data that can be inserted in one or more 
columns of a table. This is done by specifying one or 
more constraints on that column(s) while creating the 
tables. For example, one can define the constraint that 
the column mobile number can only have non-negative 
integer values of exactly 10 digits. Since each student 
shall have one unique roll number, we can put the NOT 
NULL and UNIQUE constraints on the RollNumber 
column. Constraints are used to ensure accuracy and 
reliability of data in the database.

(C) Meta-data or Data Dictionary
The database schema along with various constraints on 
the data is stored by DBMS in a database catalog or 
dictionary, called meta-data. A meta-data is data about 
the data.

(D) Database Instance
When we define database structure or schema, state 
of database is empty i.e. no data entry is there. After 
loading data, the state or snapshot of the database 
at any given time is the database instance. We may 
then retrieve data through queries or manipulate data 

DatabaSe ConCeptS 119

Reprint 2025-26

Query Result

Query

Query Result

ue
ry

Q



through updation, modification or deletion. Thus, the 
state of database can change, and thus a database 
schema can have many instances at different times. 

(E) Query
A query is a request to a database for obtaining 
information in a desired way. Query can be made to get 
data from one table or from a combination of tables. For 
example, “find names of all those students present on 
Attendance Date 2000-01-02” is a query to the database. 
To retrieve or manipulate data, the user needs to write 
query using a query language called, which is discussed 
in chapter 8.

Limitations of DBMS (F) Data Manipulation
Increased Complexity: 

Use of DBMS Modification of database consists of three operations 
increases the viz. Insertion, Deletion or Update. Suppose, Rivaan joins 
complexity of as a new student in the class then the student details 
maintaining need to be added in STUDENT as well as in GUARDIAN 

functionalities like files of the Student Attendance database. This is called 
security, consistency, Insertion operation on the database. In case a student 
sharing and integrit y

leaves the school, then his/her data as well as her 
Increased data guardian details need to be removed from STUDENT, 
vulnerability: GUARDIAN and ATTENDANCE files, respectively. This 

As data are stored is called Deletion operation on the database. Suppose 
centrally, it increases 

Atharv’s Guardian has changed his mobile number, his 
the chances of loss 
of data due to any GPhone should be updated in GUARDIAN file. This is 

failure of hardware or called Update operation on the database.
software. It can bring (G) Database Engine
all operations to a halt 

for all the users. Database engine is the underlying component or set of 
programs used by a DBMS to create database and handle 
various queries for data retrieval and manipulation. 

8.4 relatIonal data model

Different types of DBMS are available and their 
classification is done based on the underlying data model. 
A data model describes the structure of the database, 
including how data are defined and represented, 
relationships among data, and the constraints. The most 
commonly used data model is Relational Data Model. 
Other types of data models include object-oriented data 
model, entity-relationship data model, document model 
and hierarchical data model. This book discusses the 
DBMS based on relational data model.

In relational model, tables are called relations that 
store data for different columns. Each table can have 

120 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



multiple columns where each column name should be 
unique. For example, each row in the table represents a 
related set of values. Each row of Table 8.5 represents a 
particular guardian and has related values viz. guardian’s 
ID with guardian name, address and phone number. 
Thus, a table consists of a collection of relationships.

It is important to note here that relations in a database 
are not independent tables, but are associated with each 
other. For example, relation ATTENDANCE has attribute 
RollNumber which links it with corresponding student 
record in relation STUDENT. Similarly, attribute GUID 
is placed with STUDENT table for extracting guardian 
details of a particular student. If linking attributes are 
not there in appropriate relations, it will not be possible 
to keep the database in correct state and retrieve valid 
information from the database.

Figure 8.3 shows the relational database Student 
Attendance along with the three relations (tables) 
STUDENT, ATTENDANCE and GUARDIAN.

Figure 8.3: Representing STUDENTATTENDANCE database using Relational Data Model

Table 8.7 Relation schemas along with its description of Student Attendance 
database

Relation Scheme Description of attributes
STUDENT(RollNumber, RollNumber: unique id of the student
SName, SDateofBirth, SName: name of the student
GUID) SDateofBirth: date of  birth of the student

GUID: unique id of the guardian of the student

ATTENDANCE AttendanceDate: date on which attendance is taken
(AttendanceDate, RollNumber: roll number of the student
RollNumber, AttendanceStatus: whether present (P) or absent(A)
AttendanceStatus) Note that combination of AttendanceDate and RollNumber will be unique 

in each record of the table

GUARDIAN(GUID, GUID: unique id of the guardian
GName, GPhone, GName: name of the guardian
GAddress) GPhone: contact number of the guardian

GAddress: contact address of the guardian

DatabaSe ConCeptS 121

Reprint 2025-26



Each tuple (row) in a relation (table) corresponds 
to data of a real world entity (for example, Student, 
Guardian, and Attendance). In the GUARDIAN relation 
(Table 8.5), each row represents the facts about the 
guardian and each column name in the GUARDIAN table 
is used to interpret the meaning of data stored under that 
column. A database that is modeled on relational data 
model concept is called Relational Database. Figure 8.4 
shows relation GUARDIAN with some populated data. 

Let us now understand the commonly used 
terminologies in relational data model using Figure 8.4.

Relation GuaRdian 
with 4 attribute/
columns

GUID GName GPhone GAddress

444444444444 Amit Ahuja 5711492685 G-35, Ashok Vihar, Delhi

111111111111 Baichung Bhutia 3612967082 Flat no. 5, Darjeeling Appt., Shimla

101010101010 Himanshu Shah 4726309212 26/77, West Patel Nagar, Ahmedabad

333333333333 Danny Dsouza S -13, Ashok Village, Daman

466444444666 Sujata P. 3801923168 HNO-13, B- block, Preet Vihar, Madurai

Facts about RELATION GUARDIAN:
1. Degree (Number of attributes) = 4 Record/tuple/row

2. Cardinality (Number of rows/tuples/records) = 5
3. Relation is a flat file i.e, each column has a single value and each record 

has same number of columns

Figure 8.4: Relation GuaRdian with its attributes and tuples

i) ATTRIBUTE: Characteristic or parameters for 
which data are to be stored in a relation. Simply 
stated, the columns of a relation are the attributes 
which are also referred as fields. For example, GUID, 
GName, GPhone and GAddress are attributes of 
relation GUARDIAN.

ii) TUPLE: Each row of data in a relation (table) is 
called a tuple. In a table with n columns, a tuple is 
a relationship between the n related values. 

iii) DOMAIN:  It is a set of values from which an attribute 
can take a value in each row. Usually, a data type is 
used to specify domain for an attribute. For example, 
in STUDENT relation, the attribute RollNumber 
takes integer values and hence its domain is a set of 
integer values. Similarly, the set of character strings 
constitutes the domain of the attribute SName.

iv) DEGREE: The number of attributes in a relation 
is called the Degree of the relation. For example, 
relation GUARDIAN with four attributes is a relation 
of degree 4. 

122 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26

Relation 
State



v) CARDINALITY: The number of tuples in a relation noteS

is called the Cardinality of the relation. For example, 
the cardinality of relation GUARDIAN is 5 as there 
are 5 tuples in the table.

8.4.1 Three Important Properties of a Relation
In relational data model, following three properties 
are observed with respect to a relation which makes a 
relation different from a data file or a simple table.   
Property 1: imposes following rules on an attribute of 
the relation.

• Each attribute in a relation has a unique name. 
• Sequence of attributes in a relation is immaterial.

Property 2: governs following rules on a tuple of a 
relation.

• Each tuple in a relation is distinct. For example, data 
values in no two tuples of relation ATTENDANCE 
can be identical for all the attributes. Thus, each 
tuple of a relation must be uniquely identified by 
its contents.

• Sequence of tuples in a relation is immaterial. 
The tuples are not considered to be ordered, even 
though they appear to be in tabular form.

Property 3: imposes following rules on the state of a 
relation.

• All data values in an attribute must be from the 
same domain (same data type). 

• Each data value associated with an attribute 
must be atomic (cannot be further divisible into 
meaningful subparts). For example, GPhone of 
relation GUARDIAN has ten digit numbers which 
is indivisible.

• No attribute can have many data values in one 
tuple. For example, Guardian cannot specify 
multiple contact numbers under GPhone attribute. 

• A special value “NULL” is used to represent 
values that are unknown or non-applicable to 
certain attributes. For example, if a guardian does 
not share his or her contact number with the 
school authorities, then GPhone is set to NULL 
(data unknown). 

8.5 KeyS In a relatIonal databaSe  

The tuples within a relation must be distinct. It means 
no two tuples in a table should have same value for all 
attributes. That is, there should be at least one attribute 

DatabaSe ConCeptS 123

Reprint 2025-26



noteS in which data are distinct (unique) and not NULL. That 
way, we can uniquely distinguish each tuple of a relation. 
So, relational data model imposes some restrictions or 
constraints on the values of the attributes and how the 
contents of one relation be referred through another 
relation. These restrictions are specified at the time of 
defining the database through different types of keys as 
given below:

8.5.1 Candidate Key
A relation can have one or more attributes that takes 
distinct values. Any of these attributes can be used 
to uniquely identify the tuples in the relation. Such 
attributes are called candidate keys as each of them 
are candidates for the primary key.

As shown in Figure 8.4, the relation GUARDIAN 
has four attributes out of which GUID and GPhone 
always take unique values. No two guardians will have 
same phone number or same GUID. Hence, these two 
attributes are the candidate keys as they both are 
candidates for primary key.

8.5.2 Primary Key
Out of one or more candidate keys, the attribute chosen 
by the database designer to uniquely identify the tuples 
in a relation is called the primary key of that relation. 
The remaining attributes in the list of candidate keys 
are called the alternate keys.

In the relation GUARDIAN, suppose GUID is 
chosen as primary key, then GPhone will be called the 
alternate key.

8.5.3 Composite Primary Key
If no single attribute in a relation is able to uniquely 
distinguish the tuples, then more than one attribute 
are taken together as primary key. Such primary key 
consisting of more than one attribute is called Composite 
Primary key. 

In relation ATTENDANCE, Roll Number cannot be 
used as primary key as roll number of same student 
will appear in another row for a different date. Similarly, 
in relation Attendance, AttendanceDate cannot be used 
as primary key because same date is repeated for each 
roll number. However combination of these two 
attributes RollNumber and AttendanceDate together 
would always have unique value in ATTENDANCE 
table as on any working day, of  a student would be 

124 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



marked attendance only once. Hence {RollNumber, 
AttendanceDate} will make the of ATTENDANCE relation 
composite primary key. 

8.5.4 Foreign Key
A foreign key is used to represent the relationship 
between two relations. A foreign key is an attribute 
whose value is derived from the primary key of another 
relation. This means that any attribute of a relation 
(referencing), which is used to refer contents from 
another (referenced) relation, becomes foreign key if 
it refers to the primary key of referenced relation. The 
referencing relation is called Foreign Relation. In some 
cases, foreign key can take NULL value if it is not the 
part of primary key of the foreign table. The relation in 
which the referenced primary key is defined is called 
primary relation or master relation. 

In Figure 8.5, two foreign keys in Student Attendance 
database are shown using schema diagram where 
the foreign key is displayed as a directed arc (arrow) 
originating from it and ending at the corresponding 
attribute of the primary key of the referenced table.  The 
underlined attributes make the primary key of that table.

STUDENT RollNumber SName SDateofBirth GUID

GUARDIAN GUID GName GPhone GAddress

ATTENDANCE AttendanceDate RollNumber AttendanceStatus

Figure 8.5: STUDENTATTENDANCE database with the primary and foreign keys

Summary

• A file in a file system is a container to store data in a computer.
• File system suffers from Data Redundancy, Data Inconsistency, Data 

Isolation, Data Dependence and Controlled Data sharing.

• Database Management System (DBMS) is a software to create and manage 
databases. A database is a collection of tables.

• Database schema is the design of a database.

• A database constraint is a restriction on the type of data that that can be 
inserted into the table.

DatabaSe ConCeptS 125

Reprint 2025-26



• Database schema and database constraints are stored in database catalog.

• The snapshot of the database at any given time is the database instance.

• A query is a request to a database for information retrieval and data 
manipulation (insertion, deletion or update). It is written in Structured 
Query Language (SQL).

• Relational DBMS (RDBMS) is used to store data in related tables. Rows 
and columns of a table are called tuples and attributed respectively. A 
table is referred to as a relation.

• Destructions on data stored in a RDBMS is applied by use of keys such as 
Candidate Key, Primary Key, Composite Primary Key, Foreign Key.

• Primary key in a relation is used for unique identification of tuples.
• Foreign key is used to relate two tables or relations.

• Each column in a table represents a feature (attribute) of a record. Table 
stores the information for an entity whereas a row represents a record. 

• Each row in a table represents a record. A tuple is a collection of attribute 
values that makes a record unique. 

• A tuple is a unique entity whereas attribute values can be duplicate in 
the table.

• SQL is the standard language for RDBMS systems like MySQL. 

exercISe

1. Give the terms for each of the following:
a) Collection of logically related records.
b) DBMS creates a file that contains description about 

the data stored in the database.
c) Attribute that can uniquely identify the tuples in 

a relation.
d) Special value that is stored when actual data value is 

unknown for an attribute.
e) An attribute which can uniquely identify tuples of the 

table but is not defined as primary key of the table.
f) Software that is used to create, manipulate and 

maintain a relational database.

2. Why foreign keys are allowed to have NULL values? 
Explain with an example.

3. Differentiate between:
a) Database state and database schema
b) Primary key and foreign key
c) Degree and cardinality of a relation

126 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



4. Compared to a file system, how does a database Notes
management system avoid redundancy in data through 
a database?

5. What are the limitations of file system that can be 
overcome by a relational DBMS?

6. A school has a rule that each student must participate 
in a sports activity. So each one should give only one 
preference for sports activity. Suppose there are five 
students in a class, each having a unique roll number. 
The class representative has prepared a list of sports 
preferences as shown below. Answer the following:

Table: Sports Preferences

Roll_no Preference

9 Cricket
13 Football
17 Badminton
17 Football
21 Hockey
24 NULL

NULL Kabaddi
a) Roll no 24 may not be interested in sports. Can 

a NULL value be assigned to that student’s 
preference field?

b) Roll no 17 has given two preferences in sports. Which 
property of relational DBMC is violated here? Can we 
use any constraint or key in the relational DBMS to 
check against such violation, if any?

c) Kabaddi was not chosen by any student. Is it possible 
to have this tuple in the Sports Preferences relation?

7. In another class having 2 sections, the two respective 
class representatives have prepared 2 separate Sports 
Preferences tables, as shown below: 
Sports preference of section 1 (arranged on roll number 
column)

Table: Sports Preferences

Roll_no Sports

9 Cricket
13 Football
17 Badminton
21 Hockey
24 Cricket

Sports preference of section 2 (arranged on Sports name 
column, and column order is also different)

DatabaSe ConCeptS 127

Reprint 2025-26



noteS Table: Sports Preferences
Sports Roll_no

Badminton 17

Cricket 9

Cricket 24

Football 13

Hockey 21

Are the states of both the relations equivalent? Justify.

8. The school canteen wants to maintain records of items 
available in the school canteen and generate bills when 
students purchase any item from the canteen. The 
school wants to create a canteen database to keep track 
of items in the canteen and the items purchased by 
students. Design a database by answering the following 
questions:
a) To store each item name along with its price, what 

relation should be used? Decide appropriate attribute 
names along with their data type. Each item and its 
price should be stored only once. What restriction 
should be used while defining the relation?

b) In order to generate bill, we should know the quantity 
of an item purchased. Should this information be in 
a new relation or a part of the previous relation? If 
a new relation is required, decide appropriate name 
and data type for attributes. Also, identify appropriate 
primary key and foreign key so that the following  two 
restrictions are satisfied:

i) The same bill cannot be generated for different 
orders. 

ii) Bill can be generated only for available items in 
the canteen. 

c) The school wants to find out how many calories 
students intake when they order an item. In which 
relation should the attribute ‘calories’ be stored? 

9. An organisation wants to create a database EMP-
DEPENDENT to maintain following details about its 
employees and their dependent.

EMPLOYEE( Aa dha r Numbe r ,  Na me ,  Addr e s s ,  
De pa r t me nt , Empl oye e I D)

DEPENDENT( Empl oye e I D,  De pe nde nt Na me ,  
Re l a t i ons hi p)

a) Name the attributes of EMPLOYEE, which can be 
used as candidate keys.

b) The company wants to retrieve details of dependent 
of a particular employee. Name the tables and the key 
which are required to retrieve this detail.

128 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



c) What is the degree of EMPLOYEE and DEPENDENT 
relation?

10. School uniform is available at M/s Sheetal Private 
Limited. They have maintained SCHOOL_UNIFORM 
Database with two relations viz. UNIFORM and COST. 
The following figure shows database schema and its state.

School Uniform Database

Attributes and Constraints Table: COST 

UCode Size COST Price
Table: UNIFORM 1 M 500
Attribute UCode UName UColor 1 L 580

Constraints Primary Key Not Null - 1 XL 620

2 M 810
Table: COST 2 L 890
Attribute UCode Size Price 2 XL 940

Constraints Composite Primary Key >0
3 M 770

3 L 830
Table: UNIFORM 3 XL 910

UCode UName UColor 4 S 150

1 Shirt White 4 L 170

2 Pant Grey 5 S 180
3  Skirt Grey 5 L 210

4 Tie Blue 6 M 110

5 Socks Blue 6 L 140

6 Belt Blue 6 XL 160

a) Can they insert the following tuples to the UNIFORM 
Relation? Give reasons in support of your answer.  

i) 7, Handkerchief, NULL
ii) 4, Ribbon, Red
iii) 8, NULL, White

b) Can they insert the following tuples to the COST 
Relation? Give reasons in support of your answer.

i) 7, S, 0
ii) 9, XL,  100

11. In a multiplex, movies are screened in different 
auditoriums. One movie can be shown in more than one 
auditorium. In order to maintain the record of movies, 
the multiplex maintains a relational database consisting 
of two relations viz. MOVIE and AUDI respectively as 
shown below:

Movi e ( Movi e _I D,  Movi e Na me ,  Re l e a s e Da t e )
Audi ( Audi No,  Movi e _I D,  Se a t s ,  Sc r e e nType ,  

Ti c ke t Pr i c e )

DatabaSe ConCeptS 129

Reprint 2025-26



a) Is it correct to assign Movie_ID as the primary 
key in the MOVIE relation? If no, then suggest an 
appropriate primary key. 

b) Is it correct to assign AudiNo as the primary key in 
the AUDI relation? If no, then suggest appropriate 
primary key. 

c) Is there any foreign key in any of these relations?

Student Project Database
Table: STUDENT

Roll No Name Class Section Registration_ID
11 Mohan XI 1 IP-101-15

12 Sohan XI 2 IP-104-15

21 John XII 1 CS-103-14
Table: PROJECT ASSIGNED

22 Meena XII 2 CS-101-14
Registration_ID ProjectNo

23 Juhi XII 2 CS-101-10
IP-101-15 101

Table: PROJECT IP-104-15 103

ProjectNo PName SubmissionDate CS-103-14 102

101 Airline Database 12/01/2018 CS-101-14 105

102 Library Database 12/01/2018 CS-101-10 104

103 Employee Database 15/01/2018
104 Student Database 12/01/2018
105 Inventory Database 15/01/2018
106 Railway Database 15/01/2018

12. For the above given database STUDENT-PROJECT, 
answer the following: 
a) Name primary key of each table.
b) Find foreign key(s) in table PROJECT-ASSIGNED.
c) Is there any alternate key in table STUDENT? Give 

justification for your answer.
d) Can a user assign duplicate value to the field RollNo 

of STUDENT table? Jusify.

13. For the above given database STUDENT-PROJECT,  can 
we perform the following operations? 
a) Insert a student record with missing roll number 

value.
b) Insert a student record with missing registration 

number value.
c) Insert a project detail without submission-date.
d) Insert a record with registration ID IP-101-19 and 

ProjectNo  206 in table PROJECT-ASSIGNED.

130 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26


##9##
Chapter
Structured Query 

9 Language (SQL)

“Any unique image that you desire 
probably already exists on the internet or 
in some database... The problem today is no 

longer how to create the right image, but how to 
find an already existing one. ”

— Lev Manovich

In this Chapter
» Introduction

» Structured Query Language 
(SQL) 9.1 IntroductIon

» Data Types and 
We have learnt about Relational Database 

Constraints in MySQL
Management Systems (RDBMS) and its purpose 

» SQL for Data Definition
in the previous chapter. There are many 

» SQL for Data RDBMS such as MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server, 
Manipulation PostgreSQL, Oracle, etc. that allow us to create 

» SQL for Data Query a database consisting of relations. These RDBMS 
» Data Updation and also allow us to store, retrieve and manipulate 

Deletion data on that database through queries. In this 

» Functions in SQL chapter, we will learn how to create, populate and 
query databases using MySQL.

» GROUP BY Clause in SQL

» Operations on Relations 9.2  Structured Query Language (SQL) 
» Using Two Relations in a 

Query One has to write application programs to access 
data in case of a file system. However, for database 
management systems there are special kinds of 
languages called query language that can be used 
to access and manipulate data from the database. 
The Structured Query Language (SQL) is the most 
popular query language used by major relational 

Reprint 2025-26



database management systems such as MySQL, 
ORACLE, SQL Server, etc.

Activity 9.1 SQL is easy to learn as the statements comprise of 
descriptive English words and are not case sensitive. 

Find and list other 
types of databases We can create and interact with a database using SQL 
other than easily. Benefit of using SQL is that we do not have to 
RDBMS. specify how to get the data from the database. Rather, 

we simply specify what is to be retrieved, and SQL does 
the rest. Although called a query language, SQL can do 
much more, besides querying. SQL provides statements 
for defining the structure of the data, manipulating data 
in the database, declaring constraints and retrieving 
data from the database in various ways, depending on 
our requirements.

In this chapter, we will use the StudentAttendance 
discussed in chapter 8 and create a database. We 
will also learn how to populate databases with data, 
manipulate data and retrieve data from a database 
through SQL queries.

9.2.1 Installing MySQL

MySQL is an open source RDBMS software which can 
be easily downloaded from the official website https://
dev.mysql.com/downloads. After installing MySQL, 
start MySQL service. The appearance of mysql> prompt 
(Figure 9.1) means that MySQL is ready to accept SQL 
statements.

Figure 9.1: MySQL Shell

Following are some important points to be kept in 
mind while using SQL:

132 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



• SQL is case insensitive. For example, the column 
names ‘salary’ and ‘SALARY’ are the same for SQL.

• Always end SQL statements with a semicolon (;). 

• To enter multiline SQL statements, we don’t write “;” 
after the first line. We press the Enter key to continue 
on the next line. The prompt mysql> then changes to 
“->”, indicating that statement is continued to the 
next line. After the last line, put “;” and press enter.

9.3 data typeS and conStraIntS In MySQL

We know that a database consists of one or more 
relations and each relation (table) is made up of attributes 
(column). Each attribute has a data type. We can also 
specify constraints for each attribute of a relation.

Activity 9.2
9.3.1 Data type of Attribute

What are the other 
Data type of an attribute indicates the type of data value data types supported 
that an attribute can have. It also decides the operations in MySQL? Are there 
that can be performed on the data of that attribute. other variants of 

For example, arithmetic operations can be performed integer and float 
data type?

on numeric data but not on character data. Commonly 
used data types in MySQL are numeric types, date and 
time types, and string types as shown in Table 9.1.

Table 9.1 Commonly used data types in MySQL

Data type Description

CHAR(n) Specifies character type data of length n where n could be any value from 0 to 
255. CHAR is of fixed length, means, declaring CHAR (10) implies to reserve 
spaces for 10 characters. If data does not have 10 characters (e.g., ‘city’ has 
four characters), MySQL fills the remaining 6 characters with spaces padded 
on the right.

VARCHAR(n) Specifies character type data of length where n could be any value from 0 to 
65535. But unlike CHAR, VARCHAR(n) is a variable-length data type. That is, 
declaring VARCHAR (30) means a maximum of 30 characters can be stored but 
the actual allocated bytes will depend on the length of entered string. So ‘city’ 
in VARCHAR (30) will occupy space needed to store 4 characters only.

INT INT specifies an integer value. Each INT value occupies 4 bytes of storage. The 
range of unsigned values allowed in a 4 byte integer type are  0 to 4,294,967,295. 
For values larger than that, we have to use BIGINT, which occupies 8 bytes.

FLOAT Holds numbers with decimal points. Each FLOAT value occupies 4 bytes.
DATE The DATE type is used for dates in 'YYYY-MM-DD' format. YYYY is the 4 digit 

year, MM is the 2 digit month and DD is the 2 digit date. The supported range 
is '1000-01-01' to '9999-12-31'.

Structured Query Language (SQL) 133

Reprint 2025-26



9.3.2 Constraints
Which two Constraints are the certain types of restrictions on the 
constraints when  data values that an attribute can have. Table 9.2 lists 
applied together will 
produce a Primary some of the commonly used constraints in SQL. They 

Key constraint? are used to ensure correctness of data. However, it is 
not mandatory to define constraints for each attribute 
of a table.

Table 9.2 Commonly used SQL Constraints

Constraint Description

NOT NULL Ensures that a column cannot have NULL values where NULL means missing/
unknown/not applicable value.

UNI QUE Ensures that all the values in a column are distinct/unique
DEFAULT A default value specified for the column if no value is provided

PRI MARY KEY The column which can uniquely identify each row/record in a table.
FOREI GN KEY The column which refers to value of an attribute defined as primary key in another 

table

9.4 SQL for data defInItIon

In order to be able to store data we need to first define 
the relation schema. Defining a schema includes creating 
a relation and giving name to a relation, identifying the 
attributes in a relation, deciding upon the datatype for 
each attribute and also specify the constraints as per 
the requirements. Sometimes, we may require to make 
changes to the relation schema also. SQL allows us to 
write statements for defining, modifying and deleting 
relation schemas. These are part of Data Definition 
Language (DDL). 

We have already learned that the data are stored in 
relations or tables in a database. Hence, we can say 
that a database is a collection of tables. The Create 
statement is used to create a database and its tables 
(relations). Before creating a database, we should be 
clear about the number of tables the database will have, 
the columns (attributes) in each table along with the 
data type of each column, and its constraint, if any. 

9.4.1 CREATE Database

To create a database, we use the CREATE DATABASE 
statement as shown in the following syntax:

CREATE DATABASE da t a ba s e na me ;

To create a database called St ude nt At t e nda nc e , we 
will type following command at mysql prompt.

134 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



mys ql > CREATE DATABASE St ude nt At t e nda nc e ;
Que r y OK,  1  r ow a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 02 s e c )

Note: In LINUX environment, names for database and tables 
are case-sensitive whereas in WINDOWS, there is no such 
differentiation. However, as a good practice, it is suggested to write 
database/table name in the same letter cases that were used at the 
time of their creation.

A DBMS can manage multiple databases on one 
computer. Therefore, we need to select the database 

Activity 9.3
that we want to use. To know the names of existing 
databases, we use the statement SHOW DATABASES. Type the statement 

From the listed databases, we can select the database to show database;  Does 
it show the name of 

be used. Once the database is selected, we can proceed StudentAttendance 
with creating tables or querying data. database?
In order to use the StudentAttendance database, the 
following SQL statement is required. 

mys ql > USE St ude nt At t e nda nc e ;
Da t a ba s e  c ha nge d

Initially, the created database is empty. It can be 
checked by using the show tables statement that lists 
names of all the tables within a database. 

mys ql > SHOW TABLES;
Empt y s e t  ( 0 . 06 s e c )

9.4.2 CREATE Table

After creating a database StudentAttendance, we need to 
define relations in this database and specify attributes 
for each relation along with data type and constraint (if 
any) for each attribute. This is done using the CREATE 
TABLE statement.
 Syntax:

CREATE TABLE t a bl e na me (
a t t r i but e na me 1 da t a t ype  c ons t r a i nt ,
a t t r i but e na me 2 da t a t ype  c ons t r a i nt ,
:
a t t r i but e na me N da t a t ype  c ons t r a i nt ) ;

It is important to observe the following points with 
respect to the CREATE TABLE statement:
• The number of columns in a table defines the degree 

of that relation, which is denoted by N.

• Attribute name specifies the name of the column in 
the table.

• Datatype specifies the type of data that an attribute 
can hold.

Structured Query Language (SQL) 135

Reprint 2025-26



• Constraint indicates the restrictions imposed on the 
values of an attribute. By default, each attribute can 
take NULL values except for the primary key.

Let us identify data types of the attributes of table 
STUDENT along with their constraints (if any). Assuming 
maximum students in a class to be 100 and values of 
roll number in a sequence from 1 to 100, we know that 
3 digits are sufficient to store values for the attribute 
RollNumber. Hence, data type INT is appropriate for this 
attribute. Total number of characters in a student name 
(SName) can differ. Assuming maximum characters in 
a name as 20, we use VARCHAR(20) for the SName 
column. Data type for the attribute SDateofBirth is 
DATE and supposing the school uses guardian’s 12 
digit Aadhaar number as GUID, we can declare GUID as 
CHAR (12) since Aadhaar number is of fixed length and 
we are not going to perform any mathematical operation 
on GUID. 

Table 9.3, 9.4 and 9.5 shows the chosen data type and 
constraint for each attribute of the relations STUDENT, 
GUARDIAN and ATTENDANCE, respectively.

Table 9.3 Data types and constraints for the attributes of relation STUDENT

Attribute Name Data expected to be stored Data type Constraint

RollNumber Numeric value consisting of maximum 3 digits I NT PRI MARY KEY

SName Variant length string of maximum 20 characters VARCHAR( 20) NOT NULL

SDateofBirth Date value DATE NOT NULL

GUID Numeric value consisting of 12 digits CHAR ( 12) FOREI GN KEY

Table 9.4 Data types and constraints for the attributes of relation GUARDIAN

Attribute Name Data expected to be stored Data type Constraint

GUID Numeric value consisting of 12 digit Aadhaar CHAR ( 12) PRI MARY KEY
number

GName Variant length string of maximum 20 VARCHAR( 20) NOT NULL
characters

GPhone Numeric value consisting of 10 digits CHAR( 10)  NULL UNI QUE

GAddress Variant length String of size 30 characters VARCHAR( 30) NOT NULL

Table 9.5 Data types and constraints for the attributes of relation ATTENDANCE.

Attribute Name Data expected to be stored Data type Constraint

AttendanceDate Date value DATE PRI MARY KEY*

RollNumber Numeric value consisting of maximum 3 I NT PRI MARY KEY*
digits FOREI GN KEY

AttendanceStatus ‘P’ for present and ‘A’ for absent CHAR( 1) NOT NULL
*means part of composite primary key.

136 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Once data types and constraints are identified, let us 
create tables without specifying constraints along with Which datatype out 

the attribute name for simplification. We will learn to of Char and Varchar 
will you prefer for  

incorporate constraints on attributes in Section 9.4.4.
storing contact 

Example 9.1 Create table STUDENT. number(mobile 
number)? Discuss.

mys ql > CREATE TABLE STUDENT(
    - > Rol l Numbe r   I NT,
    - > SNa me  VARCHAR( 20) ,
    - > SDa t e of Bi r t h  DATE,
    - > GUI D CHAR ( 12) ,
    - > PRI MARY KEY ( Rol l Numbe r ) ) ;
Que r y OK,  0  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 91 s e c )

Note: “,” is used to separate two attributes and each statement 
terminates with a semi-colon (;). The arrow (->) is an interactive 
continuation prompt. If we enter an unfinished statement, the SQL 
shell will wait for us to enter the rest of the statement.

9.4.3 Describe Table

We can view the structure of an already created table 
using the DESCRIBE statement or DESC statement. 

Syntax:
DESCRI BE t a bl e na me ;  
mys ql > DESCRI BE STUDENT;

+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  Fi e l d         |  Type         |  Nul l  |  Ke y |  De f a ul t  |  Ext r a  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +  
|  Rol l Numbe r    |  i n t          |  NO   |  PRI  |  NULL    |        |
|  SNa me         |  va r c ha r ( 20)  |  YES  |      |  NULL    |        |
|  SDa t e of Bi r t h  |  da t e         |  YES  |      |  NULL    |        |
|  GUI D         |  c ha r ( 12)     |  YES  |      |  NULL    |        |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +

4 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 06 s e c )

We can use the SHOW TABLES statement to see the 
tables in the StudentAttendance database. So far, we Activity 9.4
have only the STUDENT table.

Create the other two 
mys ql > SHOW TABLES;

relations GUARDIAN 
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Ta bl e s _i n_s t ude nt a t t e nda nc e   | and ATTENDANCE as 

+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - + per data types given 

|  s t ude nt                       | in Table 9.4 and 9.5 
respectively, and 
view their structures. 

+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - + Do not add any 
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c ) constraint in 

these two 
9.4.4 ALTER Table tables.

After creating a table, we may realise that we need to 
add/remove an attribute or to modify the datatype of 
an existing attribute or to add constraint in attribute. In 

Structured Query Language (SQL) 137

Reprint 2025-26



all such cases, we need to change or alter the structure 
(schema) of the table by using the alter statement.

(A) Add primary key to a relation
Let us now alter the tables created in Activity 9.4. The 
following MySQL statement adds a primary key to the 
GUARDIAN relation:
mys ql > ALTER TABLE GUARDI AN ADD PRI MARY KEY ( GUI D) ;

Que r y OK,  0  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 1 . 14 s e c )
Re c or ds :  0  Dupl i c a t e s :  0  Wa r ni ngs :  0

Now let us add the primary key to the ATTENDANCE 
relation. The primary key of this relation is a composite 
key made up of two attributes - AttendanceDate and 
RollNumber.  
mys ql > ALTER TABLE ATTENDANCE 

    - > ADD PRI MARY KEY( At t e nda nc e Da t e ,  
Rol l Numbe r ) ;
Que r y OK,  0  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 52 s e c )
Re c or ds :  0  Dupl i c a t e s :  0  Wa r ni ngs :  0

Activity 9.5
(B) Add foreign key to a relation

Add foreign key in the 
ATTENDANCE table Once primary keys are added, the next step is to add 
(use Figure 9.1) to foreign keys to the relation (if any). Following points need 
identify referencing to be observed while adding foreign key to a relation:
and referenced • The referenced relation must be already created.
tables).

• The referenced attribute(s) must be part of the 
primary key of the referenced relation.

• Data types and size of referenced and referencing 
attributes must be the same.

Syntax:
ALTER TABLE t a bl e _na me  ADD FOREI GN KEY( a t t r i but e  
na me )  REFERENCES r e f e r e nc e d_t a bl e _na me                                                                         
( a t t r i but e  na me ) ;

Let us now add foreign key to the table STUDENT. 
Table 9.3 shows that attribute GUID (the referencing 

Name foreign keys in 
table ATTENDANCE attribute) is a foreign key and it refers to attribute GUID 
and STUDENT. Is  (the referenced attribute) of table GUARDIAN. Hence, 
there any foreign key STUDENT is the referencing table and GUARDIAN is the 
in table GUARDIAN. referenced table as shown in Figure 8.4 in the previous 

chapter. 
mys ql > ALTER TABLE STUDENT 

    - > ADD FOREI GN KEY( GUI D)  REFERENCES 
    - > GUARDI AN( GUI D) ;
Que r y OK,  0  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 75 s e c )
Re c or ds :  0  Dupl i c a t e s :  0  Wa r ni ngs :  0

(C) Add constraint UNIQUE to an existing attribute
In GUARDIAN table, the attribute GPhone has a 
constraint UNIQUE which means no two values in that 
column should be the same. 

138 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Syntax: noteS
ALTER TABLE t a bl e _na me  ADD UNI QUE ( a t t r i but e  
na me ) ;

Let us now add the constraint UNIQUE with the 
attribute GPhone of the table GUARDIAN as shown at 
table 9.4.
mys ql > ALTER TABLE GUARDI AN 

    - > ADD UNI QUE( GPhone ) ;
Que r y OK,  0  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 44 s e c )
Re c or ds :  0  Dupl i c a t e s :  0  Wa r ni ngs :  0

(D) Add an attribute to an existing table
Sometimes, we may need to add an additional attribute 
in a table. It can be done using the ADD attribute 
statement as shown in the following Syntax:

 ALTER TABLE t a bl e _na me  ADD a t t r i but e                     
 na me  DATATYPE;

Suppose, the principal of the school has decided to 
award scholarship to some needy students for which 
income of the guardian must be known. But, the school 
has not maintained the income attribute with table 
GUARDIAN so far. Therefore, the database designer 
now needs to add a new attribute Income of data type 
INT in the table GUARDIAN.
mys ql > ALTER TABLE GUARDI AN 

    - > ADD i nc ome  I NT;
Que r y OK,  0  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 47 s e c )
Re c or ds :  0  Dupl i c a t e s :  0  Wa r ni ngs :  0

(E) Modify datatype of an attribute
We can change data types of the existing attributes of a 
table using the following ALTER statement. 

Syntax:
ALTER TABLE t a bl e _na me  MODI FY a t t r i but e  DATATYPE;

Suppose we need to change the size of the attribute 
GAddress from VARCHAR(30) to VARCHAR(40) of the 
GUARDIAN table. The MySQL statement will be: 
mys ql > ALTER TABLE GUARDI AN 

- > MODI FY GAddr e s s  VARCHAR( 40) ;  
Que r y OK,  0  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 11 s e c )
Re c or ds :  0  Dupl i c a t e s :  0  Wa r ni ngs :  0

(F) Modify constraint of an attribute
When we create a table, by default each attribute takes 
NULL value except for the attribute defined as primary 
key. We can change an attribute’s constraint from NULL 
to NOT NULL using an alter statement.  

Structured Query Language (SQL) 139

Reprint 2025-26



Syntax:
ALTER TABLE t a bl e _na me  MODI FY a t t r i but e  DATATYPE 

What are the NOT NULL;

minimum and Note: We have to specify the data type of the attribute along with 
maximum income  

constraint NOT NULL while using MODIFY.
values that can be 
entered in the income To associate NOT NULL constraint with attribute 
attribute given the SName of table STUDENT (table 9.3), we write the 
data type is INT? following MySQL statement:

 mys ql > ALTER TABLE STUDENT 
 - > MODI FY SNa me  VARCHAR( 20)  NOT NULL;
Que r y OK,  0  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 47 s e c )
Re c or ds :  0  Dupl i c a t e s :  0  Wa r ni ngs :  0

(G) Add default value to an attribute
If we want to specify default value for an attribute, then 
use the following syntax:

ALTER TABLE t a bl e _na me  MODI FY a t t r i but e  DATATYPE 
DEFAULT de f a ul t _va l ue ;

To set default value of SDateofBirth of STUDENT to 
15th May 2000, write the following statement:
mys ql > ALTER TABLE STUDENT 

  - > MODI FY SDa t e of Bi r t h  DATE DEFAULT ‘ 2000- 05-  
     15’ ;
Que r y OK,  0  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 08 s e c )
Re c or ds :  0  Dupl i c a t e s :  0  Wa r ni ngs :  0

Note: We have to specify the data type of the attribute along with 
DEFAULT while using MODIFY.

(H) Remove an attribute
Using ALTER, we can remove attributes from a table, as 
shown in the following syntax:

ALTER TABLE t a bl e _na me  DROP a t t r i but e ;
To r e move  t he  a t t r i but e  i nc ome  f r om t a bl e  
GUARDI AN ( Ta bl e  9 . 4) ,  wr i t e  t he  f ol l owi ng MySQL 
s t a t e me nt :

mys ql > ALTER TABLE GUARDI AN DROP i nc ome ;
Que r y OK,  0  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 42 s e c )
Re c or ds :  0  Dupl i c a t e s :  0  Wa r ni ngs :  0

(I) Remove primary key from the table
Sometime there may be a requirement to remove primary 
key constraint from the table. In that case, Alter table 
command can be used in the following way: 
Syntax:

ALTER TABLE t a bl e _na me  DROP PRI MARY KEY;

To remove primary key of  table GUARDIAN (Figure 
9.4), write the following MySQL statement:
mys ql > ALTER TABLE GUARDI AN DROP PRI MARY KEY;

Que r y OK,  0  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 72 s e c )
Re c or ds :  0  Dupl i c a t e s :  0  Wa r ni ngs :  0

140 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Note: We have dropped the primary key from the GUARDIAN table, noteS
but each table should have a primary key to maintain uniqueness. 
Hence, we have to use the ADD statement with the Alter Table 
command to specify the primary key for the GUARDIAN table as 
shown in earlier examples.

9.4.5 DROP Statement

Sometimes a table in a database or the database itself 
needs to be removed. We can use a DROP statement 
to remove a database or a table permanently from the 
system. However, one should be very cautious while 
using this statement as it cannot be undone.
Syntax to drop a table:

DROP TABLE t a bl e _na me ;
Syntax to drop a database:

DROP DATABASE da t a ba s e _na me ;

Note: Using the DROP statement to remove a database will 
ultimately remove all the tables within it.

9.5 SQL for data ManIpuLatIon

In the previous section, we created the database 
StudentAttendance having three relations STUDENT, 
GUARDIAN and ATTENDANCE. When we create a table, 
only its structure is created but the table has no data. 
To populate records in the table, INSERT statement is 
used. Also, table records can be deleted or updated using 
DELETE and UPDATE statements. These SQL statements 
are part of Data Manipulation Language (DML).

Data Manipulation using a database means either 
insertion of new data, removal of existing data or 
modification of existing data in the database
9.5.1 INSERTION of Records

I NSERT I NTO statement is used to insert new records in 
a table. Its syntax is:

I NSERT I NTO t a bl e na me
VALUES( va l ue  1 ,  va l ue  2 , . . . . ) ;  

Here, value 1 corresponds to attribute 1, value 2 
corresponds to attribute 2 and so on. Note that we need 
not to specify attribute names in the insert statement 
if there are exactly the same numbers of values in the 
INSERT statement as the total number of attributes in 
the table.

Caution: While populating records in a table with foreign 
key, ensure that records in referenced tables are already 
populated.

Structured Query Language (SQL) 141

Reprint 2025-26



Let us insert some records in the StudentAttendance 
database. We shall insert records in the GUARDIAN 
table first as it does not have any foreign key. A set 
of sample records for GUARDIAN table is shown in the 
given table (Table 9.6).

Table 9.6 GUARDIAN Table

GUID GName GPhone GAddress

444444444444 Amit Ahuja 5711492685 G-35, Ashok Vihar, Delhi

111111111111 Baichung Bhutia 3612967082 Flat no. 5, Darjeeling Appt., Shimla

101010101010 Himanshu Shah 4726309212 26/77, West Patel Nagar, Ahmedabad

333333333333 Danny Dsouza S -13, Ashok Village, Daman

466444444666 Sujata P. 3801923168 HNO-13, B- block, Preet Vihar, Madurai

The following insert statement adds the first record 
in the table:
mys ql > I NSERT I NTO GUARDI AN 

- > VALUES ( 444444444444,  ' Ami t  Ahuj a ' ,  
- > 5711492685,  ' G- 35, As hok vi ha r ,  De l hi '  ) ;  
Que r y OK,  1  r ow a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 01 s e c )

We can use the SQL statement SELECT * from 
table_name to view the inserted records. The SELECT 
statement will be explained in the next section.

mys ql > SELECT * f r om  GUARDI AN;
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  GUI D         |  GNa me          |  Gphone      |  GAddr e s s                   |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  444444444444 |  Ami t  Ahuj a     |  5711492685 |  G- 35,  As hok vi ha r ,  De l hi   |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +

1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

If we want to insert values only for some of the 
attributes in a table (supposing other attributes having 
NULL or any other default value), then we shall specify 
the attribute names in which the values are to be inserted 

Activity 9.6
using the following syntax of INSERT INTO statement.

Write SQL statements 
to insert the remaining Syntax:
3 rows of table I NSERT I NTO t a bl e na me  ( c ol umn1,  c ol umn2,  . . . )  
9.6 in table VALUES ( va l ue 1,  va l ue 2,   . . . ) ;  

GUARDIAN. To insert the fourth record of Table 9.6 where GPhone 
is not given, we need to insert values in the other three 
fields (GPhone was set to NULL by default at the time 
of table creation). In this case, we have to specify the 
names of attributes in which we want to insert values. 
The values must be given in the same order in which 
attributes are written in INSERT statement.

142 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



mys ql > I NSERT I NTO GUARDI AN( GUI D,  GNa me ,  GAddr e s s )  
- > VALUES ( 333333333333,  ' Da nny Ds ouz a ' ,  
- > ' S - 13,  As hok Vi l l a ge ,  Da ma n'  ) ;  
Que r y OK,  1  r ow a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 03 s e c )

Note: Text and date values must be enclosed in ‘ ’ (single quotes).

mys ql > SELECT * f r om GUARDI AN;
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  GUI D         |  GNa me         |  Gphone     |  GAddr e s s                   |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  333333333333 |  Da nny Ds ouz a  |  NULL      |  S - 13,  As hok Vi l l a ge , Da ma n|
|  444444444444 |  Ami t  Ahuj a    |  5711492685|  G- 35,  As hok vi ha r ,  De l hi   |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
2 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Let us now insert the records given in Table 9.7 into 
the STUDENT table.
Table 9.7 STUDENT Table

RollNumber SName SDateofBirth GUID

1 Atharv Ahuja 2003-05-15 444444444444
2 Daizy Bhutia 2002-02-28 111111111111

3 Taleem Shah 2002-02-28
4 John Dsouza 2003-08-18 333333333333

5 Ali Shah 2003-07-05 101010101010
6 Manika P. 2002-03-10 466444444666

To insert the first record of Table 9.7, we write the 
following MySQL statement 
mys ql > I NSERT I NTO STUDENT Activity 9.7

- > VALUES( 1, ' At ha r v Ahuj a ' , ' 2003- 05- 15 ' ,  Write SQL statements 
444444444444) ; to insert the 
Que r y OK,  1  r ow a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 11 s e c ) remaining 4 rows 
OR of table 9.7 in 
mys ql > I NSERT I NTO STUDENT ( Rol l Numbe r ,  SNa me ,  
SDa t e of Bi r t h ,  GUI D) table STUDENT.

    - > VALUES ( 1, ' At ha r v Ahuj a ' , ' 2003- 05- 15 ' ,  
444444444444) ;
Que r y OK,  1  r ow a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 02 s e c )

Recall that Date is stored in ‘YYYY-MM-DD’ format.
mys ql > SELECT * f r om STUDENT;

+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Rol l Numbe r  |  SNa me         |  SDa t e of Bi r t h  |  GUI D         |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|           1  |  At ha r v Ahuj a  |  2003- 05- 15   |  444444444444 |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Let us now insert the third record of Table 9.7 where 
GUID is NULL. Recall that GUID is foreign key of this 
table and thus can take NULL value. Hence, we can put 
NULL value for GUID and insert the record by using the 
following statement:

Structured Query Language (SQL) 143

Reprint 2025-26



mys ql > I NSERT I NTO STUDENT 
- > VALUES( 3,  ' Ta l e e m Sha h ' , ' 2002- 02- 28 ' ,  NULL) ;  
Que r y OK,  1  r ow a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 05 s e c )

mys ql > SELECT * f r om STUDENT;
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Rol l Numbe r  |  SNa me         |  SDa t e of Bi r t h  |  GUI D         |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|           1  |  At ha r v Ahuj a  |  2003- 05- 15   |  444444444444 |
|           3  |  Ta l e e m Sha h  |  2002- 02- 28   |          NULL |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +

2 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

We had to write NULL in the above insert statement 
because we are not mentioning the column names. 
Otherwise, we should mention the names of attributes 
along with the values if we need to insert data only for 

• Which of the two certain attributes, as shown in the following query:
insert statement 
should be used  mys ql > I NSERT I NTO STUDENT ( Rol l Numbe r ,  SNa me ,  

- > SDa t e of Bi r t h)  VALUES ( 3,  ' Ta l e e m Sha h ' , ' 2002- 02-
when the order of 28 ' ) ;
data to be inserted Que r y OK,  1  r ow a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 05 s e c )
are not known?

• Can we insert two 
records with the 9.6 SQL for data Query 
same roll number?

So far we have learnt how to create a database and how 
to store and manipulate data in them. We are interested 
in storing data in a database as it is easier to retrieve 
data in future from databases in whatever way we want. 
SQL provides efficient mechanisms to retrieve data 
stored in multiple tables in MySQL database (or any 
other RDBMS). The SQL statement SELECT is used to 
retrieve data from the tables in a database and is also 
called a query statement.

9.6.1 SELECT Statement

The SQL statement SELECT is used to retrieve data 
from the tables in a database and the output is also 
displayed in tabular form.

Syntax:
SELECT a t t r i but e 1,  a t t r i but e 2,  . . .
FROM t a bl e _na me
WHERE c ondi t i on;

Here, attribute1, attribute2, ... are the column names 
of the table table_name  from which we want to retrieve 
data. The FROM clause is always written with SELECT 
clause as it specifies the name of the table from which 
data is to be retrieved. The WHERE clause is optional and 
is used to retrieve data that meet specified condition(s). 

144 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



To select all the data available in a table, we use the 
following select statement:

SELECT * FROM t a bl e _na me ;
Think and list few 

Example 9.2 The following query retrieves the name and examples from your 

date of birth of student with roll number 1: daily life where  

mys ql > SELECT SNa me ,  SDa t e of Bi r t h storing the data in 
the database and 

    - > FROM STUDENT querying the same 
    - > WHERE Rol l Numbe r  = 1; can be helpful.

+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  SNa me         |  SDa t e of Bi r t h  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  At ha r v Ahuj a  |  2003- 05- 15   |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 03 s e c )

9.6.2 QUERYING using Database OFFICE 

Organisations maintain databases to store data in the 
form of tables. Let us consider the database OFFICE 
of an organisation that has many related tables like 
EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT and so on. Every EMPLOYEE 
in the database is assigned to a DEPARTMENT and 
his/her Department number (DeptId) is stored as a 
foreign key in the table EMPLOYEE. Let us consider the 
relation ‘EMPLOYEE’ as shown in Table 9.8 and apply 
the SELECT statement to retrieve data:
Table 9.8 Records to be inserted into the EMPLOYEE table

EmpNo Ename Salary Bonus Deptld

101 Aaliya 10000 234 D02
102 Kritika 60000 123 D01
103 Shabbbir 45000 566 D01
104 Gurpreet 19000 565 D04
105 Joseph 34000 875 D03
106 Sanya 48000 695 D02
107 Vergese 15000 D01
108 Nachaobi 29000 D05
109 Daribha 42000 D04
110 Tanya 50000 467 D05

(A) Retrieve selected columns
The following query selects employee numbers of all the 
employees:
mys ql > SELECT  EmpNo FROM  EMPLOYEE;

+- - - - - - - +
|  EmpNo |
+- - - - - - - +
|    101 |
|    102 |

Structured Query Language (SQL) 145

Reprint 2025-26



noteS |    103 |
|    104 |
|    105 |
|    106 |
|    107 |
|    108 |
|    109 |
|    110 |
+- - - - - - - +
10 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 41 s e c )

The following query selects the employee number 
and employee name of all the employees, we write:
mys ql > SELECT EmpNo,  Ena me  FROM  EMPLOYEE;

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +
|  EmpNo |  Ena me     |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +
|    101 |  Aa l i ya    |
|    102 |  Kr i t i ka   |
|    103 |  Sha bbi r   |
|    104 |  Gur pr e e t  |
|    105 |  J os e ph   |
|    106 |  Sa nya     |
|    107 |  Ve r ge s e   |
|    108 |  Na c ha obi  |
|    109 |  Da r i bha   |
|    110 |  Ta nya     |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +
10 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

(B) Renaming of columns
In case we want to rename any column while displaying 
the output, it can be done by using the alias 'AS'. The 
following query selects Employee name as Name in the 
output for all the employees:
mys ql > SELECT  ENa me   a s  Na me  FROM  EMPLOYEE;

+- - - - - - - - - - +
|  Na me      |
+- - - - - - - - - - +
|  Aa l i ya    |
|  Kr i t i ka   |
|  Sha bbi r   |
|  Gur pr e e t  |
|  J os e ph   |
|  Sa nya     |
|  Ve r ge s e   |
|  Na c ha obi  |
|  Da r i bha   |
|  Ta nya     |
+- - - - - - - - - - +
10 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Example 9.3 Select names of all employees along with their 
annual income (calculated as Salary*12). While displaying 
the query result, rename the column EName as Name
mys ql > SELECT ENa me  a s  Na me ,  Sa l a r y*12 FROM EMPLOYEE;

146 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - + noteS
|  Na me      |  Sa l a r y*12 |
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Aa l i ya    |     120000 |
|  Kr i t i ka   |     720000 |
|  Sha bbi r   |     540000 |
|  Gur pr e e t  |     228000 |
|  J os e ph   |     408000 |
|  Sa nya     |     576000 |
|  Ve r ge s e   |     180000 |
|  Na c ha obi  |     348000 |
|  Da r i bha   |     504000 |
|  Ta nya     |     600000 |
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +
10 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 02 s e c )

Observe that in the output, Salary*12 is displayed as 
the column name for the Annual Income column. In the 
output table, we can use alias to rename that column as 
Annual Income as shown below:
mys ql > SELECT Ena me  AS Na me ,  Sa l a r y*12 AS ' Annua l  
I nc ome ’

    - > FROM EMPLOYEE;
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Na me      |  Annua l  I nc ome |
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Aa l i ya    |         120000 |
|  Kr i t i ka   |         720000 |
|  Sha bbi r   |         540000 |
|  Gur pr e e t  |         228000 |
|  J os e ph   |         408000 |
|  Sa nya     |         576000 |
|  Ve r ge s e   |         180000 |
|  Na c ha obi  |         348000 |
|  Da r i bha   |         504000 |
|  Ta nya     |         600000 |
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
10 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Note: Annual Income will not be added as a new column in the 
database table. It is just for displaying the output of the query. 

If an aliased column name has space as in the case of Annual 
Income, it should be enclosed in quotes as 'Annual Income

(C) Distinct Clause
By default, SQL shows all the data retrieved through 
query as output. However, there can be duplicate values. 
The SELECT statement when combined with DISTINCT 
clause, returns records without repetition (distinct 
records). For example, while retrieving a department 
number from employee relation, there can be duplicate 
values as many employees are assigned to the same 
department. To select unique department number for 
all the employees, we use DISTINCT as shown below:
mys ql > SELECT DI STI NCT De pt I d  FROM EMPLOYEE;

Structured Query Language (SQL) 147

Reprint 2025-26



noteS +- - - - - - - - +
|  De pt I d  |
+- - - - - - - - +
|  D02    |
|  D01    |
|  D04    |
|  D03    |
|  D05    |
+- - - - - - - - +
5 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 03 s e c )

(D) WHERE Clause
The WHERE clause is used to retrieve data that meet 
some specified conditions. In the OFFICE database, 
more than one employee can have the same salary. 
Following query gives distinct salaries of the employees 
working in the department number D01:
mys ql > SELECT DI STI NCT Sa l a r y
    - > FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE De pt i d=' D01' ;

As the column DeptId is of string type, its values are 
enclosed in quotes ('D01').

+- - - - - - - - +
|  Sa l a r y  |
+- - - - - - - - +
|   60000 |
|   45000 |
|   15000 |
+- - - - - - - - +
3 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 02 s e c )

In the above example, = operator is used in the 
WHERE clause. Other relational operators (<, <=, >, >=, 
!=) can be used to specify such conditions. The logical 
operators AND, OR, and NOT are used to combine 
multiple conditions.

Example 9.4 Display all the details of those employees of 
D04 department who earn more than 5000.
mys ql > SELECT  *  FROM  EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE Sa l a r y  > 5000 AND De pt I d  = ' D04 ' ;

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  EmpNo |  Ena me     |  Sa l a r y  |  Bonus  |  De pt I d  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|    104 |  Gur pr e e t  |   19000 |    565 |  D04    |
|    109 |  Da r i bha   |   42000 |   NULL |  D04    |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
2 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Example 9.5 The following query selects records of all the 
employees except Aaliya.
mys ql > SELECT * FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE NOT Ena me  = ' Aa l i ya ' ;

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +

148 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



|  EmpNo |  Ena me     |  Sa l a r y  |  Bonus  |  De pt I d  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|    102 |  Kr i t i ka   |   60000 |    123 |  D01    |
|    103 |  Sha bbi r   |   45000 |    566 |  D01    |
|    104 |  Gur pr e e t  |   19000 |    565 |  D04    |
|    105 |  J os e ph   |   34000 |    875 |  D03    |
|    106 |  Sa nya     |   48000 |    695 |  D02    |
|    107 |  Ve r ge s e   |   15000 |   NULL |  D01    |
|    108 |  Na c ha obi  |   29000 |   NULL |  D05    |
|    109 |  Da r i bha   |   42000 |   NULL |  D04    |
|    110 |  Ta nya     |   50000 |    467 |  D05    |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - + What will happen if 
9 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c ) in the above query 

we write “Aaliya” as  
Example 9.6 The following query selects the name and 

“AALIYA” or “aaliya” 
department number of all those employees who are earning or “AaLIYA”? Will the 
salary between 20000 and 50000 (both values inclusive). query generate the 
mys ql > SELECT Ena me ,  De pt I d same output or an 
    - > FROM EMPLOYEE error?
    - > WHERE Sa l a r y>=20000 AND Sa l a r y<=50000;

+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  Ena me     |  De pt I d  |
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  Sha bbi r   |  D01    |
|  J os e ph   |  D03    |
|  Sa nya     |  D02    |
|  Na c ha obi  |  D05    |
|  Da r i bha   |  D04    |
|  Ta nya     |  D05    |
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
6 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c ) Activity 9.8
SELECT  *  FROM  EMPLOYEE 

Compare the output 
WHERE Sa l a r y  > 5000 OR De pt I d= 20;

produced by the query 
The query in example 9.6 defines a range that can also in Example 9.6 and 

be checked using a comparison operator BETWEEN, as the output of the 

shown below: following query 

mys ql > SELECT  Ena me ,  De pt I d and differentiate 

    - > FROM EMPLOYEE between the 
    - > WHERE Sa l a r y  BETWEEN 20000 AND 50000; OR and AND 
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - + operators.
|  Ena me     |  De pt I d  |
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  Sha bbi r   |  D01    |
|  J os e ph   |  D03    |
|  Sa nya     |  D02    |
|  Na c ha obi  |  D05    |
|  Da r i bha   |  D04    |
|  Ta nya     |  D05    |
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
6 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 03 s e c )

Note:  The BETWEEN operator defines the range of values in which 
the column value must fall into, to make the condition true.

Example 9.7 The following query selects details of all the 
employees who work in the departments having deptid D01, 
D02 or D04.

Structured Query Language (SQL) 149

Reprint 2025-26



noteS mys ql > SELECT  *
    - > FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE De pt I d  = ' D01 '  OR De pt I d  = ' D02 '  OR 
De pt I d  = ' D04 ' ;

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  EmpNo |  Ena me     |  Sa l a r y  |  Bonus  |  De pt I d  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|    101 |  Aa l i ya    |   10000 |    234 |  D02    |
|    102 |  Kr i t i ka   |   60000 |    123 |  D01    |
|    103 |  Sha bbi r   |   45000 |    566 |  D01    |
|    104 |  Gur pr e e t  |   19000 |    565 |  D04    |
|    106 |  Sa nya     |   48000 |    695 |  D02    |
|    107 |  Ve r ge s e   |   15000 |   NULL |  D01    |
|    109 |  Da r i bha   |   42000 |   NULL |  D04    |  
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
7 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

(E) Membership operator IN 
The IN operator compares a value with a set of values 
and returns true if the value belongs to that set. The 
above query can be rewritten using IN operator as 
shown below:
mys ql > SELECT  *  FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE De pt I d  I N ( ' D01 ' ,  ' D02 '  ,  ' D04 ' ) ;

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  EmpNo |  Ena me     |  Sa l a r y  |  Bonus  |  De pt I d  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|    101 |  Aa l i ya    |   10000 |    234 |  D02    |
|    102 |  Kr i t i ka   |   60000 |    123 |  D01    |
|    103 |  Sha bbi r   |   45000 |    566 |  D01    |
|    104 |  Gur pr e e t  |   19000 |    565 |  D04    |
|    106 |  Sa nya     |   48000 |    695 |  D02    |
|    107 |  Ve r ge s e   |   15000 |   NULL |  D01    |
|    109 |  Da r i bha   |   42000 |   NULL |  D04    |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
7 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Example 9.8 The following query selects details of all the 
employees except those working in department number D01 
or D02. 
mys ql > SELECT * FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE De pt I d  NOT I N( ' D01 ' ,  ' D02 ' ) ;

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  EmpNo |  Ena me     |  Sa l a r y  |  Bonus  |  De pt I d  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|    104 |  Gur pr e e t  |   19000 |    565 |  D04    |
|    105 |  J os e ph   |   34000 |    875 |  D03    |
|    108 |  Na c ha obi  |   29000 |   NULL |  D05    |
|    109 |  Da r i bha   |   42000 |   NULL |  D04    |
|    110 |  Ta nya     |   50000 |    467 |  D05    |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
5 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Note: Here we need to combine NOT with IN as we want to retrieve 
all records except with DeptId D01 and D02.

150 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



(F) ORDER BY Clause
ORDER BY clause is used to display data in an ordered 
form with respect to a specified column. By default, 
ORDER BY displays records in ascending order of 
the specified column’s values. To display the records 
in descending order, the DESC (means descending) 
keyword needs to be written with that column.

Example 9.9 The following query selects details of all the 
employees in ascending order of their salaries.
mys ql > SELECT  *  FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > ORDER BY Sa l a r y;

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  EmpNo |  Ena me     |  Sa l a r y  |  Bonus  |  De pt I d  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|    101 |  Aa l i ya    |   10000 |    234 |  D02    |
|    107 |  Ve r ge s e   |   15000 |   NULL |  D01    |
|    104 |  Gur pr e e t  |   19000 |    565 |  D04    |
|    108 |  Na c ha obi  |   29000 |   NULL |  D05    |
|    105 |  J os e ph   |   34000 |    875 |  D03    |
|    109 |  Da r i bha   |   42000 |   NULL |  D04    |
|    103 |  Sha bbi r   |   45000 |    566 |  D01    |
|    106 |  Sa nya     |   48000 |    695 |  D02    | Activity 9.9
|    110 |  Ta nya     |   50000 |    467 |  D05    |
|    102 |  Kr i t i ka   |   60000 |    123 |  D01    | Execute the following 
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - + 2 queries and find out 
10 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 05 s e c ) what will happen if we 

specify two columns in 
Example 9.10 Select details of all the employees in descending the ORDER BY clause:
order of their salaries.

mys ql > SELECT  *  FROM EMPLOYEE SELECT  *  FROM

    - > ORDER BY Sa l a r y  DESC; EMPLOYEE

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - + ORDER BY Sa l a r y ,  

|  EmpNo |  Ena me     |  Sa l a r y  |  Bonus  |  De pt I d  | Bonus ;

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|    102 |  Kr i t i ka   |   60000 |    123 |  D01    | SELECT  *  FROM

|    110 |  Ta nya     |   50000 |    467 |  D05    | EMPLOYEE

|    106 |  Sa nya     |   48000 |    695 |  D02    | ORDER BY 

|    103 |  Sha bbi r   |   45000 |    566 |  D01    | Sa l a r y, Bonus  

|    109 |  Da r i bha   |   42000 |   NULL |  D04    | DESC;

|    105 |  J os e ph   |   34000 |    875 |  D03    |
|    108 |  Na c ha obi  |   29000 |   NULL |  D05    |
|    104 |  Gur pr e e t  |   19000 |    565 |  D04    |
|    107 |  Ve r ge s e   |   15000 |   NULL |  D01    |
|    101 |  Aa l i ya    |   10000 |    234 |  D02    |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
10 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

(G) Handling NULL Values
SQL supports a special value called NULL to represent 
a missing or unknown value. For example, the Gphone 
column in the GUARDIAN table can have missing value 
for certain records. Hence, NULL is used to represent 
such unknown values. It is important to note that NULL 

Structured Query Language (SQL) 151

Reprint 2025-26



noteS is different from 0 (zero). Also, any arithmetic operation 
performed with NULL value gives NULL. For example: 
5 + NULL = NULL because NULL is unknown hence 
the result is also unknown. In order to check for NULL 
value in a column, we use IS NULL operator.

Example 9.11 The following query selects details of all those 
employees who have not been given a bonus. This implies 
that the bonus column will be blank. 
mys ql > SELECT * FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE Bonus  I S NULL;

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  EmpNo |  Ena me     |  Sa l a r y  |  Bonus  |  De pt I d  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|    107 |  Ve r ge s e   |   15000 |   NULL |  D01    |
|    108 |  Na c ha obi  |   29000 |   NULL |  D05    |
|    109 |  Da r i bha   |   42000 |   NULL |  D04    |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
3 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Example 9.12 The following query selects names of all 
employees who have been given a bonus (i.e., Bonus is not 
null) and works in the department D01. 
mys ql > SELECT ENa me  FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE Bonus  I S NOT NULL
    - > AND De pt I D = ‘ D01’ ;

+- - - - - - - - - - +
|  ENa me     |
+- - - - - - - - - - +
|  Kr i t i ka   |
|  Sha bbi r   |
+- - - - - - - - - - +
2 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

(H) Substring pattern matching
Many a times we come across situations where we do 
not want to query by matching exact text or value. 
Rather, we are interested to find matching of only a few 
characters or values in column values. For example, 
to find out names starting with “T” or to find out pin 
codes starting with ‘60’. This is called substring pattern 
matching. We cannot match such patterns using = 
operator as we are not looking for an exact match. 
SQL provides a LIKE operator that can be used with 
the WHERE clause to search for a specified pattern in 
a column.

The LIKE operator makes use of the following two 
wild card characters:
• % (per cent)- used to represent zero, one, or multiple 

characters

152 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



• _ (underscore)- used to represent exactly a single 
character

Example 9.13 The following query selects details of all those 
employees whose name starts with 'K'.
mys ql > SELECT  *  FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE Ena me  l i ke  ' K%' ;

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  EmpNo |  Ena me    |  Sa l a r y  |  Bonus  |  De pt I d  | When we type first 
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - + letter of a contact 
|    102 |  Kr i t i ka  |   60000 |    123 |  D01    | name in our contact  
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - + list in our mobile 
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

phones all the 

Example 9.14 The following query selects details of all those names containing 
that character are 

employees whose name ends with 'a', and gets a salary more 
displayed. Can you 

than 45000. relate SQL statement 
mys ql > SELECT  *  FROM EMPLOYEE with the process? 
    - > WHERE Ena me  l i ke  ' %a ' List other real-life 
    - > AND Sa l a r y  > 45000;

situations where 

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - + you can visualise a 
|  EmpNo |  Ena me    |  Sa l a r y  |  Bonus  |  De pt I d  | SQL statement in 
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - + operation.
|    102 |  Kr i t i ka  |   60000 |    123 |  D01    |
|    106 |  Sa nya    |   48000 |    695 |  D02    |
|    110 |  Ta nya    |   50000 |    467 |  D05    |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
3 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Example 9.15 The following query selects details of all 
those employees whose name consists of exactly 5 letters 
and starts with any letter but has ‘ANYA’ after that.
mys ql > SELECT  *  FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE Ena me  l i ke  ' _ANYA' ;

+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  EmpNo |  Ena me  |  Sa l a r y  |  Bonus  |  De pt I d  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|    106 |  Sa nya  |   48000 |    695 |  D02    |
|    110 |  Ta nya  |   50000 |    467 |  D05    |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
2 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Example 9.16 The following query selects names of all 
employees containing 'se' as a substring in name.
mys ql > SELECT  Ena me  FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE Ena me  l i ke  ' %s e %' ;

+- - - - - - - - - +
|  Ena me    |
+- - - - - - - - - +
|  J os e ph  |
|  Ve r ge s e  |
+- - - - - - - - - +
2 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Structured Query Language (SQL) 153

Reprint 2025-26



noteS Example 9.17 The following query selects names of all 
employees containing 'a' as the second character.
mys ql > SELECT  ENa me  FROM EMPLOYEE
    - > WHERE Ena me  l i ke  ' _a %' ;

+- - - - - - - - - - +
|  ENa me     |
+- - - - - - - - - - +
|  Aa l i ya    |
|  Sa nya     |
|  Na c ha obi  |
|  Da r i bha   |
|  Ta nya     |
+- - - - - - - - - - +
5 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

9.7 data updatIon and deLetIon

Updation and deletion of data are also part of SQL Data 
Manipulation Language (DML). In this section, we are 
going to apply these two data manipulation methods on 
the StudentAttendance database given in section 9.4.
9.7.1 Data Updation

We may need to make changes in the value(s) of one or 
more columns of existing records in a table. For example, 
we may require some changes in address, phone number 
or spelling of name, etc. The UPDATE statement is used 
to make such modifications in existing data.
Syntax:

UPDATE t a bl e _na me
SET a t t r i but e 1 = va l ue 1,  a t t r i but e 2 = va l ue 2,  . . .
WHERE c ondi t i on;  

STUDENT Table 9.7 has NULL value in GUID for the 
student with roll number 3. Suppose students with roll 
numbers 3 and 5 are siblings. Then, in the STUDENT 
table, we need to fill the GUID value for the student with 
roll number 3 as 101010101010. In order to update 
or change GUID of a particular row (record), we need 
to specify that record using WHERE clause, as shown 
below: 
mys ql > UPDATE STUDENT
    - > SET GUI D = 101010101010
    - > WHERE Rol l Numbe r  = 3;
Que r y OK,  1  r ow a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 06 s e c )  Rows  ma t c he d:  1  
Cha nge d:  1  Wa r ni ngs :  0

We can then verify the updated data using the 
statement SELECT * FROM STUDENT.

154 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Caution : If we miss the where clause in the UPDATE statement 
then the GUID of all the records will be changed to 101010101010.

We can also update values for more than one column 
using the UPDATE statement. Suppose, the guardian 
with GUID 466444444666 has requested to change 
Address to 'WZ - 68, Azad Avenue, Bijnour, MP' and 
Phone number to '4817362092'.

mys ql > UPDATE GUARDI AN
    - > SET GAddr e s s  = ' WZ -  68,  Az a d Ave nue ,  
- > Bi j nour ,  MP' ,  GPhone  = 9010810547
    - > WHERE  GUI D = 466444444666;
Que r y OK,  1  r ow a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 06 s e c )
Rows  ma t c he d:  1  Cha nge d:  1  Wa r ni ngs :  0

mys ql > SELECT * FROM GUARDI AN ;
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
| GUI D        | GNa me           | Gphone       | GAddr e s s                               |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
| 444444444444| Ami t  Ahuj a      | 5711492685  | G- 35,  As hok vi ha r ,  De l hi               |
| 111111111111| Ba i c hung Bhut i a | 3612967082  | Fl a t  no.  5 ,  Da r j e e l i ng Appt . ,  Shi ml a   |
| 101010101010| Hi ma ns hu Sha h  | 4726309212  | 26/ 77,  We s t  Pa t e l  Na ga r ,  Ahme da ba d    |
| 333333333333| Da nny Ds ouz a    | NULL        | S - 13,  As hok Vi l l a ge ,  Da ma n           |
| 466444444666| Suj a t a  P.       | 3801923168  | WZ -  68,  Az a d Ave nue ,  Bi j nour ,  MP     |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
5 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

9.7.2 Data Deletion

DELETE statement is used to delete/remove one or 
more records from a table.
Syntax:

DELETE FROM t a bl e _na me
WHERE c ondi t i on;

Suppose the student with roll number 2 has left the 
school. We can use the following MySQL statement to 
delete that record from the STUDENT table.
mys ql > DELETE FROM STUDENT WHERE Rol l Numbe r  = 2;
Que r y OK,  1  r ow a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 06 s e c )

mys ql > SELECT * FROM STUDENT ;
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Rol l Numbe r  |  SNa me         |  SDa t e of Bi r t h  |  GUI D         |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|           1  |  At ha r v Ahuj a  |  2003- 05- 15   |  444444444444 |
|           3  |  Ta l e e m Sha h  |  2002- 02- 28   |  101010101010 |
|           4  |  J ohn Ds ouz a   |  2003- 08- 18   |  333333333333 |
|           5  |  Al i  Sha h     |  2003- 07- 05   |  101010101010 |
|           6  |  Ma ni ka  P.     |  2002- 03- 10   |  466444444666 |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
5 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Caution: Like UPDATE statement, we need to be careful to include 
the WHERE clause while using a DELETE statement to delete 
records in a table. Otherwise, all the records in the table will get 
deleted.

Structured Query Language (SQL) 155

Reprint 2025-26



9.8 functIonS In SQL 

In this section, we will understand how to use single 
row functions, multiple row functions, group records 
based on some criteria, and working on multiple tables 
using SQL.

Customer
Inventory

CustID
CarID CustName
CarName CustAdd
Price Phone
Model Email
YearManufacture Sale
FuelType

InvoiceNo Employee
CarID
CustID EmpID
SaleDate EmpName
PaymentMode DOB
EmpID DOJ
SalePrice Designaiton

Salary

Figure 9.2: Schema diagram of database CARSHOWROOM

Let us create a database called CARSHOWROOM 
having the schema as shown in Figure 9.2 It has the 
following four relations: 

1) INVENTORY: Stores name, price, model, year 
of manufacturing, and fuel type for each car in 
inventory of the showroom, 

2) CUSTOMER: Stores customer id, name, address, 
phone number and email for each customer, 

3) SALE: Stores the invoice number, car id, customer 
id, sale date, mode of payment, sales person’s 
employee id and selling price of the car sold, 

4) EMPLOYEE: Stores employee id, name, date of 
birth, date of joining, designation and salary of 
each employee in the showroom.

The records of the four relations are shown in Tables 
9.9, 9.10, 9.11, and 9.12, respectively.

Table 9.9 INVENTORY
mys ql > SELECT * FROM I NVENTORY;
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Ca r I d  |  Ca r Na me  |  Pr i c e      |  Mode l       |  Ye a r Ma nuf a c t ur e  |  Fue l t ype   |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  D001  |  Dz i r e     |  582613. 00 |  LXI         |             2017 |  Pe t r ol     |

156 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



|  D002  |  Dz i r e     |  673112. 00 |  VXI         |             2018 |  Pe t r ol     |
|  B001  |  Ba l e no   |  567031. 00 |  Si gma 1. 2   |             2019 |  Pe t r ol     |
|  B002  |  Ba l e no   |  647858. 00 |  De l t a 1. 2    |             2018 |  Pe t r ol     |
|  E001  |  EECO     |  355205. 00 |  5  STR STD  |             2017 |  CNG       |
|  E002  |  EECO     |  654914. 00 |  CARE       |             2018 |  CNG       |
|  S001  |  SWI FT    |  514000. 00 |  LXI         |             2017 |  Pe t r ol     |
|  S002  |  SWI FT    |  614000. 00 |  VXI         |             2018 |  Pe t r ol     |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
8 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Table 9.10 CUSTOMER
mys ql > SELECT * FROM CUSTOMER;
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Cus t I d  |  Cus t Na me      |  Cus t Add                 |  Phone       |  Ema i l                |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  C0001  |  Ami t  Sa ha     |  L- 10,  Pi t a mpur a          |  4564587852 |  a mi t s a ha 2@gma i l . c om |
|  C0002  |  Re hnuma       |  J - 12,  SAKET             |  5527688761 |  r e hnuma @hot ma i l . c om |
|  C0003  |  Cha r vi  Na yya r |  10/ 9 ,  FF,  Rohi ni         |  6811635425 |  c ha r vi 123@ya hoo. c om |
|  C0004  |  Gur pr e e t      |  A- 10/ 2,  SF,  Ma yur  Vi ha r  |  3511056125 |  gur _s i ngh@ya hoo. c om |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
4 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Table 9.11 SALE
mys ql > SELECT * FROM SALE;
+- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +
|  I nvoi c e No |  Ca r I d  |  Cus t I d  |  Sa l e Da t e    |  Pa yme nt Mode   |  EmpI D |  Sa l e Pr i c e  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +
|  I 00001    |  D001  |  C0001  |  2019- 01- 24 |  Cr e di t  Ca r d  |  E004  |  613248. 00 |
|  I 00002    |  S001  |  C0002  |  2018- 12- 12 |  Onl i ne        |  E001  |  590321. 00 |
|  I 00003    |  S002  |  C0004  |  2019- 01- 25 |  Che que        |  E010  |  604000. 00 |
|  I 00004    |  D002  |  C0001  |  2018- 10- 15 |  Ba nk Fi na nc e  |  E007  |  659982. 00 |
|  I 00005    |  E001  |  C0003  |  2018- 12- 20 |  Cr e di t  Ca r d  |  E002  |  369310. 00 |
|  I 00006    |  S002  |  C0002  |  2019- 01- 30 |  Ba nk Fi na nc e  |  E007  |  620214. 00 |
+- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +
6 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Table 9.12 EMPLOYEE
mys ql > SELECT * FROM EMPLOYEE;
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  EmpI D |  EmpNa me   |  DOB        |  DOJ         |  De s i gna t i on  |  Sa l a r y  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  E001  |  Rus hi l    |  1994- 07- 10 |  2017- 12- 12 |  Sa l e s ma n     |   25550 |
|  E002  |  Sa nj a y   |  1990- 03- 12 |  2016- 06- 05 |  Sa l e s ma n     |   33100 |
|  E003  |  Zoha r     |  1975- 08- 30 |  1999- 01- 08 |  Pe on         |   20000 |
|  E004  |  Ar pi t     |  1989- 06- 06 |  2010- 12- 02 |  Sa l e s ma n     |   39100 |
|  E006  |  Sa nj uc t a  |  1985- 11- 03 |  2012- 07- 01 |  Re c e pt i oni s t  |   27350 |
|  E007  |  Ma ya nk   |  1993- 04- 03 |  2017- 01- 01 |  Sa l e s ma n     |   27352 |
|  E010  |  Ra j kuma r  |  1987- 02- 26 |  2013- 10- 23 |  Sa l e s ma n     |   31111 |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
7 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

We know that a function is used to perform some 
particular task and it returns zero or more values as a 
result. Functions are useful while writing SQL queries 
also. Functions can be applied to work on single or 
multiple records (rows) of a table. Depending on their 
application in one or multiple rows, SQL functions are 

Structured Query Language (SQL) 157

Reprint 2025-26



categorised as Single Row functions and Aggregate 
functions. 

9.8.1 Single Row Functions

These are also known as Scalar functions. Single row 
functions are applied on a single value and return 
a single value. Figure 9.3 lists different single row 
functions under three categories — Numeric (Math), 
String, Date and Time. 

Math Functions 
Single Row Functions

accept numeric value 
as input and return 
a numeric value 

Numeric Functions String Functions Date Functions
as a result. String 

POWER() UCASE() NOW()
Functions accept 

ROUND() LCASE() DATE()
character value as 

MOD() MID() MONTH()
input and return 

LENGTH() MONTHNAME()
either character or 

LEFT() YEAR() numeric values as 
RIGHT() DAY() output. Date and 
INSERT() DAYNAME() Time functions accept 
LTRIM() date and time value 
RTRIM()

 as input and return 
TRIM() numeric or string 

 
or Date and Time 

Figure 9.3: Three categories of single-row functions in SQL as output. 

(A) Math Functions
Three commonly used numeric functions are POWER(), 
ROUND() and MOD(). Their usage along with syntax is 
given in Table 9.13.

Table 9.13 Math Functions

Function Description Example with output

POWER(X,Y) Calculates X to the power Y. mys ql > SELECT POWER( 2, 3) ;
can also be written as Out put :
POW(X,Y) 8

ROUND(N,D) Rounds off number N to D mys ql >SELECT ROUND( 2912. 564,  1) ;
number of decimal places. Out put :
Note: If D=0, then it rounds 2912. 6
off the number to the nearest mys ql > SELECT ROUND( 283. 2) ;

integer. Out put :
283

MOD(A, B) Returns the remain mys ql > SELECT MOD( 21,  2) ;
der after dividing number A by Out put :
number B. 1

158 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Example 9.18 In order to increase sales, suppose the car 
dealer decides to offer his customers to pay the total amount 
in 10 easy EMIs (equal monthly instalments). Assume that 
EMIs are required to be in multiples of 10000. For that, 
the dealer wants to list the CarID and Price along with the 
following data from the Inventory table:
a) Calculate GST as 12 per cent of Price and display the 

result after rounding it off to one decimal place.
mys ql > SELECT ROUND( 12/ 100*Pr i c e , 1)  " GST"  FROM
I NVENTORY;
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  GST        |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  69913. 6     |
|  80773. 4     | Activity 9.10
|  68043. 7     |  
|  77743. 0     | Using the table SALE 
|  42624. 6     | of CARSHOWROOM 
|  78589. 7     | database, write 
|  61680. 0     | SQL queries for the 
|  73680. 0     | following:
+- - - - - - - - - - - - +

a)  Display the 
8 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

InvoiceNo and 
b) Add a new column FinalPrice to the table inventory commission value 

which will have the value as sum of Price and 12 per rounded off to zero 
cent of the GST. decimal places.

mys ql > ALTER TABLE I NVENTORY ADD( Fi na l Pr i c e  b) Display the details 
Nume r i c ( 10, 1) ) ; of SALE where 
Que r y OK,  8  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 03 s e c ) payment mode 
Re c or ds :  8   Dupl i c a t e s :  0   Wa r ni ngs :  0 is credit 

card. 
mys ql > UPDATE I NVENTORY SET 
Fi na l Pr i c e =Pr i c e +Round( Pr i c e *12/ 100, 1) ;
Que r y OK,  8  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 01 s e c )
Rows  ma t c he d:  8   Cha nge d:  8   Wa r ni ngs :  0

mys ql > SELECT * FROM I NVENTORY;
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Ca r I d  | Ca r Na me  |  Pr i c e      |  Mode l    | Ye a r Ma nuf a c t ur e  |  Fue l Type  |  Fi na l Pr i c e  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  D001  |  Dz i r e   |  582613. 00 |  LXI        |  2017           |  Pe t r ol    |  652526. 6    |
|  D002  |  Dz i r e   |  673112. 00 |  VXI        |  2018           |  Pe t r ol    |  753885. 4    |
|  B001  |  Ba l e no |  567031. 00 |  Si gma 1. 2  |  2019           |  Pe t r ol    |  635074. 7    |
|  B002  |  Ba l e no |  647858. 00 |  De l t a 1. 2   |  2018           |  Pe t r ol    |  725601. 0    |
|  E001  |  EECO   |  355205. 00 |  5  STR STD |  2017           |  CNG      |  397829. 6    |
|  E002  |  EECO   |  654914. 00 |  CARE    |  2018           |  CNG      |  733503. 7    |
|  S001  |  SWI FT  |  514000. 00 |  LXI      |  2017           |  Pe t r ol    |  575680. 0    |
|  S002  |  SWI FT  |  614000. 00 |  VXI      |  2018           |  Pe t r ol    |  687680. 0    |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +
8 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

c) Calculate and display the amount to be paid 
each month (in multiples of 1000) which is to be 
calculated after dividing the FinalPrice of the car into 
10 instalments.

Structured Query Language (SQL) 159

Reprint 2025-26



d) After dividing the amount into EMIs, find out the 
remaining amount to be paid immediately, by 
performing modular division.

Following SQL query can be used to solve the 
above mentioned (c) and (d) problem:

mys ql > SELECT Ca r I d,  Fi na l Pr i c e ,  ROUND( Fi na l Pr i c e -
MOD( Fi na l Pr i c e , 1000) / 10, 0)  " EMI " ,  
MOD( Fi na l Pr i c e , 10000)  " Re ma i ni ng Amount "  FROM
I NVENTORY;
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Ca r I d  |  Fi na l Pr i c e    |  EMI      |  Re ma i ni ng Amount  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  D001  |    652526. 6    |  652474  |  2526. 6            |
|  D002  |    753885. 4    |  753797  |  3885. 4            |
|  B001  |    635074. 7    |  635067  |  5074. 7            |
|  B002  |    725601. 0    |  725541  |  5601. 0            |
|  E001  |    397829. 6    |  397747  |  7829. 6            |
|  E002  |    733503. 7    |  733453  |  3503. 7            |
|  S001  |    575680. 0    |  575612  |  5680. 0            |
|  S002  |    687680. 0    |  687612  |  7680. 0            |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
8 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Example 9.19  

a) Let us now add a new column Commission to the 
SALE table. The column Commission should have 
a total length of 7 in which 2 decimal places to 
be there.

mys ql > ALTER TABLE SALE ADD( Commi s s i on 
Nume r i c ( 7 , 2) ) ;
Que r y OK,  6  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 34 s e c )
Re c or ds :  6   Dupl i c a t e s :  0   Wa r ni ngs :  0

b) Let us now  calculate commission for sales agents as 
12% of the SalePrice, Insert the values to the newly 
added column Commission and then display records 
of the table SALE where commission > 73000.

mys ql > UPDATE SALE SET 
Commi s s i on=12/ 100*Sa l e Pr i c e ;
Que r y OK,  6  r ows  a f f e c t e d ( 0 . 06 s e c )
Rows  ma t c he d:  6   Cha nge d:  6   Wa r ni ngs :  0

mys ql > SELECT * FROM SALE WHERE Commi s s i on > 73000;
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +
| i nvoi c e no | c a r i d  |  c us t i d  |  s a l e da t e   |  pa yme nt mode  |  e mpi d |  s a l e pr i c e  |  Commi s s i on |
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  I 00001   | D001 |  C0001  |  2019- 01- 24 |  Cr e di t  Ca r d |  E004  |  613248. 00 |  73589. 64   |
|  I 00004   | D002 |  C0001  |  2018- 10- 15 |  Ba nk Fi na nc e |  E007  |  659982. 00 |  79198. 84   |
|  I 00006   | S002 |  C0002  |  2019- 01- 30 |  Ba nk Fi na nc e  |  E007 |  620214. 00 |  74425. 68   |
+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +
3 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 02 s e c )

160 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



c) Display InvoiceNo, SalePrice and Commission such 
that commission value is rounded off to 0.

Activity 9.11
mys ql > SELECT I nvoi c e No,  Sa l e Pr i c e ,  
Round( Commi s s i on, 0)  FROM SALE; Using the table 
+- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - + INVENTORY from 
|  I nvoi c e No |  Sa l e Pr i c e  |  Round( Commi s s i on, 0)  | CARSHOWROOM 
+- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - + database, write 
|  I 00001    |  613248. 00 |                73590 | sql queries for the 
|  I 00002    |  590321. 00 |                70839 | following:
|  I 00003    |  604000. 00 |                72480 | a) Convert the CarMake 
|  I 00004    |  659982. 00 |                79198 | to uppercase if its value 
|  I 00005    |  369310. 00 |                44317 |

starts with the letter ‘B’.
|  I 00006    |  620214. 00 |                74426 |
+- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - + b) If the length of the car’s 

6 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c ) model is greater than 4 
then fetch the substring 

(B) String Functions starting from position 

String functions can perform various operations on 3 till the end 

alphanumeric data which are stored in a table. They from attribute 
Model. 

can be used to change the case (uppercase to lowercase 
or vice-versa), extract a substring, calculate the length 
of a string and so on. String functions and their usage 
are shown in Table 9.14.
Table 9.14 String Functions

Function Description Example with output

UCASE(string) converts string into uppercase. mys ql > SELECT 
OR UCASE( “ I nf or ma t i c s  
UPPER(string) Pr a c t i c e s ” ) ;

Out put :
I NFORMATI CS PRACTI CES

LOWER(string) converts string into lowercase. mys ql > SELECT 
OR LOWER( “ I nf or ma t i c s  
LCASE(string) Pr a c t i c e s ” ) ;

Out put :
i nf or ma t i c s  pr a c t i c e s

MID(string, pos, n) Returns a substring of size n mys ql > SELECT 
OR starting from the specified position MI D( “ I nf or ma t i c s ” ,  3 ,  4) ;
SUBSTRING(string,  (pos) of the string. If n is not Out put :
pos, n) specified, it returns the substring f or m
OR from the position pos till end of 
SUBSTR(string, pos, n) the string. mys ql > SELECT 

MI D( ‘ I nf or ma t i c s ’ , 7) ;
Out put :
a t i c s

LENGTH(string) Return the number of characters mys ql > SELECT 
in the specified string. LENGTH( “ I nf or ma t i c s ” ) ;

Out put :
11

LEFT(string, N) Returns N number of characters mys ql > SELECT 
from the left side of the string. LEFT( “ Comput e r ” ,  4) ;

Out put :
Comp

Structured Query Language (SQL) 161

Reprint 2025-26



RIGHT(string, N) Returns N number of characters mys ql > SELECT 
from the right side of the string. RI GHT( “ SCI ENCE” ,  3) ;

NCE

INSTR(string, Returns the position of the first mys ql > SELECT 
substring) occurrence of the substring in I NSTR( “ I nf or ma t i c s ” ,  

the given string. Returns 0, if the “ ma ” ) ;
substring is not present in the Out put :
string. 6

LTRIM(string) Returns the given string after mys ql > SELECT LENGTH( “   
removing leading white space DELHI ” ) ,   LENGTH( LTRI M( “   
characters. DELHI ” ) ) ;

Out put :
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  7       |  5       |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

RTRIM(string) Returns the given string after mys ql >SELECT LENGTH( “ PEN  
removing trailing white space “ ) LENGTH( RTRI M( “ PEN  “ ) ) ;
characters. Out put :

+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  5  |  3  |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

TRIM(string) Returns the given string after mys ql > SELECT LENGTH( “   
removing both leading and trailing MADAM  “ ) , LENGTH( TRI M( “   
white space characters. MADAM  “ ) ) ;

Out put :
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  9  |  5  |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Example 9.20 Let us use Customer relation shown in Table 
Activity 9.12 9.10 to understand the working of string functions.

Using the table a) Display customer name in lower case and customer 
EMPLOYEE from email in upper case from table CUSTOMER. 
CARSHOWROOM 
database, write 

mys ql > SELECT LOWER( Cus t Na me ) ,  UPPER( Ema i l )  FROM
SQL queries for the CUSTOMER;
following: +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +

a) Display employee name |  LOWER( Cus t Na me )  |  UPPER( Ema i l )         |
and the last 2 characters 

+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
of his EmpId.

|  a mi t  s a ha        |  AMI TSAHA2@GMAI L. COM |
b) Display designation |  r e hnuma          |  REHNUMA@HOTMAI L. COM |

of employee and the 
|  c ha r vi  na yya r    |  CHARVI 123@YAHOO. COM |

position of 
|  gur pr e e t         |  GUR_SI NGH@YAHOO. COM |

character ‘e’ in 
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +

designation, if 
present. 4 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

 

b) Display the length of the email and part of the email 
from the email id before the character ‘@’. Note - Do 
not print ‘@’.

mys ql > SELECT LENGTH( Ema i l ) ,  LEFT( Ema i l ,  I NSTR( Ema i l ,  
" @" ) - 1)  FROM CUSTOMER;

162 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  LENGTH( Ema i l )  |  LEFT( Ema i l ,  I NSTR( Ema i l ,  " @" ) - 1)  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|             19 |  a mi t s a ha 2                        |
|             19 |  r e hnuma                           |
|             19 |  c ha r vi 123                        |
|             19 |  gur _s i ngh                        | Activity 9.13
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +

Using the table 
4 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 03 s e c )

EMPLOYEE of 
The function INSTR will return the position of “@” in CARSHOWROOM 

the email address. So, to print email id without “@” we database, list the 

have to use position -1. day of birth for all 
employees whose 

c) Let us assume that four-digit area code is reflected in salary is more 
the mobile number starting from position number 3. than 25000. 
For example, 1851 is the area code of mobile number 
9818511338. Now, write the SQL query to display 
the area code of the customer living in Rohini.

mys ql > SELECT MI D( Phone , 3 , 4)  FROM CUSTOMER WHERE 
Cus t Add l i ke  ‘ %Rohi ni %’ ;
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  MI D( Phone , 3 , 4)  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  1163           |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c ) Can we use arithmetic 

operators (+, -. *, or /
d) Display emails after removing the domain name  ) 

on date functions?
extension “.com” from emails of the customers.

mys ql > SELECT TRI M( “ . c om”  f r om Ema i l )  FROM
CUSTOMER;

+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  TRI M( " . c om"  FROM Ema i l )  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  a mi t s a ha 2@gma i l          |
|  r e hnuma @hot ma i l          |
|  c ha r vi 123@ya hoo         |
|  gur _s i ngh@ya hoo         |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
4 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

e) Display details of all the customers having yahoo 
emails only.

mys ql > SELECT * FROM CUSTOMER WHERE Ema i l  LI KE " %ya hoo%" ;
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Cus t I D |  Cus t Na me      |  Cus t Add                 |  Phone       |  Ema i l                 |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  C0003  |  Cha r vi  Na yya r |  10/ 9 ,  FF,  Rohi ni         |  6811635425 |  c ha r vi 123@ya hoo. c om  |
|  C0004  |  Gur pr e e t      |  A- 10/ 2,  SF,  Ma yur  Vi ha r  |  3511056125 |  gur _s i ngh@ya hoo. c om  |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
2 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

(C) Date and Time Functions
There are various functions that are used to perform 
operations on date and time data. Some of the operations 

Structured Query Language (SQL) 163

Reprint 2025-26



include displaying the current date, extracting each 
element of a date (day, month and year), displaying day 
of the week and so on. Table 9.15 explains various date 
and time functions.

Table 9.15 Date Functions

Function Description Example with output

NOW() It returns the current system date mys ql > SELECT NOW( ) ;
and time. Out put :

2019- 07- 11 19: 41: 17

DATE() It returns the date part from the mys ql > SELECT DATE( NOW( ) ) ;
given date/time expression. Out put :

2019- 07- 11

MONTH(date) It returns the month in numeric mys ql > SELECT MONTH( NOW( ) ) ;
form from the date. Out put :

7

MONTHNAME(date) It returns the month name from mys ql > SELECT 
the specified date. MONTHNAME( “ 2003- 11- 28” ) ;

Out put :
Nove mbe r

YEAR(date) It returns the year from the date. mys ql > SELECT YEAR( “ 2003- 10-
03” ) ;
Out put :
2003

DAY(date) It returns the day part from the mys ql > SELECT DAY( “ 2003- 03-
date. 24” ) ;

Out put :
24

DAYNAME(date) It returns the name of the day mys ql > SELECT 
from the date. DAYNAME( “ 2019- 07- 11” ) ;

Out put :
Thur s da y

Example 9.21 Let us use the EMPLOYEE table of 
CARSHOWROOM database to illustrate the working of some 
of the date and time functions. 

a) Select the day, month number and year of joining of 
all employees.

Activity 9.14 mys ql > SELECT DAY( DOJ ) ,  MONTH( DOJ ) ,  YEAR( DOJ )  
a) Find sum of Sale FROM EMPLOYEE;

Price of the cars +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +
purchased by the |  DAY( DOJ )  |  MONTH( DOJ )  |  YEAR( DOJ )  |
customer having ID +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +
C0001 from table |        12 |          12 |       2017 |
SALE. |         5  |           6  |       2016 |

b) Find the |         8  |           1  |       1999 |
maximum and |         2  |          12 |       2010 |
minimum |         1  |           7  |       2012 |
commission |         1  |           1  |       2017 |
from the |        23 |          10 |       2013 |

+- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +
SALE table. 7 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 03 s e c )

164 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



b) If the date of joining is not a Sunday, then 
display it in the following format "Wednesday, 26, 
November, 1979."
mys ql > SELECT DAYNAME( DOJ ) ,  DAY( DOJ ) ,  
MONTHNAME( DOJ ) ,  YEAR( DOJ )  FROM EMPLOYEE WHERE 
DAYNAME( DOJ ) ! =' Sunda y ' ;

+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +
|  DAYNAME( DOJ )  |  DAY( DOJ )  |  MONTHNAME( DOJ )  |  YEAR( DOJ )  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Tue s da y      |        12 |  De c e mbe r        |       2017 |
|  Fr i da y       |         8  |  J a nua r y        |       1999 |
|  Thur s da y     |         2  |  De c e mbe r        |       2010 |
|  We dne s da y    |        23 |  Oc t obe r         |       2013 |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - +

4 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

9.8.2 Aggregate Functions 

Aggregate functions are also called Multiple Row 
functions. These functions work on a set of records as 
a whole and return a single value for each column of 
the records on which the function is applied. Table 9.16 
shows the differences between single row functions and 
multiple row functions. Table 9.17 describes some of 
the aggregate functions along with their usage. Note 
that column must be of numeric type.

Table 9.16 Differences between Single and Multiple Row Functions

Single Row Function Multiple row function

1. It operates on a single row at a time. 1. It operates on groups of rows.

2. It returns one result per row. 2. It returns one result for a group of rows.

3. It can be used in Select, Where, and Order by 3. It can be used in the select clause only.
clause. 4. Max(), Min(), Avg(), Sum(), Count() and 

4. Math, String and Date functions are examples Count(*) are examples of multiple row 
of single row functions. functions.

Table 9.17 Aggregate Functions in SQL

Function Description Example with output

MAX(column) Returns the largest value from mys ql > SELECT MAX( Pr i c e )  FROM
the specified column. I NVENTORY;

Out put :

673112. 00

MIN(column) Returns the smallest value from mys ql > SELECT MI N( Pr i c e )  FROM
the specified column. I NVENTORY;

Out put :

355205. 00

Structured Query Language (SQL) 165

Reprint 2025-26



AVG(column) Returns the average of the values mys ql > SELECT AVG( Pr i c e )  FROM
in the specified column. I NVENTORY;

Out put :

576091. 625000

SUM(column) Returns the sum of the values mys ql > SELECT SUM( Pr i c e )  FROM
for the specified column. I NVENTORY;

Out put :

4608733. 00

COUNT(*) Returns the number of records mys ql > SELECT COUNT( *)  f r om 
in a table. MANAGER;

+- - - - - - - - - - +
Note: In order to display the |  c ount ( *)  |

+- - - - - - - - - - +
number of records that matches 

|         4  |
a particular criteria in the table, +- - - - - - - - - - +
we have to use COUNT(*) with 
WHERE clause. 1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

COUNT(column) Returns the number of values mys ql > SELECT * f r om MANAGER;
in the specified column ignoring +- - - - - -  +- - - - - - - - - +
the NULL values. |  MNO   |  MEMNAME |

+- - - - - -  +- - - - - - - - - +

Note: |  1  |  AMI T    |
|  2  |  KAVREET |

In this example, let us consider |  3  |  KAVI TA  |
a MANAGER table having two |  4  |  NULL    |
attributes and four records. +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +

4 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

mys ql > SELECT COUNT( MEMNAME)  FROM
MANAGER;
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  COUNT( MEMNAME)  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|            3    |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 01 s e c )

Example 9.22   

a) Display the total number of records from table 
INVENTORY having a model as VXI.

mys ql > SELECT COUNT( *)  FROM I NVENTORY WHERE 
Mode l =” VXI ” ;
+- - - - - - - - - - +
|  COUNT( *)  |
+- - - - - - - - - - +
|         2  |
+- - - - - - - - - - +
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )  

b) Display the total number of different types of Models 
available from table INVENTORY.

mys ql > SELECT COUNT( DI STI NCT Mode l )  FROM
I NVENTORY;

166 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - + Activity 9.15
|  COUNT( DI STI NCT MODEL)  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - + a)  List the total number 
|                      6  | of cars sold by each 
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - + employee.
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 09 s e c )

b) List the maximum 

c) Display the average price of all the cars with Model sale made 

LXI from table INVENTORY. by each 

mys ql > SELECT AVG( Pr i c e )  FROM I NVENTORY WHERE employee. 
Mode l =" LXI " ;
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  AVG( Pr i c e )     |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  548306. 500000 |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
1 r ow i n  s e t  ( 0 . 03 s e c )

9.9 group By cLauSe In SQL

At times we need to fetch a group of rows on the basis 
of common values in a column. This can be done using 
a group by clause. It groups the rows together that 
contains the same values in a specified column. We 
can use the aggregate functions (COUNT, MAX, MIN, 
AVG and SUM) to work on the grouped values. HAVING 
Clause in SQL is used to specify conditions on the rows 
with Group By clause. 

Consider the SALE table from the CARSHOWROOM 
database:
mys ql > SELECT * FROM SALE;
+- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +
| I nvoi c e No| Ca r I d  | Cus t I d  |  Sa l e Da t e    |  Pa yme nt Mode  | EmpI D | Sa l e Pr i c e  | Commi s s i on |
+- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +
|  I 00001  |  D001 |  C0001 |  2019- 01- 24 |  Cr e di t  Ca r d |  E004 | 613248. 00 |  73589. 64 |
|  I 00002  |  S001 |  C0002 |  2018- 12- 12 |  Onl i ne       |  E001 | 590321. 00 |  70838. 52 |
|  I 00003  |  S002 |  C0004 |  2019- 01- 25 |  Che que       |  E010 | 604000. 00 |  72480. 00 |
|  I 00004  |  D002 |  C0001 |  2018- 10- 15 |  Ba nk Fi na nc e |  E007 | 659982. 00 |  79198. 84 |
|  I 00005  |  E001 |  C0003 |  2018- 12- 20 |  Cr e di t  Ca r d |  E002 | 369310. 00 |  44318. 20 |
|  I 00006  |  S002 |  C0002 |  2019- 01- 30 |  Ba nk Fi na nc e |  E007 | 620214. 00 |  74425. 68 |
+- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +
6 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 11 s e c )

CarID, CustID, SaleDate, PaymentMode, EmpID, 
SalePrice are the columns that can have rows with the 
same values in it. So, Group by clause can be used 
in these columns to find the number of records of a 
particular type (column), or to calculate the sum of the 
price of each car type.

Structured Query Language (SQL) 167

Reprint 2025-26



noteS Example 9.23 

a) Display the number of Cars purchased by each 
Customer from SALE table.

mys ql > SELECT Cus t I D,  COUNT( *)  " Numbe r  of  Ca r s "  
FROM SALE GROUP BY Cus t I D;
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Cus t I D |  Numbe r  of  Ca r s  |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  C0001  |               2  |
|  C0002  |               2  |
|  C0003  |               1  |
|  C0004  |               1  |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
4 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

b) Display the Customer Id and number of cars 
purchased if the customer purchased more than 1 
car from SALE table.

mys ql > SELECT Cus t I D,  COUNT( *)  FROM SALE GROUP BY 
Cus t I D HAVI NG Count ( *) >1;
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +
|  Cus t I D |  COUNT( *)  |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +
|  C0001  |         2  |
|  C0002  |         2  |
+- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - +
2 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 30 s e c )

c) Display the number of people in each category of 
payment mode from the table SALE.

mys ql > SELECT Pa yme nt Mode ,  COUNT( Pa yme nt Mode )  
FROM SALE GROUP BY Pa yme nt mode  ORDER BY 
Pa yme nt mode ;
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Pa yme nt Mode   |  Count ( Pa yme nt Mode )  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Ba nk Fi na nc e  |                   2  |
|  Che que        |                   1  |
|  Cr e di t  Ca r d  |                   2  |
|  Onl i ne        |                   1  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
4 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

d) Display the PaymentMode and number of payments 
made using that mode more than once.

mys ql > SELECT Pa yme nt Mode ,  Count ( Pa yme nt Mode )  
FROM SALE GROUP BY Pa yme nt mode  HAVI NG COUNT( *) >1 
ORDER BY Pa yme nt mode ;
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Pa yme nt Mode   |  Count ( Pa yme nt Mode )  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|  Ba nk Fi na nc e  |                   2  |
|  Cr e di t  Ca r d  |                   2  |
+- - - - - - - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
2 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

168 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



9.10 operatIonS on reLatIonS noteS

We can perform certain operations on relations like 
Union, Intersection and Set Difference to merge the 
tuples of two tables. These three operations are binary 
operations as they work upon two tables. Note here that 
these operations can only be applied if both the relations 
have the same number of attributes and corresponding 
attributes in both tables have the same domain. 

9.10.1 UNION (∪)

This operation is used to combine the selected rows of 
two tables at a time. If some rows are same in both 
the tables, then result of the Union operation will 
show those rows only once. Figure 9.4 shows union of 
two sets. 

Music Dance

Figure 9.4: Union of two sets

Let us consider two relations DANCE and MUSIC 
shown in Tables 9.18 and 9.19 respectively.  

Table 9.18 DANCE
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  SNo  |  Na me    |  Cl a s s  |
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  1      |  Aa s t ha  |  7A    |
|  2      |  Ma hi r a  |  6A    |
|  3      |  Mohi t   |  7B    |
|  4      |  Sa nj a y |  7A    |
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +

Table 9.19 MUSIC
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  SNo  |  Na me     |  Cl a s s  |
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  1     |  Me ha k   |  8A |
|  2     |  Ma hi r a   |  6A |
|  3     |  La va nya  |  7A |
|  4     |  Sa nj a y  |  7A |
|  5     |  Abha y   |  8A |
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +

If we need the list of students participating in either 
of events, then we have to apply UNION operation 
(represented by symbol U) on relations DANCE and 
MUSIC. The output of UNION operation is shown in 
Table 9.20.

Structured Query Language (SQL) 169

Reprint 2025-26



noteS Table 9.20 DANCE U MUSIC
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  SNo  |  Na me     |  Cl a s s  |
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  1    |  Aa s t ha   |  7A    |
|  2    |  Ma hi r a   |  6A    |
|  3    |  Mohi t    |  7B    |
|  4    |  Sa nj a y  |  7A    |
|  1    |  Me ha k   |  8A    |
|  3    |  La va nya  |  7A    |
|  5    |  Abha y   |  8A    |
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +

9.10.2 INTERSECT (∩)
Intersect operation is used to get the common tuples 
from two tables and is represented by symbol ∩. Figure 
9.5 shows intersection of two sets. 

Music Dance

Figure 9.5: Intersection of two sets 

Suppose, we have to display the list of students 
who are participating in both the events (DANCE and 
MUSIC), then intersection operation is to be applied on 
these two tables. The output of INTERSECT operation is 
shown in Table 9.21.

Table 9.21 DANCE ∩ MUSIC 
+- - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  SNo|  Na me     |  Cl a s s  |
+- - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|   2  |  Ma hi r a   |  6A    |
|   4  |  Sa nj a y  |  7A    |   
+- - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +

9.10.3 MINUS (-)

This operation is used to get tuples/rows which are 
in the first table but not in the second table and the 
operation is represented by the symbol - (minus). Figure 
9.6 shows minus operation (also called set difference) 
between two sets.

170 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Music Dance noteS

 
Figure 9.6: Difference of two sets 

Suppose we want the list of students who are only 
participating in MUSIC and not in DANCE event. Then, 
we will use the MINUS operation, whose output is given 
in Table 9.22.

Table 9.22 DANCE - MUSIC
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  SNo  |  Na me     |  Cl a s s  |
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  1     |  Me ha k   |  8A    |
|  3     |  La va nya  |  7A    |
|  5     |  Abha y   |  8A    |
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +

9.10.4 Cartesian Product (X)

Cartesian product operation combines tuples from 
two relations. It results in all pairs of rows from the 
two input relations, regardless of whether or not they 
have the same values on common attributes. It is 
denoted as ‘X’.

The degree of the resulting relation is calculated 
as the sum of the degrees of both the relations under 
consideration. The cardinality of the resulting relation is 
calculated as the product of the cardinality of relations 
on which cartesian product is applied. Let us use the 
relations DANCE and MUSIC to show the output of 
cartesian product. Note that both relations are of degree 
3. The cardinality of relations DANCE and MUSIC is 4 
and 5 respectively. Applying cartesian product on these 
two relations will result in a relation of degree 6 and 
cardinality 20, as shown in Table 9.23.
Table 9.23 DANCE X MUSIC

+- - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
| SNo|  Na me   |  Cl a s s  |  SNo  |  Na me     |  Cl a s s  |
+- - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  1  |  Aa s t ha  |  7A |  1  |  Me ha k   |  8A   |
|  2  |  Ma hi r a  |  6A |  1  |  Me ha k   |  8A   |
|  3  |  Mohi t   |  7B |  1  |  Me ha k   |  8A   |
|  4  |  Sa nj a y |  7A |  1  |  Me ha k   |  8A   |
|  1  |  Aa s t ha  |  7A |  2  |  Ma hi r a   |  6A   |
|  2  |  Ma hi r a  |  6A |  2  |  Ma hi r a   |  6A   |

Structured Query Language (SQL) 171

Reprint 2025-26



noteS |  3  |  Mohi t   |  7B |  2  |  Ma hi r a   |  6A   |
|  4  |  Sa nj a y |  7A |  2  |  Ma hi r a   |  6A   |
|  1  |  Aa s t ha  |  7A |  3  |  La va nya  |  7A   |  
|  2  |  Ma hi r a  |  6A |  3  |  La va nya  |  7A   |
|  3  |  Mohi t   |  7B |  3  |  La va nya  |  7A   |
|  4  |  Sa nj a y |  7A |  3  |  La va nya  |  7A   |
|  1  |  Aa s t ha  |  7A |  4  |  Sa nj a y  |  7A   |
|  2  |  Ma hi r a  |  6A |  4  |  Sa nj a y  |  7A   |
|  3  |  Mohi t   |  7B |  4  |  Sa nj a y  |  7A   |
|  4  |  Sa nj a y |  7A |  4  |  Sa nj a y  |  7A   |
|  1  |  Aa s t ha  |  7A |  5  |  Abha y   |  8A   |
|  2  |  Ma hi r a  |  6A |  5  |  Abha y   |  8A   |
|  3  |  Mohi t   |  7B |  5  |  Abha y   |  8A   |
|  4  |  Sa nj a y |  7A |  5  |  Abha y   |  8A   |
+- - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
20 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 03 s e c )

9.11 uSIng two reLatIonS In a Query

Till now we have written queries in SQL using a single 
relation only.  In this section, we will learn to write 
queries using two relations.

9.11.1 Cartesian product on two tables

From the previous section, we learnt that application 
of operator cartesian product on two tables results 
in a table having all combinations of tuples from the 
underlying tables. When more than one table is to be 
used in a query, then we must specify the table names 
by separating commas in the FROM clause, as shown in 
Example 9.24. On execution of such a query, the DBMS 
(MySql) will first apply cartesian product on specified 
tables to have a single table. The following query of 
example 9.24 applies cartesian product on the two 
tables DANCE and MUSIC:
Example 9.24 

a) Display all possible combinations of tuples of 
relations DANCE and MUSIC

mys ql > SELECT * FROM DANCE,  MUSI C;

As we are using SELECT * in the query, the 
output will be the Table 9.23 having degree 6 and 
cardinality 20.

b) From the all possible combinations of tuples of 
relations DANCE and MUSIC display only those 
rows such that the attribute name in both have the 
same value.

mys ql > SELECT * FROM DANCE D,  MUSI C M WHERE 
D. Na me  = M. Na me ;

172 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Table 9.24 Tuples with same name noteS
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  Sno  |  Na me    |  Cl a s s  |  Sno  |  Na me    |  c l a s s  |
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|     2  |  Ma hi r a  |  6A    |     2  |  Ma hi r a  |  6A    |
|     4  |  Sa nj a y |  7A    |     4  |  Sa nj a y |  7A    |
+- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
2 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 00 s e c )

Note that in this query we have used table aliases (D 
for DANCE and M for MUSIC), just like column aliases 
(see Section 9.6.2) to refer to tables by shortened names. 
It is important to note that table alias is valid only for 
current query and the original table name cannot be 
used in the query if its alias is given in FROM clause.

9.11.2 JOIN on two tables

JOIN operation combines tuples from two tables on 
specified conditions. This is unlike cartesian product 
which make all possible combinations of tuples. While 
using the JOIN clause of SQL, we specify conditions on 
the related attributes of two tables within the FROM 
clause. Usually, such an attribute is the primary key 
in one table and foreign key in another table. Let us 
create two tables UNIFORM (UCode, UName, UColor) 
and COST (UCode, Size, Price) in the SchoolUniform 
database. UCode is Primary Key in table UNIFORM. 
UCode and Size is the Composite Key in table COST. 
Therefore, Ucode is a common attribute between the 
two tables which can be used to fetch the common data 
from both tables. Hence, we need to define Ucode as 
foreign key in the Price table while creating this table.

Table 9.25 Uniform table
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|  Uc ode  |  Una me  |  Uc ol or  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +
|    1    |  Shi r t  |  Whi t e   |
|    2    |  Pa nt   |  Gr e y   |  
|    3    |  Ti e    |  Bl ue    |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +

Table 9.26 Cost table
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  Uc ode  |  Si z e  |  Pr i c e  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|    1    |  L    |    580 |
|    1    |  M    |    500 |
|    2    |  L    |    890 |
|    2    |  M    |    810 |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - +

Structured Query Language (SQL) 173

Reprint 2025-26



noteS Example 9.25 List the UCode, UName, UColor, Size and 
Price of related tuples of tables UNIFORM and COST.

The given query may be written in three different 
ways as given below.

a) Using condition in where clause
mys ql > SELECT * FROM UNI FORM U,  COST C WHERE 
U. UCode  = C. UCode ;

Table 9.27 Output of the query
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  UCode  |  UNa me  |  UCol or  |  Uc ode  | Si z e  |  Pr i c e  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|    1    |  Shi r t  |  Whi t e   |  1      |  L   |    580 |
|    1    |  Shi r t  |  Whi t e   |  1      |  M   |    500 |
|    2    |  Pa nt   |  Gr e y   |  2      |  L   |    890 |
|    2    |  Pa nt   |  Gr e y   |  2      |  M   |    810 |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - +- - - - - - - +
4 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 08 s e c )

As the attribute Ucode is in both tables, we need 
to use table alias to remove ambiguity. Hence, we 
have used qualifier with attribute UCode in SELECT 
and FROM clauses to indicate its scope.

b) Explicit use of JOIN clause
mys ql > SELECT * FROM UNI FORM U J OI N COST C ON 
U. Uc ode =C. Uc ode ;

The output of the query is same as shown in 
Table 9.26. In this query we have used JOIN clause 
explicitly along with condition in From clause. Hence 
no condition needs to be given in where clause.

c) Explicit use of NATURAL JOIN clause
 The output of queries (a) and (b) shown in Table 
9.26 has a repetitive column Ucode having exactly 
the same values. This redundant column provides 
no additional information. There is an extension of 
JOIN operation called NATURAL JOIN which works 
similar to JOIN clause in SQL but removes the 
redundant attribute. This operator can be used to 
join the contents of two tables if there is one common 
attribute in both the tables. The above SQL query 
using NATURAL JOIN is shown below:

mys ql > SELECT * FROM UNI FORM  NATURAL J OI N COST;
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|  UCode  |  UNa me  |  UCol or  |  Si z e  |  Pr i c e  |
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
|    1    |  Shi r t  |  Whi t e   |  L    |   580  |
|    1    |  Shi r t  |  Whi t e   |  M    |   500  |
|    2    |  Pa nt   |  Gr e y   |  L    |    890 |

174 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



|    2    |  Pa nt   |  Gr e y   |  M    |    810 | noteS
+- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - +- - - - - - - - +- - - - - - +- - - - - - - +
4 r ows  i n  s e t  ( 0 . 17 s e c )

It is clear from the output that the result of this query 
is same as that of queries written in (a) and (b) except 
that the attribute Ucode appears only once.

Following are some of the points to be considered 
while applying JOIN operations on two or more relations:
• If two tables are to be joined on equality condition 

on the common attribute, then one may use JOIN 
with ON clause or NATURAL JOIN in FROM clause. 
If three tables are to be joined on equality condition, 
then two JOIN or NATURAL JOIN are required.

• In general, N-1 joins are needed to combine N tables 
on equality condition.

• With JOIN clause, we may use any relational 
operators to combine tuples of two tables.

SuMMary

• Database is a collection of related tables. MySQL 
is a ‘relational’ DBMS.

• DDL (Data Definition Language) includes SQL 
statements such as, Create table, Alter table and 
Drop table.

• DML (Data Manipulation Language) includes SQL 
statements such as, insert, select, update and 
delete.

• A table is a collection of rows and columns, where 
each row is a record and columns describe the 
feature of records.

• ALTER TABLE statement is used to make changes 
in the structure of a table  like adding, removing 
or changing datatype of column(s).

• UPDATE statement is used to modify existing 
data in a table.

• WHERE clause in SQL query is used to enforce 
condition(s).

• DISTINCT clause is used to eliminate repetition 
and display the values only once.

Structured Query Language (SQL) 175

Reprint 2025-26



noteS • The BETWEEN operator defines the range of 
values inclusive of boundary values.

• The IN operator selects values that match any 
value in the given list of values.

• NULL values can be tested using IS NULL and IS 
NOT NULL.

• ORDER BY clause is used to display the result of a 
SQL query in ascending or descending order with 
respect to specified attribute values. By default, 
the order is ascending.

• LIKE operator is used for pattern matching. % 
and _ are two wild card characters. The per cent 
(%) symbol is used to represent zero or more 
characters. The underscore (_) symbol is used to 
represent a single character.

• A Function is used to perform a particular task 
and return a value as a result.

• Single Row functions work on a single row of the 
table and return a single value. 

• Multiple Row functions work on a set of records 
as a whole and return a single value. Examples 
include COUNT, MAX, MIN, AVG and SUM.

• GROUP BY function is used to group rows of a 
table that contain the same values in a specified 
column. 

• Join is an operation which is used to combine 
rows from two or more tables based on one or 
more common fields between them.

exercISe

1.  Answer the following questions:
a) Define RDBMS. Name any two RDBMS software.
b) What is the purpose of the following clauses in a 

select statement?
i) ORDER BY
ii) GROUP BY

c) Site any two differences between Single Row Functions 
and Aggregate Functions.

d) What do you understand by Cartesian Product?
e) Differentiate between the following statements: 

176 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



i)  ALTER and UPDATE
ii) DELETE and DROP

f) Write the name of the functions to perform the 
following operations:
i) To display the day like “Monday”, “Tuesday”, 

from the date when India got independence.

ii) To display the specified number of characters 
from a particular position of the given string.

iii) To display the name of the month in which 
you were born.

iv) To display your name in capital letters.

2.  Write the output produced by the following SQL 
statements:
a) SELECT POW(2,3);

b) SELECT ROUND(342.9234,-1);
c) SELECT LENGTH("Informatics Practices");
d) SELECT YEAR(“1979/11/26”), 

MONTH(“1979/11/26”), DAY(“1979/11/26”), 
MONTHNAME(“1979/11/26”);

e) SELECT LEFT("INDIA",3), RIGHT("Computer 
Science",4), MID("Informatics",3,4), 
SUBSTR("Practices",3);

3. Consider the following MOVIE table and write the SQL 
queries based on it. 

Movi e I D  Movi e Na me       Ca t e gor y   Re l e a s e Da t e    Pr oduc t i onCos t    
Bus i ne s s Cos t
001  Hi ndi _Movi e      Mus i c a l      2018- 04- 23  124500       130000
002  Ta mi l _Movi e      Ac t i on      2016- 05- 17  112000       118000
003  Engl i s h_Movi e    Hor r or       2017- 08- 06  245000       360000
004  Be nga l i _Movi e    Adve nt ur e    2017- 01- 04  72000            100000
005  Te l ugu_Movi e     Ac t i on         -         100000         -
006  Punj a bi _Movi e    Come dy         -         30500              -

a) Display all the information from the Movie table.

b) List business done by the movies showing only 
MovieID, MovieName and Total_Earning. Total_
Earning to be calculated as the sum of ProductionCost 
and BusinessCost.

c) List the different categories of movies.

d) Find the net profit of each movie showing its 
MovieID, MovieName and NetProfit. Net Profit is to be 
calculated as the difference between Business Cost 
and Production Cost.  

Structured Query Language (SQL) 177

Reprint 2025-26



e) List MovieID, MovieName and Cost for all movies with 
ProductionCost greater than 10,000 and less than 
1,00,000.

f) List details of all movies which fall in the category of 
comedy or action.

g) List details of all movies which have not been released 
yet.

4. Suppose your school management has decided to 
conduct cricket matches between students of Class XI 
and Class XII. Students of each class are asked to join 
any one of the four teams – Team Titan, Team Rockers, 
Team Magnet and Team Hurricane. During summer 
vacations, various matches will be conducted between 
these teams. Help your sports teacher to do the following:
a) Create a database “Sports”.
b) Create a table “TEAM” with following considerations:

i) It should have a column TeamID for storing an 
integer value between 1 to 9, which refers to 
unique identification of a team.

ii) Each TeamID should have its associated name 
(TeamName), which should be a string of length 
not less than 10 characters.

c) Using table level constraint, make TeamID as the 
primary key.

d) Show the structure of the table TEAM using a SQL 
statement.

e) As per the preferences of the students four teams 
were formed as given below. Insert these four rows in 
TEAM table:
Row 1:  ( 1 ,  Te a m Ti t a n)
Row 2:  ( 2 ,  Te a m Roc ke r s )
Row 3:  ( 3 ,  Te a m Ma gne t )
Row 3:  ( 4 ,  Te a m Hur r i c a ne )

f) Show the contents of the table TEAM using a DML 
statement.

g) Now create another table MATCH_DETAILS and 
insert data as shown below. Choose appropriate data 
types and constraints for each attribute.

Table: MATCH_DETAILS 
Ma t c hI D  Ma t c hDa t e     Fi r s t Te a mI D  Se c ondTe a mI D  Fi r s t Te a mSc or e  Se c ondTe a mSc or e
M1 2018- 07- 17 1  2  90 86
M2 2018- 07- 18 3  4  45 48
M3 2018- 07- 19 1  3  78 56
M4 2018- 07- 19 2  4  56 67
M5 2018- 07- 18 1  4  32 87
M6 2018- 07- 17 2  3  67 51

5. Using the sports database containing two relations 
(TEAM, MATCH_DETAILS) and write the queries for the 
following:

178 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



a) Display the MatchID of all those matches where both noteS
the teams have scored more than 70. 

b) Display the MatchID of all those matches where 
FirstTeam has scored less than 70 but SecondTeam 
has scored more than 70. 

c) Display the MatchID and date of matches played by 
Team 1 and won by it.

d) Display the MatchID of matches played by Team 2 
and not won by it. 

e) Change the name of the relation TEAM to T_DATA. 
Also change the attributes TeamID and TeamName 
to T_ID and T_NAME respectively.

6. A shop called Wonderful Garments who sells school 
uniforms maintains a database SCHOOLUNIFORM as 
shown below. It consisted of two relations - UNIFORM 
and COST. They made UniformCode as the primary key 
for UNIFORM relations. Further, they used UniformCode 
and Size to be composite keys for COSTrelation. By 
analysing the database schema and database state, 
specify SQL queries to rectify the following anomalies.

a) M/S Wonderful Garments also keeps handkerchiefs 
of red colour, medium size of Rs. 100 each. 

b) INSERT INTO COST (UCode, Size, Price) values (7, 
'M',100);

When the above query is used to insert data, 
the values for the handkerchief without entering its 
details in the UNIFORM relation is entered. Make 
a provision so that the data can be entered in the 
COST table only if it is already there in the UNIFORM 
table.   

c) Further, they should be able to assign a new UCode to 
an item only if it has a valid UName. Write a query to 
add appropriate constraints to the SCHOOLUNIFORM 
database. 

d) Add the constraint so that the price of an item is 
always greater than zero.

7. Consider the following table named “Product”, showing 
details of products being sold in a grocery shop.
PCode  PNa me            UPr i c e  Ma nuf a c t ur e r
P01 Wa s hi ng Powde r  120 Sur f
P02 Toot hpa s t e        54 Col ga t e
P03 Soa p             25 Lux
P04 Toot hpa s t e        65 Pe ps ode nt
P05 Soa p             38 Dove
P06 Sha mpoo       245 Dove

Structured Query Language (SQL) 179

Reprint 2025-26



Notes Write SQL queries for the following:
a) Create the table Product with appropriate data types 

and constraints. 
b) Identify the primary key in Product.
c) List the Product Code, Product name and price in 

descending order of their product name. If PName is 
the same, then display the data in ascending order 
of price.

d) Add a new column Discount to the table Product.
e) Calculate the value of the discount in the table Product 

as 10 per cent of the UPrice for all those products 
where the UPrice is more than 100, otherwise the 
discount will be 0.

f) Increase the price by 12 per cent for all the products 
manufactured by Dove.

g) Display the total number of products manufactured 
by each manufacturer.

Write the output(s) produced by executing the 
following queries on the basis of the information 
given above in the table Product:

h) SELECT PName, avg(UPrice) FROM Product GROUP 
BY Pname;

i) SELECT DISTINCT Manufacturer FROM Product;
j) SELECT COUNT (DISTINCT PName) FROM Product;
k) SELECT PName, MAX(UPrice), MIN(UPrice) FROM 

Product GROUP BY PName;

8. Using the CARSHOWROOM database given in the 
chapter, write the SQL queries for the following:
a) Add a new column Discount in the INVENTORY table.
b) Set appropriate discount values for all cars keeping 

in mind the following:

(i) No discount is available on the LXI model.

(ii) VXI model gives a 10 per cent discount.

(iii) A 12 per cent discount is given on cars other 
than LXI model and VXI model. 

c) Display the name of the costliest car with fuel type 
“Petrol”. 

d) Calculate the average discount and total discount 
available on Baleno cars.

e) List the total number of cars having no discount. 

180 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26

##10##

Chapter

10 Computer Networks

“Hoaxes use weaknesses in human 
behavior to ensure they are replicated and 
distributed.  In other words, hoaxes prey on 

the Human Operating System.” 

                                — Stewart Kirkpatrick

In this Chapter
» Introduction to Computer 

Networks

» Evolution of Networking 10.1 IntroductIon to computer networks

» Types of Networks 
We are living in a connected world. Information 

» Network Devices is being produced, exchanged, and traced across 
» Networking Topologies the globe in real time. It's possible as almost 
» Identifying Nodes everyone and everything in the digital world is 

in a Networked interconnected through one way or the other.
Communication

» Internet, Web and the 
Internet of Things

» Domain Name System

Figure 10.1: Interconnection forming a social network

Reprint 2025-26



Activity 10.1 A group of two or more similar things or people 
interconnected with each other is called network (Figure 

Identify some other 
networks in the 10.1). Some of the examples of network in our everyday 
real world. life includes:

•	 Social network
•	 Mobile network
•	 Network of computers
•	 Airlines, railway, banks, hospitals networks

A computer network (Figure 10.2) is an interconnection 
among two or more computers or computing devices. 
Such interconnection allows computers to share data 
and resources among each other. A basic network may 
connect a few computers placed in a room.

The network size may vary from small to large 
depending on the number of computers it connects. 
A computer network can include different types of 
hosts (also called nodes) like server, desktop, laptop, 
cellular phones.

Networking 
Device

Figure 10.2: A computer network

Apart from computers, networks include networking 
devices like switch, router, modem, etc. Networking 
devices are used to connect multiple computers in 
different settings. For communication, data in a network 
is divided into smaller chunks called packets. These 
packets are then carried over a network.  Devices in a 
network can be connected either through wired media 
like cables or wireless media like air.

In a communication network, each device that is a 
part of a network and that can receive, create, store 
or send data to different network routes is called a 
node. In the context of data communication, a node 
can be a device such as a modem, hub, bridge, switch, 
router, digital telephone handset, a printer, a computer 
or a server.

182 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Interconnectivity of computing devices in a network Activity 10.2
allows us to exchange information simultaneously with 

Create a hotspot using 
many parties through email, websites, audio/video a smartphone and 
calls, etc. Network allows sharing of resources. For connect other 
example, a printer can be made available to multiple devices to it. 

computers through a network; a networked storage 
can be accessed by multiple computers. People often 
connect their devices through hotspot, thus forming a 
small personal network.

10.2 evolutIon of networkIng

In the 1960s a research project was commissioned by 
Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) 
in the U.S. Department of Defence to connect the 
academic and research institutions located at different 
places	for	scientific	collaborations.	The	first	message	was	
communicated between the University of California, Los 
Angeles (UCLA) and Stanford Research Institute (SRI). 
Slowly but gradually, more and more organisations 
joined the ARPANET, and many independent smaller 
networks were formed. Few of the milestones in the 
magnificent	journey	of	evolution	of	computer	networks	
is depicted in the timeline shown in Figure 10.3.

The idea of Advanced First version of Wi-fi 
Research Project Agency TCP/IP introduced as (802.11) standard was 
Network (ARPANET) is standard protocol on introduced

conceptualized ARPANET National Science 

Roy Tomlinson develops Foundation brings 

network messaging or connectivity to more 

E-mail. Symbol @ people with its NSFNET 

comes to mean "at" program
1961 1997

1982

1971 1986

1969 1983

1990
Domain Name System 

ARPANET became 1974
introduced

functional by 
connecting UCLA and 

SRI
The term Internet was The Berners-Lee at 

coined, CERN developed HTML 
and URL, thus giving 

First commercial use of birth to World Wide Web 

ARPANET, was started (www)

in the name of Telenet

Figure 10.3: Timeline showing evolution of networking

Computer networkS 183

Reprint 2025-26



notes 10.3 types of networks

There are various types of computer networks ranging 
from network of handheld devices (like mobile phones 
or tablets) connected through Wi-Fi or Bluetooth within 
a single room to the millions of computers spread across 
the globe. Some are connected wireless while others are 
connected through wires.

Based on the geographical area covered and data 
transfer rate, computer networks are broadly categorised 
as:
•	 PAN ( Personal Area Network)
•	 LAN (Local Area Network)
•	 MAN (Metropolitan Area Network)
•	 WAN (Wide Area Network)  

10.3.1 Personal Area Network (PAN)
It is a network formed by connecting a few personal 
devices like computers, laptops, mobile phones, smart 
phones, printers etc., as shown in Figure 10.4. All these 
devices lie within an approximate range of 10 metres. 
A personal area network may be wired or wireless. 
For example, a mobile phone connected to the laptop 
through USB forms a wired PAN while two smartphones 
communicating with each other through Bluetooth 
technology form a wireless PAN or WPAN. 

Figure 10.4:  A Personal Area Network

184 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



10.3.2 Local Area Network (LAN)
It is a network that connects computers, mobile phones, Explore	and	find	out	
tablet, mouse, printer, etc., placed at a limited distance. the minimum interne t 
The geographical area covered by a LAN can range from speed required to 

a	 single	 room,	 a	 floor,	 an	 office	 having	 one	 or	 more	 make a video call.

buildings in the same premise, laboratory, a school, 
college, or university campus. The connectivity is done 
by	means	of	wires,	Ethernet	cables,	fibre	optics,	or	Wi-Fi.	
A Local Area Network (LAN) is shown in Figure 10.5.

Figure 10.5:  A Local Area Network

LAN is comparatively secure as only authentic 
users in the network can access other computers or 
shared resources. Users can print documents using 
a connected printer, upload/download documents 
and software to and from the local server. Such LANs 
provide the short range communication with the high 
speed data transfer rates. These types of networks can 
be extended up to 1 km. Data transfer in LAN is quite 
high, and usually varies from 10 Mbps (called Ethernet) 
to 1000 Mbps (called Gigabit Ethernet), where Mbps 
stands for Megabits per second. Ethernet is a set of rules 
that decides how computers and other devices connect 
with each other through cables in a local area network 
or LAN.

10.3.3 Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) is an extended form of 
LAN which covers a larger geographical area like a city or 
a town. Data transfer rate in MAN also ranges in Mbps, 

Computer networkS 185

Reprint 2025-26



but it is considerably less as compared to LAN. Cable TV 
network or cable based broadband internet services are 
examples of MAN. This kind of network can be extended 
up to 30-40 km. Sometimes, many LANs are connected 
together to form MAN, as shown in Figure 10.6.

LAN 1

Networking LAN 3
Device

LAN 2

Figure 10.6: A Metropolitan Area Network

10.3.4 Wide Area Network (WAN)
Wide Area Network connects computers and other 
LANs and MANs, which are spread across different 

It is possible to access 
your bank account geographical locations of a country or in different 

 
from any part of the countries or continents. A WAN could be formed 
world. Whether the by connecting a LAN to other LANs (Figure 10.7) via 
bank’s network is a wired/wireless media. Large business, educational 
LAN, MAN, WAN or 

and government organisations connect their different 
any other type?

branches in different locations across the world through 
WAN. The Internet is the largest WAN that connects 
billions of computers, smartphones and millions of 
LANs from different continents.  
 

186 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Network User Network User 
Network User Network User 

Network Switch Network Switch

Network User Network User 

Internet

Network User Network User Network User Network User 

LAN 1 - Delhi LAN 1 - Shimla

Figure 10.7: A Wide Area Network

10.4 network devIces

To communicate data through different transmission 
media	 and	 to	 configure	 networks	 with	 different	
functionality, we require different devices like Modem, 
Hub, Switch, Repeater, Router, Gateway, etc. Let us 
explore them in detail.

10.4.1 Modem
Modem stands for ‘MOdulator DEModulator’. It refers to 
a device used for conversion between analog signals and 
digital bits. We know computers store and process data 
in terms of 0s and 1s. However, to transmit data from 
a sender to a receiver, or while browsing the internet, 
digital data are converted to an analog signal and the 
medium (be it free-space or a physical media) carries 
the signal to the receiver. There are modems connected 
to both the source and destination nodes. The modem 
at the sender’s end acts as a modulator that converts 
the digital data into analog signals. The modem at the 
receiver’s end acts as a demodulator that converts 
the analog signals into digital data for the destination 
node to understand. Figure 10.8 shows connectivity 
using a modem.

Computer networkS 187

Reprint 2025-26



 
Analog Signal

Modulation Demodulation

Digital Signal Digital Signal
Demodulation Modulation

Telephone Line

Modem Modem

Figure 10.8: Use of modem

10.4.2 Ethernet Card
Ethernet card, also known as Network Interface Card 
(NIC card in short) is a network adapter used to set 

up a wired network. 
It acts as an interface 
between computer and 
the network. It is a circuit 
board mounted on the 
motherboard of a computer 
as shown in Figure 
10.9. The Ethernet cable 
connects the computer to 
the network through NIC. 
Ethernet cards can support 
data transfer between 10 
Mbps and 1 Gbps (1000 
Mbps). Each NIC has a 
MAC address, which helps 
in uniquely identifying the 
computer on the network.

Figure 10.9:  A Network Interface Card

10.4.3 RJ45 
RJ 45 or Registered Jack-45 is an 
eight-pin connector (Figure 10.10) 
that is used exclusively with 
Ethernet cables for networking. 
It is a standard networking 
interface that can be seen at 
the end of all network cables. 
Basically, it is a small plastic plug 
that	 fits	 into	 RJ-45	 jacks	 of	 the	
Ethernet cards present in various 

Figure 10.10: RJ 45
computing devices.

188 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



10.4.4 Repeater
Data are carried in the form of signals over the cable. 
These	 signals	 can	 travel	 a	 specified	 distance	 (usually	
about 100 m). Signals lose their strength beyond this 
limit and become weak. In such conditions, original An Internet service 

signals need to be regenerated. provider (ISP) is any 

A repeater is an analog device that works with signals organisation that 
provides services 

on the cables to which it is connected. The weakened for accessing the 
signal appearing on the cable is regenerated and put Internet.
back on the cable by a repeater.

10.4.5 Hub
An Ethernet hub (Figure 10.11) is a network device used 
to connect different devices through wires. Data arriving 
on any of the lines are sent out on all the others. The 
limitation of Hub is that if data from two devices come 
at the same time, they will collide.

Activity 10.3

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Find and list a 
few ISPs in your 
region. 

Figure 10.11: A network hub with 8 ports

10.4.5 Switch
A switch is a networking device (Figure 10.12) that 
plays a central role in a Local Area Network (LAN). Like 
a hub, a network switch is used to connect multiple 
computers or communicating devices. When data 
arrives, the switch extracts the 
destination address from the data 
packet and looks it up in a table to 
see where to send the packet. Thus, 
it sends signals to only selected 
devices instead of sending to all. 
It can forward multiple packets at 
the same time. A switch does not 
forward the signals which are noisy 
or corrupted. It drops such signals 
and asks the sender to resend it. Figure 10.12: Cables connected to a network switch

Ethernet	 switches	 are	 common	 in	 homes/offices	
to connect multiple devices thus creating LANs or to 
access the Internet.

Computer networkS 189

Reprint 2025-26



notes 10.4.6 Router
A router (Figure 10.13) is a network device that can 
receive the data, analyse it and transmit it to other 
networks. A router connects a local area network to the 
internet. Compared to a hub or a switch, a router has 
advanced capabilities as it can analyse the data being 
carried over a network, decide/alter how it is packaged, 
and send it to another network of a different type. For 
example, data has been divided into packets of a certain 
size. Suppose these packets are to be carried over a 
different type of network which cannot handle bigger 
packets. In such a case, the data is to be repackaged 
as smaller packets and then sent over the network by 
a router.

Figure 10.13: A router
A router can be wired or wireless. A wireless router 

can provide Wi-Fi access to smartphones and other 
devices. Usually, such routers also contain some ports 
to provide wired Internet access. These days, home Wi-Fi 
routers perform the dual task of a router and a modem/
switch. These routers connect to incoming broadband 
lines, from ISP (Internet Service Provider), and convert 
them to digital data for computing devices to process.

10.4.7 Gateway
As the term “Gateway” suggests, it is a key access point 
that acts as a “gate” between an organisation's network 
and the outside world of the Internet (Figure 10.14). 
Gateway serves as the entry and exit point of a network, 
as all data coming in or going out of a network must 
first	pass	through	the	gateway	in	order	to	use	routing	
paths. Besides routing data packets, gateways also 
maintain information about the host network's internal 
connection	 paths	 and	 the	 identified	 paths	 of	 other	
remote networks. If a node from one network wants to 
communicate with a node of a foreign network, it will 

190 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



pass the data packet to the gateway, which then routes 
it to the destination using the best possible route. 

10.0.0.0/8 Server GATEWAY Server 20.0.0.0/8
IP ADDRESS IP ADDRESS

PC 4 PC 5 PC 4 PC 5

PC 1 PC 2 PC 3 PC 1 PC 2 PC 3

Figure 10.14: A network gateway

For simple Internet connectivity at homes, the 
gateway is usually the Internet Service Provider that 
provides access to the entire Internet. Generally, a 
router	 is	 configured	 to	 work	 as	 a	 gateway	 device	
in computer networks. But a gateway can be 
implemented completely in software, hardware, or 
a combination of both. Because a network gateway 
is	placed	at	 the	edge	of	a	network,	 the	firewall	 is	
usually integrated with it.

10.5 networkIng topologIes

We have already discussed that a number of computing 
devices are connected together to form a Local Area 
Network (LAN), and interconnections among millions of 
LANs forms the Internet. The arrangement of computers 
and other peripherals in a network is called its topology. 
Common network topologies are Mesh, Ring, Bus, Star 
and Tree.

Computer networkS 191

Reprint 2025-26



10.5.1 Mesh Topology
In this networking topology, each communicating 
device is connected with every other device in the 
network as shown in Figure 10.15. Such a network can 
handle	 large	 amounts	 of	 traffic	 since	 multiple	 nodes	
can transmit data simultaneously. Also, such networks 
are more reliable in the sense that even if a node gets 
down, it does not cause any break in the transmission 
of data between other nodes. This topology is also 
more secure as compared to other topologies because 
each cable between two nodes carries different data. 
However, wiring is complex and cabling cost is high in 
creating such networks and there are many redundant 
or unutilised connections.

 
Figure 10.15: A mesh topology

To build a fully-
10.5.2 Ring Topology 

connected mesh 
topology of n nodes, In ring topology (Figure 10.16), each node is connected 
it requires n(n-1)/2 to two other devices, one each on either side, as shown 

wires. in Figure 10.16. The nodes connected with each 
other thus forms a ring. The link in a ring topology is 
unidirectional. Thus, data can be transmitted in one 
direction only (clockwise or counterclockwise).

Figure 10.16: A ring topology

10.5.3 Bus Topology
In bus topology (Figure 10.17), each communicating 
device connects to a transmission medium, known as 
bus. Data sent from a node are passed on to the bus 
and hence are transmitted to the length of the bus in 
both directions. That means, data can be received by 
any of the nodes connected to the bus. 

192 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Bus

Figure 10.17: A bus topology

In this topology, a single backbone wire called bus is 
shared among the nodes, which makes it cheaper and 
easier to maintain. Both ring and bus topologies are 
considered to be less secure and less reliable.

10.5.4 Star Topology
In star topology (Figure 10.18), each communicating 

How will a Bus and 
device is connected to a central node, which is a 

Ring topology behave 
networking device like a hub or a switch, as shown in  

in case a Node is 
Figure 10.18. down?

Star	 topology	 is	 considered	 very	 effective,	 efficient	
and fast as each device is directly connected with the 
central device. Although disturbance in one device will 
not affect the rest of the network, any failure in a central 
networking device may lead to the failure of complete 
network.

Figure 10.18: A star topology

The central node can be either a broadcasting device 
means data will be transmitted to all the nodes in the 
network, or a unicast device means the node can identify 
the destination and forward data to that node only.

10.5.5 Tree or Hybrid Topology
It is a hierarchical topology, in which there are multiple 
branches and each branch can have one or more basic 
topologies like star, ring and bus. Such topologies are 
usually realised in WANs where multiple LANs are 
connected. Those LANs may be in the form of a ring, 
bus	or	star.	In	figure	10.19,	a	hybrid	topology	is	shown	
connecting 4-star topologies in a bus.

In this type of network, data transmitted from source 
first	reaches	the	centralised	device	and	from	there	the	
data passes through every branch where each branch 
can have links for more nodes.

Computer networkS 193

Reprint 2025-26



Figure 10.19: A hybrid topology

10.6 IdentIfyIng nodes In a networked  

 communIcatIon

Each	node	in	a	network	should	be	uniquely	identified	
so that a network device can identify the sender and 
receiver and decide a routing path to transmit data. 
Let us explore further and know how each node is 
distinguished in a network.

10.6.1 MAC Address
MAC stands for Media Access Control. The MAC address, 
also known as the physical or hardware address, is a 
unique value associated with a network adapter called 
a NIC. The MAC address is engraved on NIC at the time 
of manufacturing and thus it is a permanent address 
and cannot be changed under any circumstances. The 
machine on which the NIC is attached, can be physically 
identified	on	the	network	using	its	MAC	address.

Each MAC address is a 12-digit hexadecimal numbers 
(48	bits	in	length),	of	which	the	first	six	digits	(24	bits)	
contain the manufacturer’s ID called Organisational 
Unique	Identifier	(OUI)	and	the	later	six	digits	(24	bits)	
represents the serial number assigned to the card by 
the manufacturer. A sample MAC address looks like:

Activity 10.4

Explore how can you 
find	the	MAC	 10.6.2 IP Address
address of your 

IP address, also known as Internet Protocol address, 
computer 
system. is also a unique address that can be used to uniquely 

identify each node in a network. The IP addresses 

194 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



are assigned to each node in a network that uses the 
Internet Protocol for communication. Thus, if we know Do mobile phones 
a computer’s IP address, we can communicate with have a MAC address?  
that computer from anywhere in the world. However, Is it different from 

unlike MAC address, IP address can change if a node the IMEI number of 
mobile phones?

is removed from one network and connected to another 
network. 

The initial IP Address called version 4 (IPV4 in short), 
is a 32 bit numeric address, written as four numbers 
separated by periods, where each number is the decimal 
(base-10) representation for an 8-bit binary (base-2) 
number and each can take any value from 0 - 255. A 
sample IPV4 address looks like:

192.168.0.178

With more and more devices getting connected to 
the Internet, it was realised that the 32-bit IP address 
will	not	be	sufficient	as	it	offers	just	under	4.3	billion	
unique addresses. Thus, a 128 bits IP address, called IP 
version 6 (IPV6 in short) was proposed. An IPv6 address 
is represented by eight groups of hexadecimal (base-16) 
numbers separated by colons. A sample IPV6 address 
looks like:
2001:CDBA:0000:0000:0000:0000:3257:9652

10.7 Internet, Web and the Internet of thIngs

The Internet is the global network of computing devices 
including desktop, laptop, servers, tablets, mobile 
phones, other handheld devices, printers, scanners, 
routers, switches, gateways, etc. Moreover, smart 
electronic appliances like TV, AC, refrigerator, fan, light, 
etc. can also communicate through a network.  The list 
of such smart devices is always increasing e.g., drones, 
vehicles, door lock, security camera. We have already 
studied IoT and WoT in class 11.

The	Internet	is	evolving	every	day	and	it	is	difficult	
to visualise or describe each and every aspect of the 
architecture of the Internet. Computers are either 
connected to a modem through a cable or wirelessly (Wi-
Fi). That modem, be it wired or wireless, is connected to 
a local Internet Service Provider (ISP) who then connects 
to a national network. Many such ISPs connect together 
forming a regional network and regional networks 
connect together forming a national network, and such 
country-wise networks form the Internet backbone.

Computer networkS 195

Reprint 2025-26



The Internet today is a widespread network, and its 
influence	is	no	longer	limited	to	the	technical	fields	of	
computer communications. It is being used by everyone 
in the society as is evident from the increasing use of 
online tools for education, creativity, entertainment, 

You are encouraged socialisation, and e-commerce.
to take up any area  
of concern where 10.7.1 The World Wide Web (WWW)
you think IoT can be The World Wide Web (WWW) or web in short, is an 
immensely	beneficial	 ocean of information, stored in the form of trillions 
and discuss it with 

of interlinked web pages and web resources. The 
your peers. An 
example for the same resources on the web can be shared or accessed 
can be preventing through the Internet.
road accidents. Earlier,	 to	 access	 files	 residing	 in	 different	

computers, one had to login individually to each 
computer	 through	 the	 Internet.	 Besides,	 files	 in	
different computers were sometimes in different 
formats,	and	it	was	difficult	to	understand	each	other’s	
files	and	documents.	Sir	Tim	Berners-Lee	—	a	British	
computer scientist invented the revolutionary World 
Wide	 Web	 in	 1990	 by	 defining	 three	 fundamental	
technologies that lead to creation of web:

•	 HTML – HyperText Markup Language. It is a language 
which is used to design standardised Web Pages so 
that the Web contents can be read and understood 
from any computer. Basic structure of every webpage 
is designed using HTML.

•	 URI	 –	Uniform	Resource	 Identifier.	 It	 is	a	unique	
address or path for each resource located on the 
web. It is also known as Uniform Resource Locator 
(URL). Every page on the web has a unique URL. 
Examples are: https://www.mhrd.gov.in,http://
www.ncert.nic.in,http://www.airindia.in, etc. URL 
is sometimes also called web address. However, 
a URL is not only the domain name. It contains 
other information that completes a web address, 
as depicted below:

Domain Name

http://www.ncert.nic.in/textbook/textbook.htm

URL

•	 HTTP – The HyperText Transfer Protocol is a set of 
rules which is used to retrieve linked web pages 
across the web. The more secure and advanced 
version is HTTPS.

196 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Many people confuse the web with the Internet. notes

The Internet as we know is the huge global network 
of interconnected computers, which may or may not 
have	any	file	or	webpage	to	share	with	the	world.	The	
web on the other hand is the interlinking of collection 
of Webpages on these computers which are accessible 
over the Internet. WWW today gives users access to a 
vast collection of information created and shared by 
people across the world. It is today the most popular 
information retrieval system

10.8 domaIn name system

The Internet is a vast ocean where information is 
available in the form of millions of websites. Each website 
is stored on a server which is connected to the Internet, 
which means each server has an IP address. Every 
device connected to the Internet has an IP address. To 
access a website, we need to enter its IP address on our 
web	browser.	But	it	is	very	difficult	to	remember	the	IP	
addresses of different websites as they are in terms of 
numbers or strings. 

However, it is easier to remember names, and 
therefore, each computer server hosting a website or 
web resource is given a name against its IP address. 
These names are called the Domain names or hostnames 
corresponding to unique IP addresses assigned to each 
server. For easy understanding, it can be considered 
as the phonebook where instead of remembering each 
person’s phone number, we assign names to their 
numbers. For example, IP addresses and domain names 
of some websites are as follows:

Table 10.1 Examples of domain names and their 
mapped IP addresses

Domain Name IP Address

ncert.nic.in 164.100.60.233

cbse.nic.in 164.100.107.32

mhrd.gov.in 164.100.163.45

wikipedia.org 198.35.26.96

10.8.1 DNS Server
Instead of remembering IP addresses, we assign a 
domain name to each IP. But, to access a web resource, 
a	browser	needs	to	find	out	the	IP	address	corresponding	
to the domain name entered. Conversion of the domain 

Computer networkS 197

Reprint 2025-26



name of each web server to its corresponding IP address 
is called domain name resolution. It is done through 
a server called DNS server. Thus, when we enter a 
URL on a web browser, the HTTP protocol approaches 
a computer server called DNS server to obtain the IP 
address corresponding to that domain name. After 
getting the IP address, the HTTP protocol retrieves the 
information and loads it in our browser. 

In Figure 10.20, an example is shown in which the 
HTTP requests a DNS server for corresponding IP addss, 
and the server sends back an IP address.

DNS root servers 
User

are named using 
alphabets A through 
M	for	the	first	
13 letters of the 
alphabet. Ten of 164.100.60.233

these servers are HTTP in DNS 

in the US, one in Browser www.ncert.nic.in Server

London, one in 
Stockholm, and 
one in Japan.  
The organisation 

Figure 10.20: Request of IP address corresponding to domain name
Internet Assigned 
Numbers Authority A DNS server maintains a database of domain names 
(IANA) keeps this 
list of DNS root and their corresponding IP addresses. To understand 
servers. how the domain name resolution works, we have to 

understand how and where the DNS servers are kept. 
The DNS servers are placed in hierarchical order. At 
the top level, there are 13 servers called root servers. 
Then below the root servers there are other DNS servers 
at different levels. A DNS server may contain the IP 
address corresponding to a domain or it will contain 
the IP address of other DNS servers, where this domain 
entry can be searched.

summary

•	 A computer network is an interconnection among 
two or more computers or computing devices.

•	 A computer network allows computers to share 
data and resources among each other.

•	 Networking devices are used to connect multiple 
computers in different settings.

198 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



•	 notes
In a communication network, each device that is 
a part of a network and that can receive, create, 
store or send data to different network routes is 
called a node.

•	 Based on the geographical area covered and data 
transfer rate, computer networks are broadly 
categorised into LAN (Local Area Network), MAN 
(Metropolitan Area Network) and WAN (Wide Area 
Network).

•	 LAN is a network that connects a variety of nodes 
placed at a limited distance ranging from a single 
room,	a	floor,	an	office	or	a	campus	having	one	or	
more buildings in the same premises.

•	 Ethernet is a set of rules that decides how 
computers and other devices connect with each 
other through cables in a LAN.

•	 Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) is an extended 
form of LAN which covers a larger geographical 
area like a city or a town.

•	 Cable TV network or cable based broadband 
internet services are examples of MAN.

•	 Wide Area Network (WAN) connects computers 
and other LANs and MANs, which are spread 
across different geographical locations of a 
country or in different countries or continents.

•	 The Internet is the largest WAN that connects 
billions of computers, smartphones and millions 
of LANs from different continents. 

•	 Modem stands for ‘MOdulator DEModulator’, 
is a device used for conversion between electric 
signals and digital bits.

•	 Ethernet card, also known as Network Interface 
Card (NIC card in short) is a network adaptor 
used to set up a wired network.

•	 Each NIC has a MAC address, which helps in 
uniquely identifying the computer on the network.

•	 A repeater is an analog device that regenerate the 
signals on the cables to which it is connected.

•	 A switch is a networking device used to connect 
multiple computers or communicating devices.

•	 A router is a network device that can receive the 
data, analyse it and transmit it to other networks.

Computer networkS 199

Reprint 2025-26



notes •	 Gateway serves as the entry and exit point of a 
network, as all data coming in or going out of a 
network	must	first	pass	through	the	gateway	in	
order to use routing paths.

•	 The arrangement of computers and other 
peripherals in a network is called its topology.

•	 Common network topologies are Mesh, Ring, Bus, 
Star and Tree.

•	 In mesh topology each communicating device is 
connected with every other device in the network.

•	 In ring topology, each node is connected to two 
other devices, one each on either side.

•	 In bus topology, a single backbone wire called 
bus is shared among the nodes, which makes it 
cheaper and easy to maintain.

•	 In star topology, each communicating device is 
connected to a central networking device like a 
hub or a switch.

•	 In tree or hybrid topology, there are multiple 
branches and each branch can have one or more 
basic topologies like star, ring and bus.

•	 The MAC address, also known as the physical or 
hardware address, is a unique permanent value 
associated with a network adapter called a NIC. 
It is used to physically identify a machine on the 
network.

•	 IP address, also known as Internet Protocol 
address, is a unique address that can be used to 
uniquely identify each node in a network.

•	 Unlike MAC address, IP address can change if a 
node is removed from one network and connected 
to another network.

•	 The Internet is the global network of computing 
devices.

•	 The World Wide Web (WWW) or web in short, is an 
ocean of information, stored in the form of trillions 
of interlinked web pages and web resources.

•	 Sir	 Tim	 Berners-Lee	 —	 a	 British	 computer	
scientist invented the revolutionary World Wide 
Web in 1990.

•	 HTML (HyperText Markup Language) is a 
language which is used to design standardised 
Web Pages so that the Web contents can be read 

200 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



and understood from any computer. notes

•	 URI	(Uniform	Resource	Identifier)	or	URL	(Uniform	
Resource Locator) is a unique address or path for 
each resource located on the web.

•	 HTTP – The HyperText Transfer Protocol is a set of 
rules which is used to retrieve linked web pages 
across the web. The more secure and advanced 
version is HTTPS.

•	 Each computer server hosting a website or web 
resource is given a name against its IP address. 
These names are called the Domain names or 
hostnames.

•	 Conversion of the domain name of each web server 
to its corresponding IP address is called domain 
name resolution. It is done through a server called 
DNS server. 

exercIse

1.  Expand the following:
a) ARPANET
b) MAC
c) ISP
d) URI

2.  What do you understand by the term network?

3.  Mention any two main advantages of using a network of 
computing devices.

4.  Differentiate between LAN and WAN.

5.  Write down the names of few commonly used networking 
devices.

6.  Two universities in different States want to transfer 
information. Which type of network they need to use for 
this?

7. 	Define	the	term	topology.	What	are	the	popular	network	
topologies?

8.  How is tree topology different from bus topology?

9.  Identify the type of topology from the following:
a) Each node is connected with the help of a single cable.
b) Each node is connected with central switching 

through independent cables. 

Computer networkS 201

Reprint 2025-26



notes 10. What do you mean by a modem? Why is it used?

11.  Explain the following devices:
a) Switch
b) Repeater
c) Router
d) Gateway
e) NIC

12. Draw a network layout of star topology and bus 
topology	connecting	five	computers.

13. What	is	the	significance	of	MAC	address?
14. How is IP address different from MAC address? 

Discuss	briefly.
15. What is DNS? What is a DNS server?

16. Sahil, a class X student, has just started understanding 
the basics of Internet and web technologies. He is a bit 
confused in between the terms “World Wide Web” and 
“Internet”. Help him in understanding both the terms 
with the help of suitable examples of each.

202 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26


##11##
Chapter

11 Data Communication

“People already have bionic arms and legs that 
work by the power of thought. And we increasingly 

outsource mental and communicative activities to 
computers. We are merging with our smartphones. 

Very soon, they will just be part of the body” 

— Yuval Noah Harari

In this Chapter

» Concept of Communication

» Components of Data 
Communication 11.1 ConCept of CommuniCation

» Measuring Capacity of The term “Data Communication” comprises two 
Communication Media words: Data and Communication. Data can be 

» Types of Data any text, image, audio, video, and multimedia 
Communication files. Communication is an act of sending or 

» Switching Techniques receiving data. Thus, data communication refers 
» Transmission Media to the exchange of data between two or more 

networked or connected devices. These devices 
» Mobile Telecommunication 

Technologies must be capable of sending and receiving data 
over a communication medium. Examples of 

» Protocol
such devices include personal computers, mobile 
phones, laptops, etc. As we can see in Figure 
11.1, four different types of devices — computer, 
printer, server and switch are connected to form 
the network. These devices are connected through 
a media to the network, which carry information 
from one end to other end.
 

Reprint 2025-26



Central Server Sharing Printer 
connected to Switch

Switch

Figure 11.1: A simple network of computing devices

11.2 Components of Data CommuniCation

Whenever we talk about  communication between 
two computing devices using a network, five most 
important aspects come to our mind. These are sender, 
receiver, communication medium, the message to be 
communicated, and certain rules called protocols to be 
followed during communication. The communication 
media is also called transmission media. Figure 
11.2 shows the role of these five components in data 
communication.

 

Sender

Activity 11.1 Transmission Receiver

List various types Media

of senders on a Figure 11.2: Components of data communication
network.

Sender: A sender is a computer or any such device 
which is capable of sending data over a network. It 
can be a computer, mobile phone, smartwatch, walkie-
talkie, video recording device, etc.

Receiver: A receiver is a computer or any such device 
which is capable of receiving data from the network. 
It can be any computer, printer, laptop, mobile phone, 
television, etc. In computer communication, the sender 
and receiver are known as nodes in a network.

204 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Message: It is the data or information that needs to 
be exchanged between the sender and the receiver. 
Messages can be in the form of  text, number, image, 
audio, video, multimedia, etc.

Communication media: It is the path through which 
the message travels between source and destination. 
It is also called medium or link which is either wired 
or wireless. For example, a television cable, telephone 
cable, ethernet cable, satellite link, microwaves, etc. 
We will study about various communication media in 
section 11.5.

Protocols: It is a set of rules that need to be followed by 
the communicating parties in order to have successful 
and reliable data communication. You have already 
come across protocols such as Ethernet and HTTP.

11.3 measuring CapaCity of CommuniCation meDia

In data communication, the transmission medium is 
also known as channel. The capacity of a channel is the 
maximum amount of signals or traffic that a channel 
can carry. It is measured in terms of bandwidth and 
data transfer rate as described below:
11.3.1 Bandwidth

Bandwidth of a channel is the range of frequencies 
available for transmission of data through that channel. 

Activity 11.2
Higher the bandwidth, higher the data transfer rate. 
Normally, bandwidth is the difference of maximum and Find out how 

many hertz is 
minimum frequency contained in the composite signals. 10 Megahertz.
Bandwidth is measured in Hertz (Hz).  

1 KHz =1000 Hz
1 MHz =1000 KHz = 1000000 Hz

11.3.2 Data Transfer Rate

Data travels in the form of signals over a channel. One 
signal carries one or more bits over the channel. Data MBps stands for 
transfer rate is the number of bits transmitted between Megabyte per 
source and destination in one second. It is also known second whereas 
as bit rate. It is measured in terms of bits per second Mbps stands 

(bps). The higher units for data transfer rates are: for Megabit per 
second.

1 Kbps=210 bps=1024 bps
1 Mbps=220 bps=1024 Kbps
1 Gbps=230 bps=1024 Mbps
1 Tbps=240 bps=1024 Gbps

Data CommuniCation 205

Reprint 2025-26



notes Example 11.1 A user wants to upload a text document at 
the rate of 10 pages per 20 second. What will be the required 
data rate of the channel? (Assume that 1 page contains 1600 
characters and each character is of 8 bits).

Solution:  

11.4 types of Data CommuniCation

Data communication happens in the form of signals 
between two or more computing devices or nodes. 
The transfer  of  data  happens over a point-to-point 
or multipoint communication channel. Data 
communication between different devices are broadly 
categorised into 3 types: Simplex communication, Half-
duplex communication, and Full-duplex communication.

11.4.1 Simplex Communication

It is a one way or unidirectional communication between 
two devices in which one device is sender and other one 
is receiver. Devices use the entire capacity of the link 
to transmit the data. It is like a one way street where 
vehicles can move in only one direction. For example, 
data entered through a keyboard or audio sent to a 
speaker are one way communications.

With the advent of IoT, controlling home appliances 
is another example of simplex communication as shown 
in the Figure 11.3. One can control fans, lights, fridge, 
oven etc. while sitting in the office or driving a car.
 

Simplex One Direction

Figure 11.3: Simplex communication

11.4.2 Half-duplex Communication

It is two way or bidirectional communication between two 
devices in which both the devices can send and receive 
data or control signals in both directions, but not at the 
same time, as shown in Figure 11.4. While one device is 
sending data, the other one will receive and vice-versa. It 
is like sharing a one-way narrow bridge among vehicles 

206 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



moving in both directions. Vehicles cannot pass the notes
bridge simultaneously. Basically, it is a simplex channel 
where the direction of transmission can be switched. 
Application of such type of communication can be found 
in walkie-talkie where one can press the push-to-talk 
button and talk. This enables the transmitter and turns 
off the receiver in that device and others can only listen. 

OR

Figure 11.4: Half-duplex where communication occurs in two 
different moments.

11.4.3 Full-duplex Communication

It is two way or bidirectional communication in which 
both devices can send and receive data simultaneously, 
as shown in Figure 11.5. It is like a two way road where 
vehicles can go in both directions at the same time. 
This type of communication channel is employed to 
allow simultaneous communication, for example, in our 
mobile phones and landline telephones. The capacity 
of the transmission link is shared between the signals 
going in both directions. This can be done either by 
using two physically separate simplex lines — one for 
sending and other for receiving, or the capacity of the 
single channel is shared between the signals travelling 
in different directions.  

Both Directions

A B

Figure 11.5: Full duplex transmission of data

Data CommuniCation 207

Reprint 2025-26



11.5 switChing teChniques

VoIP is a In a network having multiple devices, we are interested 
communication to know how to connect the sender and receiver so that 

methodology one-to-one communication is possible. One solution is 
designed to to make a dedicated connection between each pair of 

deliver both voice 
devices (mesh topology) or between a central device and 

and multimedia 
communications every other device (a star topology). However, we know 

over Internet that such methods are costly in case of large networks.
protocol.

An alternative to this is switching whereby data 
is routed through various nodes in a network. This 
switching process forms a temporary route for the 
data to be transmitted. Two commonly used switching 
techniques are — Circuit Switching and Packet 
Switching.

11.5.1 Circuit Switching

Voice over Long- In circuit switching, before a communication starts, 
Term Evolution a dedicated path is identified between the sender and 

(VoLTE) is a the receiver. This path is a connected sequence of links 
standard for high- between network nodes. All packets follow the same 

speed wireless 
path established during the connection.

communication 
for mobile phones, In earlier days, when we placed a telephone call, the 
including IoT and switching equipment within the telephone system finds 

wearables. out a physical path or channel all the way from our 
telephone at home to the receiver’s telephone. This is an 
example of circuit switching.
11.5.2 Packet Switching

In packet switching, each information or message to 
be transmitted between sender and receiver is broken 
down into smaller pieces, called packets. These packets 
are then transmitted independently through the 
network. Different packets of the same message may 
take different routes depending on availability.

Each packet has two parts — a header containing 
the address of the destination and other information, 
and the main message part. When all the packets reach 
the destination, they are reassembled and the complete 
message is received by the receiver.

Unlike circuit switching, a channel is occupied 
in packet switching only during the transmission of 
the packet. On completion of the transmission, the 
channel is available for transfer of packets from other 
communicating parties.

208 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



11.6 transmission meDia notes

A transmission medium can be anything that can 
carry signals or data between the source (transmitter) 
and destination (receiver). For example, as we switch 
on a ceiling fan or a light bulb, the electric wire is the 
medium that carries electric current from switch to the 
fan or bulb. Two men are talking as shown in Figure 
11.6. Here the medium is air.  

Figure 11.6: Two person communicating

In data communication, transmission media 
are the links that carry messages between two or 
more communicating devices. Transmission can be 
classified as guided or unguided. Figure 11.7 shows the 
classification of communication media.

In guided transmission, there is a physical link 
made of wire/cable through which data in terms of 
signals are propagated between the nodes. These are 
usually metallic cable, fiber-optic cable, etc. They are 
also known as wired media. 

In unguided transmission, data travels in air in 
terms of electromagnetic waves using an antenna. They 
are also known as wireless media. 

Data CommuniCation 209

Reprint 2025-26



Communication

Media

Wired Wireless Media

Media (Electromagnetic 
waves)

Twisted Pair Fiber-Optic
Co-axial Cable Radio Waves Micro Waves Infrared Waves

Cable Cable

 
Figure 11.7: Classification of communication media

Dish-shaped antennas are used for sending and 
receiving data at longer distances. These antennas are 
mounted on taller buildings so that it would be in line-of-
sight. Waves gradually become weaker and weaker after 
travelling a certain distance through the air. Therefore 
repeaters are installed to regenerate the signals of the 
same energy.

11.6.1 Wired Transmission Media

Any physical link that can carry data in the form of 
signals belongs to the category of wired transmission 
media. Three commonly used guided/wired media for 
data transmission are, twisted pair, coaxial cable, and 
fiber optic cable. Twisted-pair and coaxial cable carry 
the electric signals whereas the optical fiber cable 
carries the light signals.

(A) Twisted Pair Cable
A twisted-pair consists of two copper wires twisted like 
a DNA helical structure. Both the copper wires are 
insulated with plastic covers. Usually, a number of 
such pairs are combined together and covered with a 
protective outer wrapping, as shown in Figure 11.8.

Twisted Pair of Cables

Figure 11.8: Twisted pair of cables

210 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Each of the twisted pairs act as a single communication 
link. The use of twisted configuration minimises the 
effect of electrical interference from similar pairs close 
by. Twisted pairs are less expensive and most commonly 
used in telephone lines and LANs. These cables are of 
two types: Unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) and Shielded 
twisted-pair (STP), as shown in Figure 11.9.

Metal Shield

(a) UTP (b) STP

Plastic Cover Plastic Cover

Figure 11.9: UTP Cable and STP Cable

(B) Coaxial cable
Coaxial cable is another type of data transmission 
medium. It is better shielded and has more bandwidth Backbone networks 
than a twisted pair. As shown in Figure 11.10, it has a interconnect different 
copper wire at the core of the cable which is surrounded segments of the 
with insulating material. The insulator is further network and provide 

a path to exchange 
surrounded with an outer conductor (usually a copper information between 
mesh). This outer conductor is wrapped in a plastic different LANs or 
cover. The key to success of coaxial cable is its shielded subnetworks..

design that allows the cable's copper core to transmit 
data quickly, without interference of environmental 
factors. These types of cables are used to carry signals 
of higher frequencies to a longer distance. 

Braided
outer Conductor

Copper
Core

Protective Insulating
Plastic Covering Material

 
Figure 11.10: A coaxial cable 

Data CommuniCation 211

Reprint 2025-26



(C) Optical Fibre

The optical fiber cable carries data as light, which travels 
The number of inside a thin fiber of glass (Figure 11.11). Optic fiber 
oscillations a 

wave makes per uses refraction to direct the light through the media. A 
second is called its thin transparent strand of glass at the centre is covered 
frequency, and it with a layer of less dense glass called cladding. This 
is measured in Hz whole arrangement is covered with an outer jacket made 

(Hertz). of PVC or Teflon. Such types of cables are usually used 
in backbone networks. These cables are of light weight 
and have higher bandwidth which means higher data 
transfer rate. Signals can travel longer distances and 
electromagnetic noise cannot affect the cable. However, 
optic fibers are expensive and unidirectional. Two cables 
are required for full duplex communication.

Glass

Sender Receiver

Cladding of less
dense material

Figure 11.11: Fiber optic cable 

Geostationary 11.6.2 Wireless Transmission Media
satellites orbiting 
around the Earth In wireless communication technology, information 

are used to In wireless communication technology, information 
deliver broadband travels in the form of electromagnetic signals through 
Internet service, air. Electromagnetic spectrum of frequency ranging 

similar to the way 
satellite is used from 3 KHz to 900 THz is available for wireless 

for television and communication (Figure 11.12). Wireless technologies 
telephone signals. allow communication between two or more devices in 

These satellites short to long distance without requiring any physical 
use microwaves 

for communication media. There are many types of wireless communication 
between a satellite technologies such as Bluetooth, WiFi, WiMax etc.
dish placed at our The electromagnetic spectrum range (3KHz to 
home and the hub 
of satellite internet 900THz) can be divided into 4 categories (Figure 11.12) - 

service providers. Radio waves, Microwaves, Infrared waves and Visible or 
Light waves, according to their frequency ranges. Some 

212 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



of the properties of each wave are listed in Table 11.1. 
of these, three are useful for wireless communication.

3 1 300 400 900
KHz GHz GHz THz THz

Radio Microwaves Infrared Light
Waves Waves Waves  
Figure 11.12: Electromagnetic waves spectrum

Table 11.1 Classification of transmission waves and their properties
Transmission 

Properties
Waves

Radio Waves 1. Waves of frequency range 3 KHz - 1 GHz 
2. Omni-directional, these waves can move in all directions 
3. Radio waves of frequency 300KHz-30MHz can travel long distance
4. Susceptible to interference
5. Radio waves of frequency 3-300KHz can penetrate walls
6. These waves are used in AM and FM radio, television, cordless phones.

Microwaves 1. Electromagnetic waves of frequency range 1GHz - 300GHz.
2. Unidirectional, can move in only one direction.

3. Cannot penetrate solid objects such as walls, hills or mountains.

4. Needs line-of-sight propagation i.e. both communicating antenna must 
be in the direction of each other.

5. Used in point-to-point communication or unicast communication such 
as radar and satellite.

6. Provide very large information-carrying capacity.

Infrared waves 1. Electromagnetic waves of frequency range 300GHz - 400THz.
2. Very high frequency waves.
3. Cannot penetrate solid objects such as walls.

4. Used for short-distance point-to-point communication such as mobile-
to-mobile, mobile-to-printer, remote-control-to-TV, and Bluetooth-
enabled devices to other devices like mouse, keyboards etc.

11.6.3 Wireless Technologies

(A) Bluetooth
Bluetooth is a short-range wireless technology that can 
be used to connect mobile-phones, mouse, headphones, 
keyboards, computers, etc. wirelessly over a short 
distance. One can print documents with bluetooth-

Data CommuniCation 213

Reprint 2025-26



enabled printers without a physical connection. All these 
bluetooth-enabled devices have a low cost transceiver 
chip. This chip uses the unlicensed frequency band of 
2.4 GHz to transmit and receive data. These devices can 
send data within a range of 10 meters with a speed of 
1 - 2 Mbps.  

In Bluetooth technology, the communicating devices 
within a range of 10 meters build a personal area 
network called piconet. The devices in a piconet work 
in a master-slave configuration. A master device can 
communicate with up to 7 active slave devices at the 
same time. 

Bluetooth technology allows up to 255 devices to build 
a network. Out of them, 8 devices can communicate at 
the same time and remaining devices can be inactive, 
waiting for a response command from the master device.
(B) Wireless LAN
This is another way of wireless communication. Wireless 
LAN is a local area network (LAN), and it is a popular way 
to connect to the Internet. The international organisation 
IEEE assigns numbers to each different standards of 
LAN. The wireless LAN is number as 802.11, and it is 
popularly known as Wi-Fi.

These networks consist of communicating devices 
such as laptops and mobile phones, as well as the 
network device called APs (access points) which is 
installed in buildings or floors (Figure 11.13). An access 
point is a device that is used to create a wireless local 
area network, by connecting to a wired router, switch, 

or hub. The APs are 
connected to a wired 

Access Point To wired network
network, and all the 
devices communicate 
or access the Internet 
through an access 
point. 

Wi-Fi gives users 
the flexibility to move 
around within the 
network area while 

Smartphone
Tablet being connected to the 

Laptop Desktop network. Following are 
some of the benefits of 

Figure 11.13: Access point creating a wireless LAN WLAN:

214 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



• Wireless connections can be used to extend or replace 
an existing wired infrastructure

• Resulted in increased access for mobile devices WiMax stands 
for Worldwide 

• Provides easy access to the Internet in public places Interoperability 
for Microwave 

11.7 mobile teleCommuniCation teChnologies Access. Like Wi-Fi, 
it is also used for 

Today the mobile phone network is the most used communication in 

network in the world. The ability to be connected to wireless networks 

the network on-the-go makes it very convenient to but there is a 
difference. Whereas 

communicate with people via call or instant messages. Wi-Fi is used to 
It is also handy to access the Internet using the mobile form small wireless 
phone network through wireless connection. Besides, networks (WLANs), 

the Internet of Things (IoT) is letting us control and WiMax uses a 

communicate with other smart devices as well. larger spectrum to 
deliver connections 

The architecture of the mobile network has rapidly to various devices 

evolved over the last few decades. The different landmark on the network. It 
achievements in mobile communication technologies are has a higher data 

classified as different generations. They are identified transfer rate and 
can span over a 

as 1G, 2G, 3G, 4G, and 5G. Let us briefly discuss the larger area. That 
mobile telecommunication generations. is why it is used in 

The first generation (1G) mobile network system came MAN applications.

around 1982. It was used to transmit only voice calls. 
The analog signals were used to carry voices between 
the caller and receiver. 

The second generation (2G) mobile network system 
came around 1991. Instead of analog signals, voice 
calls were transmitted in digital form thus providing 
improved call quality. This increased capacity allowed 
more people to talk simultaneously, and led to improved 
security as the signals could be encrypted. It also 
enabled an additional service to send SMS and MMS 
(Multimedia messages).

The third generation (3G) mobile network technology 
was developed during late 90s, but it was introduced 
commercially around 2001. It offered both digital voice 
and data services. 3G provided Internet access via the 
same radio towers that provide voice service to the mobile 
phone. It facilitated greater voice and data capacity. 
Therefore, more simultaneous calls could happen in 
the same frequency range and also a significantly faster 
data transfer speed.

Demand for faster data is always increasing and 
thus 4G mobile networks were developed and now 

Data CommuniCation 215

Reprint 2025-26



5G networks have also come into being. 4G is much 
Explore how 5G can faster than 3G and this has revolutionised the field of 
impact society.  telecommunication by bringing the wireless experience 

to a new level altogether. 4G systems support interactive 
multimedia, voice, video, wireless internet and other 
broadband services. Technologically, 4G is very different 
compared to 3G.

The fifth generation or 5G is currently under 
development. It is expected to be a milestone development 
for the success of IoT and Machine to Machine (M2M) 
communications. Machine to machine (M2M) is direct 
communication between devices — wired and wireless. 
5G is expected to allow data transfer in Gbps, which is 
much faster than 4G. It is expected to be able to support 
all the devices of the future such as connected vehicles 
and the Internet of Things.

11.8 protoCol

In communication, Protocol is a set of standard rules 
that the communicating parties — the sender, the 
receiver, and all other intermediate devices need 
to follow. We know that the sender and receiver can 
be parts of different networks, placed at different 
geographic locations. Besides, the data transfer rates in 
different networks can vary, requiring data to be sent in 
different formats.
11.8.1 Need for Protocols

We need protocols for different reasons such as flow 
control, access control, addressing, etc. Flow control is 
required when the sender and receiver have different 
speeds of sending and receiving the data. Figure 11.14 
shows that Computer A is sending data at the speed 
of 1024 Mbps and computer B is receiving data at the 
speed of 512 Mbps. In this case, Computer B must be 
able to inform computer A about the speed mismatch 
so that computer A can adjust its data transmission 
rate. Otherwise some data will be lost, as shown in 
Figure 11.14.

Access control is required to decide which nodes in 
a communication channel will access the link shared 
among them at a particular instant of time. Otherwise, 
the transmitted data packets will collide if computers 
are sending data simultaneously through the same link 
resulting in the loss or corruption of data.

216 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



A B

1024 Mbps 512 Mbps

Received Packets

Loss Packets

Figure 11.14: Speed mismatch between two computers can result into  
loss of data

Protocols also define:
• how computers identify one another on a network. 
• the form to which the data should be converted 

for transit. 
• how to decide whether the data received is for that 

node or to be forwarded to another node. 
• ensuring that all the data have reached the destination 

without any loss.
• how to rearrange the packets and process them at 

the destination.

If all the rules or protocols of a communication 
network are defined at one place, it becomes complex to 
ensure that communicating parties follow the guidelines. 
In this section, we will briefly talk about some of the 
protocols required in communication.
11.8.2 HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP)

HTTP stands for HyperText Transfer Protocol. It is 
the primary protocol used to access the World Wide 
Web. Tim Berners-Lee led the development of HTTP at 
CERN in 1989 in collaboration with Internet Hypertext refers to 
Engineering Task Force (IETF) and the World Wide a document that 

Web Consortium (W3C). contains images 
or text that can be 

HTTP is a request-response (also called client- linked to another 
server) protocol that runs over TCP. The common use document or text. 

of HTTP is between a web browser (client) and a web 
server (server). HTTP facilitates access of hypertext from 
the World Wide Web by defining how information are 
formatted and transmitted, and how the Web servers 
and browsers should respond to various commands.

Data CommuniCation 217

Reprint 2025-26



notes A web page is written using a markup language like 
HTML and is stored on a web server for access via its 
URL. Once a user opens a web browser and types in the 
URL of the intended web page, a logical communication 
link between the user machine (client) and the web 
server is created using HTTP.

For example, whenever we enter the URL http//
www.ncert.nic.in in a browser, it sends HTTP request 
to the web-server where ncert.nic.in is hosted. The 
HTTP response from the web-server fetches and 
sends the requested Web-page, which is displayed on 
your browser.

11.8.3 File Transfer Protocol (FTP)

File Transfer Protocol (FTP) is the protocol used for 
transferring files from one machine to another. Like 
HTTP, FTP also works on a client-server model.

When a user requests for a file transfer with another 
system, FTP sets up a connection between the two 
nodes for accessing the file. Optionally, the user can 
authenticate using user ID and password. The user 
then specifies the file name and location of the desired 
file. After that, another connection sets up and the file 
transfer happens directly between the two machines. 
However, some servers provide FTP logins without 
authentication for accessing files.  

File transfer between two systems seems simple 
and straightforward because FTP takes care of issues 
between two communicating devices, such as:
• use of different conventions while naming files.
• representation of text and data in different formats.
• having different directory structure

11.8.4 Point to Point Protocol (PPP)

PPP is a communication protocol which establishes 
a dedicated and direct connection between two 
communicating devices. This protocol defines how two 
devices will authenticate each other and establish a 
direct link between them to exchange data. For example, 
two routers with direct connection communicate using 
PPP. The Internet users who connect their home 
computers to the server of an Internet Service Provider 
(ISP) through a modem also use PPP. 

The communicating devices should have duplex 
modes for using this protocol. This protocol maintains 

218 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



data integrity ensuring that the packets arrive in order. 
It intimates the sender about damage or lost packets 
and asks to resend it.

11.8.5 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)

SMTP is a protocol used for email services. It uses 
information written on the message header (like an 
envelope on a letter sent by post), and is not concerned 
with the content of the email message. Each email 
header contains email addresses of recipients. The 
email containing header and body are entered into a Activity 11.3
queue of outgoing mails. Find and list 

The SMTP sender program takes mails from the other Email 

outgoing queue and transmits them to the destination(s). Protocols.

When the SMTP sender successfully delivers a 
particular mail to one or more destinations, it removes 
the corresponding receiver’s email address from the 
mail’s destination list. When that mail is delivered to all 
the recipients, it is removed from the outgoing queue. 
The SMTP receiver program accepts each mail that has 
arrived and places it in the appropriate user mailbox.

11.8.6 Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)/ 
Internet Protocol (IP) 

TCP/IP stands for Transmission Control Protocol/
Internet Protocol. It is a set of standardised rules that 
uses a client-server model of communication in which a 
user or machine (a client) requests a service by a server 
in the network.

The IP protocol ensures that each computer or node 
connected to the Internet is assigned an IP address, 
which is used to identify each node independently. It can 
be considered to be the adhesive that holds the whole 
Internet together. TCP ensures that the message or data 
is broken into smaller chunks, called IP packets. Each 
of these packets are routed (transmitted) through the 
Internet, along a path from one router to the next, until 
it reaches the specified destination. TCP guarantees the 
delivery of packets on the designated IP address. It is 
also responsible for ordering the packets so that they 
are delivered in sequence.

There are many redundant connection paths in 
the Internet, with backbones and ISPs connecting to 
each other in multiple locations. So, there are many 

Data CommuniCation 219

Reprint 2025-26



notes possible paths between two hosts. Hence, two packets 
of the same message can take two different routes 
depending on congestion and other factors in different 
possible routes. When all the packets finally reach the 
destination machine, they are reassembled into the 
original message at the receiver’s end.

summary

• Data communication refers to the exchange of 
data between two or more networked or connected 
devices like laptops, PC, printers, routers etc.

• Sender, receiver, messages, channel and protocols 
are major components of data communication.

• In data communication, transmission media are 
the links that carry messages between two or 
more communicating devices. These are broadly 
classified into guided and unguided media.

• In guided transmission, there is a physical link 
made of wire/cable through which data in terms 
of signals are propagated between the nodes. 
These are usually metallic cable, fiber-optic cable, 
etc. They are also known as wired media.

• In unguided transmission, data travels in air in 
terms of electromagnetic waves using an antenna. 
They are also known as wireless media.

• The capacity of channels is measured in 
bandwidth. The unit of bandwidth is Hertz.

• Communication can be done in three different 
modes — simplex, half-duplex, and full-duplex 
communication.

• Switching techniques are alternative to dedicated 
lines whereby data is routed through various 
nodes in a network. It forms a temporary route 
for the data to be transmitted. Two commonly 
used switching techniques are – circuit switching 
and packet switching.

• Electromagnetic spectrum of frequency ranging 
from 3 KHz to 900 THz is available for wireless 
communication. This spectrum range (3KHz to 
900THz) can be divided into four categories- Radio 

220 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



waves, Microwaves, Infrared waves and Visible or notes

Light waves, according to their frequency ranges.
• Bluetooth is a short-range wireless technology 

that can be used to connect mobile-phones, 
mouse, headphones, keyboards, computers, etc. 
wirelessly over a short distance.

• Based on the architecture of the mobile network, 
mobile communication technologies are classified 
into different generations identified as 1G, 2G, 
3G, 4G, and 5G.

• In communication, protocol is a set of standard 
rules that the communicating parties — the 
sender, the receiver, and all other intermediate 
devices need to follow. Flow control, access 
control, addressing, etc. are examples of protocol.

• HTTP stands for HyperText Transfer Protocol. It 
is the primary protocol used to access the World 
Wide Web, which was developed by Tim Berners-
Lee at CERN in 1989.

• File Transfer Protocol (FTP) is the protocol 
used for transferring files from one machine to 
another. Like HTTP, FTP also works on a client-
server model.

• Point-to-Point protocol (PPP) defines how two 
devices will authenticate each other and establish 
a direct link between them to exchange data.

• TCP/IP stands for Transmission Control Protocol/
Internet Protocol. It is a set of standardised rules 
that uses a client-server model of communication 
in which a user or machine (a client) requests a 
service by a server in the network.

exerCise

1.  What is data communication? What are the main 
components of data communication?

2.  Which communication mode allows communication in 
both directions simultaneously?

3.  Among LAN, MAN, and WAN, which has the highest 
speed and which one can cover the largest area?

Data CommuniCation 221

Reprint 2025-26



notes 4.  What are three categories of wired media? Explain them.
5.  Compare wired and wireless media.

6.  Which transmission media carries signals in the form of 
light?

7.  List out the advantages and disadvantages of optical 
fiber cable.

8.  What is the range of frequency for radio waves?
9. 18 Gbps is equal to how many Bits per second?

10.  HTTP stands for?
11. Write short note on the following:

a) HTTP
b) Bandwidth
c) Bluetooth
d) DNS
e) Data transfer rate 

12. What is protocol in data communication? Explain with 
an example.

13.  A composite signal contains frequencies between 500 
MHz and 1GHz. What is the bandwidth of a signal?

222 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26

##12##

Chapter

12 Security Aspects

“Treat your password like your 
toothbrush. Don't let anybody else use it, 

and get a new one every six months.” 

—  Clifford Stoll

In this Chapter

» Threats and Prevention

» Malware

» Antivirus

» Spam 12.1 ThreaTs and PrevenTion

» HTTP vs HTTPS Being alone is the most ideal situation for an 
» Firewall individual in terms of security. It applies to 

computers as well. A computer with no link to 
» Cookies

an external device or computer is free from the 
» Hackers and Crackers

security threats arising otherwise. However, 
» Network Security Threats it is not an ideal solution for a human being 

or a computer to stay aloof in order to mitigate 
any security threats, as the world at present 
is on its way to become fully connected. This 
connectedness of various devices and computers 
has brought into our focus the various network 
threats and its prevention.

Network security is concerned with protection 
of our device as well as data from illegitimate access 
or misuse. Threats include all the ways in which 
one can exploit any vulnerability or weakness in 
a network or communication system in order to 
cause harm or damage one’s reputation.

Reprint 2025-26



noTes 12.2 Malware

Malware is a short term used for MALicious softWARE. 
It is any software developed with an intention to damage 
hardware devices, steal data, or cause any other trouble 
to the user. Various types of malware have been created 
from time-to-time, and large-scale damages have been 
inflicted. Many of these malware programs have been 
identified and counter measures have been initiated. 
However, different types of malware keep on coming on a 
regular basis that compromise the security of computer 
systems and cause intangible damages. Besides, each 
year, malware incur financial damages worth billions 
of dollars worldwide. Viruses, Worms, Ransomware, 
Trojans, and Spyware are some of the kinds of malware.

12.2.1 Virus

The term computer virus was coined by Fred Cohen in 
1985 and has been borrowed from biological science 
with almost similar meaning and behavior, the only 
difference is that the victim is a computer system and 
the virus is a malicious software. A virus is a piece of 
software code created to perform malicious activities 
and hamper resources of a computer system like CPU 
time, memory, personal files, or sensitive information. 

Mimicking the behaviour of a biological virus, the 
computer virus spreads on contact with another system, 
i.e. a computer virus infects other computer systems 
that it comes into contact with by copying or inserting 
its code into the computer programs or software 
(executable files). A virus remains dormant on a system 
and is activated as soon as the infected file is opened 
(executed) by a user.

Viruses behave differently, depending upon the 
reason or motivation behind their creation. Some of 
the most common intentions or motives behind viruses 
include stealing passwords or data, corrupting files, 
spamming the user’s email contacts, and even taking 
control of the user’s machine. Some well-known viruses 
include CryptoLocker, ILOVEYOU, MyDoom, Sasser 
and Netsky, Slammer, Stuxnet, etc.

12.2.2 Worms

The Worm is also a malware that incurs unexpected or 
damaging behaviour on an infected computer system. 
The major difference between a worm and a virus is that 

224 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



unlike a virus, a worm does not need a host program or noTes

software to insert its code into. Worms are standalone 
programs that are capable of working on its own.  Also, 
a virus needs human triggering for replication (i.e. when 
a user opens/executes the infected file), while a worm 
replicates on its own and can spread to other computers 
through the network. Some prominent examples of 
worms include Storm Worm, Sobig, MSBlast, Code Red, 
Nimda, Morris Worm, etc.

12.2.3 Ransomware

It is a type of malware that targets user data. It 
either blocks the user from accessing their own data 
or threatens to publish the personal data online and 
demands ransom payment against the same. Some 
ransomware simply block the access to the data while 
others encrypt data making it very difficult to access. 
In May 2017, a ransomware WannaCry infected almost 
200,000 computers across 150 countries. It worked by 
encrypting data and demanding ransom payments in 
the Bitcoin cryptocurrency. It literally made its victims 
“cry” and hence the name.

Figure 12.1: A ransomware

12.2.4 Trojan

Since the ancient Greeks could not infiltrate the city 
of Troy using traditional warfare methods, they gifted 
the king of Troy with a big wooden horse with hidden 
soldiers inside and eventually defeated them. Borrowing 

SeCurity aSpeCtS 225

Reprint 2025-26



noTes the concept, a Trojan is a malware, that looks like a 
legitimate software and once it tricks a user into installing 
it, it acts pretty much like a virus or worm. However, 
a Trojan does not self-replicate or infect other files, it 
spreads through user interaction such as opening an 
email attachment or downloading and executing a file 
from the Internet. Some Trojans create backdoors to 
give malicious users access to the system.

Figure 12.2: A trojan horse

12.2.5 Spyware

It is a type of malware that spies on a person or an 
organisation by gathering information about them, 
without the knowledge of the user. It records and sends 
the collected information to an external entity without 
consent or knowledge of the user. 

Spyware usually tracks internet usage data and sells 
them to advertisers. They can also be used to track and 
capture credit card or bank account information, login 
and password information or user’s personal identity.

12.2.6 Adware

An Adware is a malware that is created to generate 
revenue for its developer. An adware displays 
online advertisements using pop-ups, web pages, or 
installation screens. Once an adware has infected a 
substantial number of computer systems, it generates 
revenue either by displaying advertisements or using 
“pay per click” mechanism to charge its clients against 
the number of clicks on their displayed ads. Adware 

226 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



is usually annoying, but harmless. However, it often 
paves way for other malware by displaying unsafe links 
as advertisements. To implement a 

keylogger in hardware, 
12.2.7 Keyloggers a thin transparent 

keyboard is placed 
A keylogger can either be malware or hardware. The atop the actual 
main purpose of this malware is to record the keys keyboard or input 
pressed by a user on the keyboard. A keylogger makes pad of the intended 

logs of daily keyboard usage and may send it to an machine, which then 

external entity as well. In this way, very sensitive and records the keystrokes 
pressed by the user.

personal information like passwords, emails, private 
conversations, etc. can be revealed to an external 
entity without the knowledge of the user. One strategy 
to avoid the threat of password leaks by keyloggers is 
to use a virtual keyboard while signing into your online 
accounts from an unknown computer.

(A) Online Virtual Keyboard Vs On-Screen Keyboard
The names “on-screen” and “virtual” keyboard refer to 
any software-based keyboard and are sometimes used 
interchangeably. But, there exists a notable difference 
between “on-screen” and “online virtual” keyboards. 
Both types of keyboards may look the same, but the 
difference is in terms of the layout or ordering of the 
keys. The on-screen keyboard of an operating system 
uses a fixed QWERTY key layout (Figure 12.3), which 
can be exploited by sophisticated keylogger software. 
However, an online virtual keyboard randomises the 
key layout every time it is used (Figure 12.4), thereby 
making it very difficult for a keylogger software to know 
or record the key(s) pressed by the user.

Figure 12.3:  A QWERTY keyboard layout

SeCurity aSpeCtS 227

Reprint 2025-26



noTes

 
Figure 12.4: Online virtual keyboard

12.2.8 Modes of Malware distribution

A malware once designed, can take many routes to 
reach your computer. Some of the common distribution 
channels for malware are:
• Downloaded from the Internet: Most of the time, 

malware is unintentionally downloaded into the 
hard drive of a computer by the user. Of course, the 
malware designers are smart enough to disguise 
their malware, but we should be very careful while 
downloading files from the Internet (especially those 
highlighted as free stuff).

• Spam Email: We often receive an unsolicited email 
with embedded hyperlinks or attachment files. These 
links or attached files can be malware.

• Removable Storage Devices: Often, the replicating 
malware targets the removable storage media 
like pen drives, SSD cards, music players, mobile 
phones, etc. and infect them with malware that 
gets transferred to other systems that they are 
plugged into. 

• Network Propagation: Some malware like Worms 
have the ability to propagate from one computer to 
another through a network connection.

12.2.9 Combating Malware

Common signs of some malware infection include the 
following:

228 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



• frequent pop-up windows prompting you to visit noTes

some website and/or download some software; 
• changes to the default homepage of your web browser; 
• mass emails being sent from your email account; 
• unusually slow computer with frequent crashes; 
• unknown programs startup as you turn on your 

computer; 
• programs opening and closing automatically; 
• sudden lack of storage space, random messages, 

sounds, or music start to appear;
• programs or files appear or disappear without your 

knowledge.
Malware exists and continues to evolve, and so is the 

mechanism to combat them. As the saying goes that 
prevention is better than cure, we list some preventive 
measures against the malware discussed earlier. 

9 Using antivirus, anti-malware, and other related 
software and updating them on a regular basis.

9 Configure your browser security settings 
9 Always check for a lock button in the address bar 

while making payments.

9 Never use pirated on unlicensed software. Instead 
go for Free and Open Source Software (FOSS).

9 Applying software updates and patches released by 
its manufacturers.

9 Taking a regular backup of important data.

9 Enforcing firewall protection in the network.
9 Avoid entering sensitive (passwords, pins) or 

personal information on unknown or public 
computers.

9 Avoid entering sensitive data on an unknown 
network (like Wi-Fi in a public place) using your 
own computer also.

9 Avoid clicking on links or downloading attachments 
from unsolicited emails.

9 Scan any removable storage device with an antivirus 
software before transferring data to and from it.

9 Never share your online account or banking 
password/pins with anyone.

9 Remove all the programs that you don’t recognise 
from your system. 

SeCurity aSpeCtS 229

Reprint 2025-26



9 Do not install an anti-spyware or antivirus program 
presented to you in a pop-up or ad.

9 Use the pop-up window’s ‘X’ icon located on the 
top-right of the popup to close the ad instead of 
clicking on the ‘close’ button in the pop-up. If you 
notice an installation has been started, cancel 
immediately to avoid further damage.

12.3 anTivirus

Antivirus is a software, also known as anti-malware. 
Initially, antivirus software was developed to detect 
and remove viruses only and hence the name anti-
virus. However, with time it has evolved and now comes 
bundled with the prevention, detection, and removal of 
a wide range of malware.

12.3.1 Methods of Malware Identification used by 
Antivirus

(A) Signature-based detection
In this method, an antivirus works with the help of 
a signature database known as “Virus Definition File 
(VDF)”. This file consists of virus signatures and is 
updated continuously on a real-time basis. This makes 
the regular update of the antivirus software a must. If 
there is an antivirus software with an outdated VDF, it 
is as good as having no antivirus software installed, as 

Virus Signature the new malware will infect the system without getting 
A virus signature detected. This method also fails to detect malware that 
is a consecutive has an ability to change its signature (polymorphic) and 

sequence of bytes that 
is commonly found the malware that has some portion of its code encrypted.

in a certain malware 
sample. That means (B) Sandbox detection
it’s contained within In this method, a new application or file is executed 
the malware or the in a virtual environment (sandbox) and its behavioural 

infected file and not in fingerprint is observed for a possible malware. Depending 
unaffected files. on its behaviour, the antivirus engine determines if it 

is a potential threat or not and proceeds accordingly. 
Although this method is a little slow, it is very safe as 
the new unknown application is not given access to 
actual resources of the system.

(C) Data mining techniques
This method employs various data mining and machine 
learning techniques to classify the behaviour of a file as 
either benign or malicious.

230 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



(D) Heuristics
Often, a malware infection follows a certain pattern. 
Here, the source code of a suspected program is 
compared to viruses that are already known and are 
in the heuristic database. If the majority of the source 
code matches with any code in the heuristic database, 
the code is flagged as a possible threat.
(E) Real-time protection
Some malware remains dormant or gets activated after 
some time. Such malware needs to be checked on a 
real-time basis. In this technique, the anti-malware 
software keeps running in the background and observes 
the behavior of an application or file for any suspicious 
activity while it is being executed i.e. when it resides in 
the active (main) memory of the computer system.

12.4 sPaM

Spam is a broad term and applies to various digital 
platforms like messaging, forums, chatting, emailing, 
advertisement, etc. However, the widely recognised 
form is email spam. Depending on their requirements, 
organisations or individuals buy or create a mailing 
list (list of email addresses) and repeatedly send 
advertisement links and invitation emails to a large 
number of users. This creates unnecessary junk in the 
inbox of the receiver’s email and often tricks a user into 
buying something or downloading a paid software or 
malware.

Nowadays, email services like Gmail, Hotmail, etc. 
have an automatic spam detection algorithm that filters 
emails and makes things easier for the end users. A 
user can also mark an undetected unsolicited email as 
“spam”, thereby ensuring that such type of email is not 
delivered into the inbox as normal email in future.

12.5 hTTP vs hTTPs Always look for 
the “https://” at 

Both the HTTP (Hyper Text Transfer Protocol) and its the beginning of 
variant HTTPS (Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure) the address (URL) 
are a set of rules (protocol) that govern how data can be of the websites 

transmitted over the WWW (World Wide Web). In other while entering your 
banking, personal, 

words, they provide rules for the client web browser and or other sensitive 
servers to communicate. information.

HTTP sends information over the network as it is. It 
does not scramble the data to be transmitted, leaving 

SeCurity aSpeCtS 231

Reprint 2025-26



it vulnerable to attacks from hackers. Hence, HTTP is 
sufficient for websites with public information sharing 
like news portals, blogs, etc. However, when it comes to 
dealing with personal information, banking credentials 
and passwords, we need to communicate data more 
securely over the network using HTTPS. HTTPS encrypts 
the data before transmission. At the receiver end, it 
decrypts to recover the original data. The HTTPS based 

Activity 12.1 websites require SSL Digital Certificate.
Ask your teacher 
to show you how to 12.6 Firewall
enable and disable 
firewall on your Computer firewall is a network security system designed 
computer. to protect a trusted private network from unauthorised 

access or traffic originating from an untrusted outside 
network (e.g., the Internet or different sections of the 
same network) to which it is connected (Figure 12.5). 
Firewall can be implemented in software, hardware or 
both. As discussed earlier, a malware like worm has the 
capability to move across the networks and infect other 
computers. The firewall acts as the first barrier against 
malware.

LAN

WAN

Firewall

Figure 12.5:  A firewall between two networks

A firewall acts as a network filter and based on the 
predefined security rules, it continuously monitors 
and controls the incoming and outgoing traffic. As an 
example, a rule can be set in the firewall of a school 
LAN, that a student cannot access data from the finance 

232 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



server, while the school accountant can access the 
finance server.
12.6.1 Types of Firewall

• Network Firewall: If the firewall is placed between 
two or more networks and monitors the network 
traffic between different networks, it is termed as 
Network Firewall.

• Host-based Firewall: If the firewall is placed on a 
computer and monitors the network traffic to and 
from that computer, it is called a host-based firewall.

12.7 Cookies Assume students in 
a class are to finish 

The term "cookie" was derived from the term "magic their project. For  
cookie" used by Unix programmers to indicate a packet this, the access to 

of data that a program receives and sends it back the Internet has also 

unchanged. A computer cookie is a small file or data been given. To ensure 
maximum output i.e 

packet, which is stored by a website on the client’s 
timely completion, can 

computer. A cookie is edited only by the website that you utilise Firewall 
created it, the client’s computer acts as a host to store to prevent distraction 
the cookie. Cookies are used by the websites to store while surfing the net?
browsing information of the user. For example, while 
going through an e-commerce website, when a user adds 
items to cart, the website usually uses cookies to record 
the items in the cart. A cookie can also be used to store 
other user-centric information like login credentials, 
language preference, search queries, recently viewed 
web pages, music choice, favorite cuisine, etc., that 
helps in enhancing the user experience and making 
browsing time more productive.

Depending upon their task, there are different types 
of cookies. Session cookies keep track of the current 
session and even terminate the session when there is a 
time-out (banking website). So, if you accidentally left 
your e-banking page open, it will automatically close 
after the time-out. Similarly, authentication cookies 
are used by a website to check if the user is previously 
logged in (authenticated) or not. This way, you don’t Activity 12.2

need to login again and again while visiting different Open your internet 
web pages or links of the same website. You might have browser and check the 
also noticed that certain information like your Name, settings for cookies. 

Address, Contact, D.O.B, etc. automatically fills up Also, try to locate some 

while filling an online form. This auto-fill feature is also cookie files on 
your computer 

implemented by websites using cookies. system. 

SeCurity aSpeCtS 233

Reprint 2025-26



12.7.1 Threats due to Cookies

Usually, cookies are used for enhancing the user’s 
browsing experience and do not infect your computer 
with malware. However, some malware might disguise 
as cookies e.g. “supercookies”. There is another type of 
cookie known as “Zombie cookie” that gets recreated 
after being deleted. Some third-party cookies might 
share user data without the consent of the user for 
advertising or tracking purposes. As a common example, 
if you search for a particular item using your search 
engine, a third-party cookie will display advertisements 
showing similar items on other websites that you 
visit later. So, one should be careful while granting 
permission to any websites to create and store cookies 
on the user computer.

12.8 haCkers and CraCkers

Hackers and crackers are people having a thorough 
knowledge of the computer systems, system software 
(operating system), computer networks, and 
programming. They use this knowledge to find loopholes 
and vulnerabilities in computer systems or computer 
networks and gain access to unauthorised information. 
In simple terms, a hacker is a person that is skilled 
enough to hack or take control of a computer system. 
Depending on the intent, there are different types 
of hackers.

12.8.1 White Hats: Ethical Hacker
A hacktivist is a 

hacker with an aim to If a hacker uses its knowledge to find and help in fixing 
bring about political the security flaws in the system, its termed as White 
and social change. Hat hacker. These are the hackers with good intentions. 

They are actually security experts. Organisations hire 
ethical or white hat hackers to check and fix their 
systems for potential security threats and loopholes. 
Technically, white hats work against black hats.

12.8.2 Black Hats: Crackers 

If hackers use their knowledge unethically to break 
the law and disrupt security by exploiting the flaws 
and loopholes in a system, then they are called black 
hat hackers.

12.8.3 Grey Hats

The distinction between different hackers is not always 
clear. There exists a grey area in between, which 

234 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



represents the class of hackers that are neutral, they noTes

hack systems by exploiting its vulnerabilities, but they 
don’t do so for monetary or political gains. The grey 
hats take system security as a challenge and just hack 
systems for the fun of it.

12.9 neTwork seCuriTy ThreaTs

12.9.1 Denial of Service

Denial of Service (DoS) is a scenario, wherein an attacker 
(Hacker) limits or stops an authorised user to access 
a service, device, or any such resource by overloading 
that resource with illegitimate requests. The DoS attack 
floods the victim resource with traffic, making the 
resource appear busy. If attackers carry out a DoS attack 
on a website, they will flood it with a very large number 
of network packets by using different IP addresses. 
This way, the web server would be overloaded and will 
not be able to provide service to a legitimate user. The 
users will think that the website is not working, causing 
damage to the victim’s organisation. Same way, DoS 
attacks can be done on resources like email servers, 
network storage, disrupting connection between 
two machines or disrupting the state of information 
(resetting of sessions).

If a DoS attack makes a server crash, the server or 
resource can be restarted to recover from the attack. 
However, a flooding attack is difficult to recover from, 
as there can be some genuine legitimate requests in it 
as well.

A variant of DoS, known as Distributed Denial of 
Service (DDoS) is an attack, where the flooded requests 
come from compromised computer (Zombies) systems 
distributed across the globe or over a very large area. 
The attacker installs a malicious software known as Bot 
on the Zombie machines, which gives it control over 
these machines. Depending upon the requirement and 
availability, the attacker activates a network of these 
Zombie computers known as Bot-Net to carry out the 
DDoS attack. While as a simple DoS attack may be 
countered by blocking requests or network packets from 
a single source, DDoS is very difficult to resolve, as the 
attack is carried from multiple distributed locations.

SeCurity aSpeCtS 235

Reprint 2025-26



12.9.2 Intrusion Problems

Network Intrusion refers to any unauthorised activity 
on a computer network. These activities may involve 
unauthorised use of network resources (DoS) or 
threatening the security of the network and the data. 
Network intrusion is a very serious problem and the 
network administrator needs to devise strategy and 
implement various security measures to protect the 
network. We have already discussed some of the 
intrusion attacks such as DoS, Trojans, and Worms. 
The remaining attacks are briefly discussed below.
(A) Asymmetric Routing
The attacker tends to avoid detection by sending the 
intrusion packets through multiple paths, thereby 
bypassing the network intrusion sensors.

(B) Buffer Overflow Attacks
In this attack, the attacker overwrites certain memory 
areas of the computers within the network with code 
(set of commands) that will be executed later when the 
buffer overflow (programming error) occurs. Once the 
malicious code is executed, an attacker can initiate a 
DoS attack or gain access to the network.

(C) Traffic Flooding
It is one of the most trivial methods of network intrusion. 
It involves flooding the network intrusion detection 
system with message packets. This huge load leaves the 
network detection system incapable of monitoring the 
packets adequately. The hacker takes advantage of this 
congested and chaotic network environment to sneak 
into the system undetected.

12.9.3 Snooping
URL Snooping 

Snooping means secretly listening to a conversation. 
It is a software In the context of networking, it refers to the process of 
package that secret capture and analysis of network traffic. It is a 

downloads and stores 
a web stream as a file, computer program or utility that has a network traffic 

that can be viewed monitoring capability. In this attack, the hacker taps or 
or used later. The listens to a channel of communication by picking all of 

common online video the traffic passing through it. Once the network packets 
downloaders use the are analysed by the snooping device or software, it 
same techniques to reproduces the exact traffic packets and places them 

download videos from 
the Web. back in the channel, as if nothing has happened. So, 

if the data that is being sent over the network is not 
encrypted, it is vulnerable to snooping and eventually 

236 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



may cause serious damage, depending upon the type of noTes

information leak. However, snooping is not always an 
attack, at times it is also used by network administrators 
for troubleshooting various network issues. Snooping is 
also known as Sniffing.

Various snooping software exist that act as network 
traffic analyser. Besides, various network hubs and 
switches have a SPAN (Sniffer Port Analyser) port 
function for snooping.

12.9.4 Eavesdropping

The term eavesdropping has been derived from the 
literal practice of secretly listening to the conversations 
of people by standing under the eaves of a house. Unlike 
snooping, where the network traffic can be stored for later 
analysis, eavesdropping is an unauthorised real-time 
interception or monitoring of private communication 
between two entities over a network. Also, the targets 

10
01
100100011111

11
11

0

Figure 12.6: Eavesdropping

are usually the private communication channels like 
phone calls (VoIP), instant messages, video conference, 
fax transmission, etc. In older days, eavesdropping 
was performed on the conventional telephone line and 
was known as wiretapping. Digital devices like laptops 
and cell phones that have a built-in microphone or 
camera can be easily hacked and eavesdropped using 
rootkit malware. 

Eavesdropping is different from Snooping. While the 
former happens in real time, the latter does not. As an 

SeCurity aSpeCtS 237

Reprint 2025-26

01
11
11
1100

0001111110

11
11
00
001 101010101

00
00
00
01010101011111



n example, in eavesdropping, imagine someone listening 
oTes

to your private conversation with the help of a hidden 
microphone in your room or by physically standing near 
the window of your room. However, in snooping, that 
person may make a copy of a letter that is addressed to 
your friend and keep the copy with himself and send the 
original letter to the intended address.

suMMary

• Malware is a software developed with an intention 
to damage computer hardware, software, steal 
data, or cause any other trouble to a user.

• A virus is a piece of software code created 
to perform malicious activities and hamper 
resources of a computer system.

• The Worm is also a malware that incurs 
unexpected or damaging behaviour on an infected 
computer system.

• Worms are standalone programs that are capable 
of working on its own.

• Ransomware is a type of malware that targets 
user data.

• Ransomware either blocks the user from 
accessing their own data or threatens to publish 
their personal data online and demands ransom 
payment against the same.

• Trojan is a malware, that looks like a legitimate 
software and once it tricks a user into installing 
it, it acts pretty much like a virus or a worm.

• Spyware records and sends the collected 
information to an external entity without the 
consent or knowledge of a user.

• An adware displays unwanted online 
advertisements using pop-ups, web pages, or 
installation screens.

• A keylogger makes logs of daily keyboard usage 
and may send it to an external entity as well.

• The on-screen keyboard is an application software 
that uses a fixed QWERTY key layout.

• Online virtual keyboard is a web-based or a 
standalone software with a randomised key 
layout every time it is used.

• A malware can take many routes to reach your 
computer, which include: Downloaded from the 

238 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Internet, Spam Email, using infected Removable noTes

Storage Devices, and network propagation.
• An antivirus software is used to detect and remove 

viruses and hence the name anti-virus.
• Antiviruses now come bundled with the prevention, 

detection, and removal of a wide range of malware.
• Some of the prominent methods of malware 

identification used by an antivirus include: 
Signature-based detection, Sandbox detection, 
Heuristics.

• Any unwanted data, information, email, 
advertisement, etc. is called Spam.

• HTTP (Hyper Text Transfer Protocol) and HTTPS 
(Hyper Text Transfer Protocol Secure) are a set 
of rules or protocol that govern how data can be 
transmitted over the World Wide Web.

• Firewall is a network security system designed 
to protect a trusted private network from 
unauthorised access or traffic originating from an 
untrusted external network.

• There are two basic types of firewalls — Network 
Firewall and Host-based Firewall.

• A computer cookie is a small file or data packet, 
which is stored by a website on the client’s 
computer.

• Cookies are used by the websites to store browsing 
information of the user.

• Hackers/Crackers find loopholes and 
vulnerabilities in computer systems or computer 
networks and gain access to unauthorised 
information.

• If a hacker uses its knowledge to find and help in 
fixing the security flaws in the system, its termed 
as White Hat hacker.

• If hackers use their knowledge unethically to 
break the law and disrupt security by exploiting 
the flaws and loopholes in a system, then they are 
called black hat hackers.

• The grey hats take system security as a challenge 
and just hack systems for the fun of it.

• The Denial of Service (DoS) attack floods the 
victim resource with traffic, making the resource 
appear busy.

• Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) is an 
attack, where the flooded requests come from 

SeCurity aSpeCtS 239

Reprint 2025-26



noTes compromised computer (Zombies) systems 
distributed across the globe or over a very 
large area.

• Network Intrusion refers to any unauthorised 
activity on a computer network.

• Snooping is the process of secret capture and 
analysis of network traffic by malicious users.

• Eavesdropping is an unauthorised real-
time interception or monitoring of private 
communication between two entities over 
a network.

exerCise

1. Why is a computer considered to be safe if it is not 
connected to a network or Internet?

2. What is a computer virus? Name some computer viruses 
that were popular in recent years.

3. How is a computer worm different from a virus?
4. How is Ransomware used to extract money from users?
5. How did a Trojan get its name?
6. How does an adware generate revenue for its creator?
7. Briefly explain two threats that may arise due to a 

keylogger installed on a computer.

8. How is a Virtual Keyboard safer than On Screen 
Keyboard?

9. List and briefly explain different modes of malware 
distribution.

10. List some common signs of malware infection.

11. List some preventive measures against malware 
infection.

12. Write a short note on different methods of malware 
identification used by antivirus software.

13. What are the risks associated with HTTP? How can we 
resolve these risks by using HTTPS?

14. List one advantage and disadvantage of using Cookies.

15. Write a short note on White, Black, and Grey Hat 
Hackers.

16. Differentiate between DoS and DDoS attack.

17. How is Snooping different from Eavesdropping?

240 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26

##13##

er
Chapt

Project Based 
13 Learning

“An idea that is developed and put into 
action is more important than idea that 

exists only as an idea.” 

—  Gautam Buddha

In this Chapter

» Introduction

» Approaches for Solving 
Projects

» Teamwork 13.1 IntroductIon

» Project Descriptions Project based learning gives a thorough practical 
exposure to students regarding a problem upon 
which the project is based. Through project based 
learning, students learn to organise their project 
and use their time effectively for successful 
completion of the project. Projects are developed 
generally in groups where students can learn 
various skills such as working together, problem 
solving, decision making, and investigating 
activities. Project based learning involves the 
steps such as analysing the problem, formulating 
the problem into small modules, applying the 
mechanism or method to solve each module and 
then integrating the solution of all the modules 
to arrive at the complete solution of the problem. 
To solve a problem, it is required that those who 
work on it gather the relevant data and process 
it by applying a particular method. Data may 

Reprint 2025-26



notes be collected as per the requirement of the project in 
a particular format. All the team members should be 
associated to accomplish the task. After collecting data, 
it should be processed to solve the problem. The results 
should be reported in a predetermined format. 

13.2 ApproAches for solvIng projects

The approach followed for the development and 
completion of a project plays a pivotal role in project 
based learning. There are several approaches to execute 
a project such as modular approach, top down approach 
and bottom up approach. A structured or a modular 
approach to a project means that a project is divided into 
various manageable modules and each of the modules 
has a well-defined task to be performed with a set of 
inputs. This would lead to a set of outputs which when 
integrated leads to the desired outcome.

Different steps involved in project based learning 
(Figure 13.1) are : 
(1) Identification of a project: The project idea may 

come through any real-life situation. For example, 
one could think of doing a project for organising a 
seminar. One needs to understand the usefulness 
of the project and its impact. Students must be 
encouraged to undertake interdisciplinary projects. 

(2) Defining a plan: Normally for any kind of project, 
there are several project members involved in it. One 
project leader has to be identified. The roles of project 
leader and each project member have to be clearly 
defined. Students who are performing a project must 
be assigned with specific activities. The various tools 
for executing these activities must be known. To 
obtain a better solution, one should always think of 
the extreme situations. 

(3) Fixing of a time frame and processing: Every 
project is a time relevance project. A student must 
understand the importance of time frame for 
completion of the project. All the activities which are 
performed in the projects require a certain amount 
of time. Every project must be well structured and at 
the same time it must be flexible in its time frame.

242 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Identification of Defining a 
Project Plan

Fixing time frame Guidance and 
and processing Monitoring

Outcome 
of project

Figure 13.1: Steps in project based learning 

(4) Providing guidance and monitoring a project: 
Many times, the participants in the project get 
stuck up with a particular process and it becomes 
impossible to proceed further. In such a case, they 
need guidance, which can be obtained from various 
resources such as books, websites and experts in 
the field. While it is essential that the project leader 
should ensure monitoring of the project, the guide 
teacher also helps in monitoring the project. 

(5) Outcome of a project: One needs to understand 
thoroughly the outcome of a project. The outcome 
can be single, or it can be multiple. The output 
of a project can be peer reviewed and can be 
modified as per the feedback from the guide teacher 
or other users.

13.3 teAmwork

Many real-life tasks are very complex and require a lot 
of individuals to contribute in achieving them. Efforts 
made by individuals collectively to accomplish a task is 
called teamwork. 

For example, in many sports, there is a team of 
players. These players play together to win a match. 
Take an example of a cricket team. We find that even if 
a bowler bowls a good ball but if the fielder cannot take 

projeCt BaSed learning 243

Reprint 2025-26



notes a catch then the wicket cannot be taken. So, in order 
to take a catch, efforts of a bowler as well as of fielders 
are needed. To win a cricket match, contributions from 
all the team members in all the three areas batting, 
bowling and fielding are required.
13.3.1 Components of Teamwork
Apart from technical proficiency, a wide variety of other 
components make a successful teamwork. It comprises 
skilled team members with specific roles to achieve 
the goal. 

(A) Communicate with Others 
When a group of individuals perform one job, it is 
necessary to have effective communication between 
the members of the team. Such communication can 
be done via e-mails, telephones or by arranging group 
meetings. This helps the team members to understand 
each other and sort out their problems to achieve the 
goal effectively. 

(B) Listen to Others 
It is necessary to understand the ideas of others while 
executing a job together. This can be achieved when the 
team members listen to each other in group meetings 
and follow steps that are agreed upon. 

(C) Share with Others 
Ideas, images and tools need to be shared with each 
other in order to perform a job. Sharing is an important 
component of teamwork. Any member of the team who is 
well versed in a certain area should share the expertise 
and experience with others to effectively achieve the 
goal within the time frame. 

(D) Respect for Others 
Every member of the team must be treated respectfully. 
All the thoughts and ideas that are put forth in the 
group meetings may be respected and duly considered. 
Not respecting the views of a particular member may 
cause problems and that particular team member may 
not give his best. 

(E) Help Others 
A helping hand from every member is a key to success. 
Sometimes help from people who are not a part of the 
team is also obtained in order to accomplish a job. 

244 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



(F) Participate notes

All the team members must be encouraged by each 
other to participate in completing the project and also 
in discussions in group meetings. Also, every member 
should take an active participation so that they feel 
their importance in the team.

13.4 project descrIptIons

In this section, some examples of project works are 
given, which can be taken up in groups under project 
based learning. However, a group may choose any other 
project in consultation with the guide teacher.

Project Title 1: Automation of Order Processing in a 
Restaurant
Description
A new restaurant “Stay Healthy” is coming up in your 
locality. The owner/management of the restaurant 
wants to use a computer to generate bills and maintain 
other records of the restaurant. Your team is asked to 
develop an application software to automate the order 
placing and associated processes. 

Specifications
Make a group of students to undertake a project on 
automating the order processing of the restaurant 
‘Stay Healthy’. The owner of the restaurant wants the 
following specific functionalities to be made available in 
the developed application:

• There should be two types of Login options — one for 
the manager of the joint and other for the customer.

• Kiosk(s) running the software for customers will be 
placed at reception for placing the order. On the 
opening screen, menu for placing orders will be 
displayed. 

• To place orders, customers will enter Item Code(s) 
and quantity desired.

• After placing an order, a soft copy of the bill will be 
displayed on the kiosk, having an Order Number.

• Every bill will have a unique identification (such as 
combination of date, and order number of the day) 
and should be saved in the data file/database.

• Order Number starts from 1 every day.

projeCt BaSed learning 245

Reprint 2025-26



notes • For Manager login—provision for entry/change of 
Menu, deletion of Order (on demand) and generation 
of following report is desired.

9 A Report giving Summary of the Sales made on 
a Day. Program should accept the date for which 
the Summary is required.

• Add at least one more relevant report of your choice 
to the program.

Project Title 2 : Development of a Puzzle

Description
Implement a puzzle solving game in Python. The game 
presents a grid board composed of cells to the player, in 
which some cells have Bomb. Player is required to clear 
the board (of the bomb), without detonating any one of 
them with the help of clue(s) provided on the board. 

Specifications
For clearing the board, the player will click a cell on the 
board, if the cell contains a bomb, the game finishes. If 
the cell does not contain a bomb, then the cell reveals 
a number giving a clue about the number of bombs 
hidden in adjacent cells.

Before you start coding the game, play any 
Minesweeper game five times. This will help you in 
proper understanding of your project. To reduce the 
complexity of the program you can fix the grid size to 
6x6 and number of bombs to 6.

Note: Do ensure to handle various exception(s) which may 
occur while playing the game, in your code.

Project Title 3 : Development of an Educational Game
Description
You are a member of the ICT club of your school. As a club 
member, you are given the responsibility of identifying 
ways to improve mathematical skills of kids, in the age 
group of 5-7 years. One of the club members suggested 
developing an Edutainment Game named “Match the 
Sum” for it. Match the Sum will hone summing skills 
of student(s), by allowing them to form number 10 by 
adding 2/3 digits.

246 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26



Specifications notes

Following are the details of provisions required for 
program:

• Display a list of 15 cells on screen, where each cell 
can hold a digit (1 to 9)

• Randomly generate a digit at a time and place it in 
the list from the right end. Program will keep on 
generating digits at equal intervals of time and place 
it in the rightmost cell. (Already existing digits, will 
be shifted left, by one cell, with every new addition of 
digits’ in the list)

• For playing the game, students’ will be allowed to 
type 2/3 digits (one at a time) currently displayed in 
the list of cells.

• If the sum of those digits is 10, then those digits 
should get removed from the list of cells.

• Game will continue till there is an empty cell to insert 
a digit in the list of cells.

Note: Do take care of the situation when digits displayed in 
a list of cells do not add up to 10.

projeCt BaSed learning 247

Reprint 2025-26



notes

248 Computer SCienCe - ClaSS Xii

Reprint 2025-26