KALEIDOSCOPE
Textbook in English (Elective)

for Class XII

Reprint 2025-26



12076 – KALEIDOSCOPE ISBN  81-7450-663-2
Textbook for Class XII

First Edition ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
February 2007   Magha 1928

q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval

Reprint Edition system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior

November 2007  Kartika 1929 permission of the publisher.
May 2009  Vaisakha 1931

q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of
January 2010  Magha 1931 trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without

the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than
January 2019 Agrahayana 1940

that in which it is published.
August 2019  Shravana 1941

q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this
March 2024 Chaitra 1946 page, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker

or by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.

PD 15T SU
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION

DIVISION, NCERT
© National Council of

Educational Research NCERT Campus

and Training, 2007 Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085    Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446

CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati

` 145.00 Kolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454

CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869

Publication Team

Head, Publication : Anup Kumar Rajput

Printed on 80 GSM paper Division

with NCERT watermark Chief Editor : Shveta Uppal

Chief Production : Arun Chitkara
Published at the Publication Officer
Division by the Secretary, National

Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar
Council of Educational Research Manager (In charge)
and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,

Editor : M.G. Bhagat
New Delhi 110016 and printed at

Assistant Production : Sunil Kumar
Sagar Offset Printer India (P)

Officer
Ltd., Plot No. 518, Ecotech III,
Udyog Kendra II, Greater Noida, Cover and Layout

Joel Gill
Uttar Pradesh

Illustrations
Joel Gill and Nidhi Wadhwa

Reprint 2025-26



FOREWORD

The National Curriculum Framework, 2005, recommends that
children's life at school must be linked to their life outside the
school. This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish
learning which continues to shape our system and causes a gap
between the school, home and community. The syllabi and
textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to
implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote
learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between
different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us
significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of
education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).

The success of this effort depends on the steps that school
principals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on
their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and
questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom,
children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information
passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as
the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other
resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity
and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of
knowledge.

These aims imply considerable change in school routines and
mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as
necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that
the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to
teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also
determine how effective this textbook proves for making children's
life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at
different stages with greater consideration for child psychology
and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to
enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to
opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in
small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.

Reprint 2025-26



NCERT appreciates the hard work done by the textbook
development committee responsible for this book. We wish to thank
the Chairperson of the advisory group in languages,
Professor Namwar Singh and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Professor R. Amritavalli  for guiding the work of this committee.
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook;
we are grateful to their principals for making this possible. We are
indebted to the institutions and organisations which have
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material
and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the
National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of
Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development under the Chairmanship of Professor Mrinal Miri
and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and
contribution.  As an organisation committed to systemic reform
and continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT
welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to
undertake further revision and refinement.

Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 November 2006 Research and Training

(iv)

Reprint 2025-26



A NOTE FOR THE TEACHER

The selections for the Class XII Elective English Textbook,
Kaleidoscope, are representative of Literature in English and fall
into the following genres –fiction, non-fiction, drama, poetry.

There are three short stories and two long ones in the fiction
section representing contemporary writers from five cultures:
Gabriel Garcia Marquez, James Joyce, Bi Shu-min, Isaac Singer
and Joseph Conrad. The stories deal with fantasy and reality,
alienation, a mother's sensitivity and the problem of choice in
personal life.

Thematic variation is also found in the six pieces included in
the non-fiction. George Bernard Shaw’s essay on Freedom deals
with the individual and society, with a companion piece by
J.Krishnamurti on discipline and individual freedom. Virginia
Woolf’s essay, The Mark on the Wall, demonstrates the stream of
consciousness technique. D.H Lawrence talks of the significance
of the Novel as a literary form. Excerpts from Film-making by
Ingmar Bergman, detailing film-making as a creative art is followed
by an excerpt from an interview of Umberto Eco. The
Argumentative Indian by Amartya Sen is based on the famous
dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita. The
last piece by Isaac Asimov correlates the Universe of Science
Fiction to accounts of mythical superhuman beings in the
Pre-scientific Universe that served to fulfill the same emotional
needs as science fiction does.

Two plays find a place in the selection–Chandalika by Tagore
brings out the intense conflict in the mind of a sensitive
untouchable girl. The excerpt from Girish Karnad's Broken Images
reflects the ambiguities in the mind of a writer who has
unexpectedly acquired fame.

Of the eight poems, four are from the classical tradition–Donne,
Milton, Blake and Coleridge. The other four are established poets,
closer to contemporary times–Yeats, A.K. Ramanujan,
Emily Dickinson and Kamala Das. There are two poems each by
Blake and Milton. Learners may be encouraged to notice, in each
pair of poems, the symmetry and/or contrast in themes and
language. In an attempt to introduce learners to Blake as the first

Reprint 2025-26



multi-media artist, his engraved illustrations with the poems
inscribed in his own handwriting have been reproduced.

The collection seeks to offer a balanced representation of the
classical literary tradition, literary genres and contemporary
themes to appeal to the modern sensibility and develop in young
readers a taste for good reading and an appreciation of the
nuances of language.

The exercises following the texts are based on insightful reading
and literary appreciation. There is no separate textbook on
Phonology and Grammar. Every unit, however, has a section on
phonetic and grammatical patterns drawn from the texts.

Three plays and a collection of short stories are recommended
for additional reading. Two plays are by contemporary Indian
playwrights–Dance Like a Man by Mahesh Dattani and Doongaji
House by Cyrus Mistry and the third is Bertolt Brecht's Life
of Galileo. Garcia Gabriel Marquez’ Strange Pilgrims: Twelve
Stories is a delightful short story collection that would appeal to
young adults.

(vi)

Reprint 2025-26



TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN LANGUAGES

Professor Namwar Singh, formerly Chairman, School of Languages,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

CHIEF ADVISOR

R. Amritavalli, Professor, Central Institute of English and
Foreign Languages (CIEFL), Hyderabad

CHIEF COORDINATOR

Ram Janma Sharma, Head, Department of Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi

MEMBERS

Bhavna Kale, Lecturer, Bharati College, C-4, Janak Puri, New Delhi

Irene Duarte Dias, Teacher, Pawan School, Dharwad, Karnataka

Malathy Krishnan, Reader, CIEFL, Hyderabad

N. Khan, Reader, Department of Languages, NCERT, New Delhi

Pema Eden Samdup, Lecturer, School of Humanities, IGNOU, New Delhi

P.N. Singh, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Malgodam Road, Gazipur

S.C. Dubey, Professor,  Department of English, University of Allahabad,
Allahabad

Usha Satishchandra, Principal, Apollo Convent, Banshankari III Stage,
Bangalore

Vandana R. Singh, Senior Lecturer, Department of English, Government
College for Girls, Sector-XI, Chandigarh

V. D.Singh, Professor (Retd. CIEFL), ‘Harsha’ 1-JA-10, Jawahar Nagar, Jaipur

MEMBER-COORDINATOR

Varada M. Nikalje, Lecturer, Department of Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi

Reprint 2025-26



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

For permission to reproduce copyright material in this book,
NCERT would like to thank Vintage Books, New York for ‘One
Centimetre’ by Bi Shu-min; Random House, London, for ‘I Sell
My Dreams’ by Gabriel Garcia Marquez; Penguin Books Ltd,
London, for ‘The Argumentative Indian’ by Amartya Sen; Penguin
Books, Middlesex, England, for ‘A Wedding in Brownsville’ by
Isaac Bashevis Singer; Oxford University Press, New Delhi, for
‘Time and Time Again’ by A.K.Ramanujan, the Introduction to
Tagore’s ‘Chandalika’ and ‘Broken Images’ (an excerpt) by Girish
Karnad; Oxford University Press, Calcutta, for ‘Freedom’ by
George Bernard Shaw; Holt, Rinehart and Winston Inc, New York,
for ‘Film-Making’ by Ingmar Bergman; Panther Books, London,
for ‘The Pre-scientific Universe’ and ‘The Universe of Science Fiction’
by Isaac Asimov; The Hindu, Chennai, for Umberto Eco’s interview
by Mukund Padmanabhan; Krishnamurti Foundation of America
Ojai, California, for ‘Understanding Freedom and Discipline’ by
J. Krishnamurti; Kamala Das for ‘Blood’; and National School of
Drama, New Delhi, for photographs of staged production of the
Hindi version of ‘Broken Images’.

The Council also acknowledges the services of Parash Ram,
Incharge, Computer Station, NCERT; Neena Chandra,
Copy Editor; and Mohd. Harun, DTP Operator. The efforts of the
Publication Department, NCERT are also highly appreciated.

Reprint 2025-26



CONTENTS

Foreword iii

A Note for the Teacher v

 SHORT STORIES – INTRODUCTION 1-89

1. I Sell my Dreams GABRIEL GARCIA MARQUEZ 2

2. Eveline JAMES JOYCE 12

3. A Wedding in Brownsville ISAAC BASHEVIS SINGER 21

4. Tomorrow JOSEPH CONRAD 39

5. One Centimetre BI SHU-MIN 71

 POETRY – INTRODUCTION 90-117

1. A Lecture Upon the Shadow JOHN DONNE 91

2. Poems by Milton JOHN MILTON 94

3. Poems by Blake WILLIAM BLAKE 97

4. Kubla Khan S.T.COLERIDGE 103

5. Trees EMILY DICKINSON 107

6. The Wild Swans at Coole W.B.YEATS 109

7. Time and Time Again A.K.RAMANUJAN 111

8. Blood KAMALA DAS 113

Reprint 2025-26



 NON-FICTION – INTRODUCTION 118-202

1. Freedom G.B.SHAW 119

2. The Mark on the Wall VIRGINIA WOOLF 136

3. Film-making INGMAR BERGMAN 149

4. Why the Novel Matters D.H. LAWRENCE 165

5. The Argumentative Indian AMARTYA SEN 176

6. On Science Fiction ISAAC ASIMOV 191

 DRAMA - INTRODUCTION 203-238

1. Chandalika RABINDRANATH TAGORE 204

2. Broken Images GIRISH KARNAD 224

(x)

Reprint 2025-26



1/I SELL MY DREAMS

Short stories

INTRODUCTION

A short story is a prose narrative of limited length.
It organises the action and thoughts of its
characters into the pattern of a plot. The plot
form may be comic, tragic, romantic or satiric.
The central incident is selected to manifest, as
much as possible, the protagonist’s life and
character, and the details contribute to the
development of the plot.

The term ‘short story’ covers a great diversity of
prose fiction, right from the really short ‘short
story’ of about five hundred words to longer and
more complex works. The longer ones, with their
status of middle length, fall between the tautness
of the short narrative and the expansiveness of
the novel.

There can be thematic variation too. The stories
deal with fantasy, reality, alienation and the
problem of choice in personal life. There are three
short stories and two long ones in this section
representing writers from five cultures.

Reprint 2025-26



2/KALEIDOSCOPE
##1##
1
I Sell my Dreams

Gabriel Garcia Marquez was brought up by his
grandparents in Northern Columbia because his
parents were poor and struggling. A novelist, short-
story writer and journalist, he is widely considered
the greatest living Latin American master of narrative.
Marquez won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1982.
His two masterpieces are One Hundred Years in
Solitude (1967, tr. 1970) and Love in The Time of
Cholera (1985, tr. 1988). His themes are violence,
solitude and the overwhelming human need for love.
This story reflects, like most of his works, a high

Gabriel Garcia Marquez point in Latin American magical realism; it is rich
1927-2014 and lucid, mixing reality with fantasy.

One morning at nine o’clock, while we were having breakfast
on the terrace of the Havana Riviera Hotel under a bright
sun, a huge wave picked up several cars that were driving
down the avenue along the seawall or parked on the
pavement, and embedded one of them in the side of the
hotel. It was like an explosion of dynamite that sowed panic
on all twenty floors of the building and turned the great
entrance window to dust. The many tourists in the lobby
were thrown into the air along with the furniture, and
some were cut by the hailstorm of glass. The wave must
have been immense, because it leaped over the wide two-
way street between the seawall and the hotel and still had
enough force to shatter the window.

The cheerful Cuban volunteers, with the help of the
fire department, picked up the debris in less than six hours,
and sealed off the gate to the sea and installed another,

Reprint 2025-26



3/I SELL MY DREAMS

and everything returned to normal. During the morning
nobody worried about the car encrusted in the wall, for
people assumed it was one of those that had been parked
on the pavement. But when the crane lifted it out of its
setting, the body of a woman was found secured behind
the steering wheel by a seat belt. The blow had been so
brutal that not a single one of her bones was left whole.
Her face was destroyed, her boots had been ripped apart,
and her clothes were in shreds. She wore a gold ring shaped
like a serpent, with emerald eyes. The police established
that she was the housekeeper for the new Portuguese
ambassador and his wife. She had come to Havana with
them two weeks before and had left that morning for the
market, driving a new car. Her name meant nothing to me
when I read it in the newspaper, but I was intrigued by the
snake ring and its emerald eyes. I could not find out,
however, on which finger she wore it.

This was a crucial piece of information, because I feared
she was an unforgettable woman whose real name I never
knew, and who wore a similar ring on her right forefinger
which, in those days, was even more unusual than it is
now. I had met her thirty-four years earlier in Vienna,
eating sausage with boiled potatoes and drinking draft beer
in a tavern frequented by Latin American students. I had
come from Rome that morning, and I still remember my
immediate response to her splendid soprano’s bosom, the
languid foxtails on her coat collar, and that Egyptian ring
in the shape of a serpent. She spoke an elementary Spanish
in a metallic accent without pausing for breath, and I
thought she was the only Austrian at the long wooden
table. But no, she had been born in Colombia and had
come to Austria between the wars, when she was little
more than a child, to study music and voice. She was
about thirty, and did not carry her years well, for she had
never been pretty and had begun to age before her time.
But she was a charming human being. And one of the
most awe-inspiring.

Vienna was still an old imperial city, whose
geographical position between the two irreconcilable worlds
left behind by the Second World War had turned it into a

Reprint 2025-26



4/KALEIDOSCOPE

paradise of black marketeering and international espionage.
I could not have imagined a more suitable spot for my
fugitive compatriot, who still ate in the students’ tavern
on the corner only out of loyalty to her origins, since she
had more than enough money to buy meals for all her
table companions. She never told her real name, and we
always knew her by the Germanic tongue twister that we
Latin American students in Vienna invented for her: Frau
Frieda. I had just been introduced to her when I committed
the happy impertinence of asking how she had come to be
in a world so distant and different from the windy cliffs of
Quindio, and she answered with a devastating:

‘I sell my dreams.’
In reality, that was her only trade. She had been the

third of eleven children born to a prosperous shopkeeper
in old Caldas, and as soon as she learned to speak she
instituted the fine custom in her family of telling dreams
before breakfast, the time when their oracular qualities
are preserved in their purest form. When she was seven
she dreamed that one of her brothers was carried off by a
flood. Her mother, out of sheer religious superstition,
forbade the boy to swim in the ravine, which was his
favourite pastime. But Frau Frieda already had her own
system of prophecy.

‘What that dream means,’ she said, ‘isn’t that he’s
going to drown, but that he shouldn’t eat sweets.’

Her interpretation seemed an infamy to a five-year-old
boy who could not live without his Sunday treats. Their
mother, convinced of her daughter’s oracular talents,
enforced the warning with an iron hand. But in her first
careless moment the boy choked on a piece of caramel that
he was eating in secret, and there was no way to save him.

Frau Frieda did not think she could earn a living with
her talent until life caught her by the throat during the
cruel Viennese winters. Then she looked for work at the
first house where she would have liked to live, and when
she was asked what she could do, she told only the truth:
‘I dream.’ A brief explanation to the lady of the house was
all she needed, and she was hired at a salary that just

Reprint 2025-26



5/I SELL MY DREAMS

covered her minor expenses, but she had a nice room and
three meals a day—breakfast in particular, when the family
sat down to learn the immediate future of each of its
members: the father, a refined financier; the mother, a
joyful woman passionate about Romantic chamber music;
and two children, eleven and nine years old. They were all
religious and therefore inclined to archaic superstitions,
and they were delighted to take in Frau Frieda, whose
only obligation was to decipher the family’s daily fate
through her dreams.

She did her job well, and for a long time, above all
during the war years, when reality was more sinister than
nightmares. Only she could decide at breakfast what each
should do that day, and how it should be done, until her
predictions became the sole authority in the house. Her
control over the family was absolute: even the faintest sigh
was breathed by her order. The master of the house died
at about the time I was in Vienna, and had the elegance to
leave her a part of his estate on the condition that she
continue dreaming for the family until her dreams came
to an end.

I stayed in Vienna for more than a month, sharing the
straitened circumstances of the other students while I
waited for money that never arrived. Frau Frieda’s
unexpected and generous visits to the tavern were like
fiestas in our poverty-stricken regime. One night, in a beery
euphoria, she whispered in my ear with a conviction that
permitted no delay.

‘I only came to tell you that I dreamed about you last
night,’ she said. ‘You must leave right away and not come
back to Vienna for five years.’

Her conviction was so real that I boarded the last train
to Rome that same night. As for me, I was so influenced by
what she said that from then on I considered myself a
survivor of some catastrophe I never experienced. I still
have not returned to Vienna.

Reprint 2025-26



6/KALEIDOSCOPE

Stop and Think

1. How did the author recognise the lady who was
extricated from the car encrusted in the wall of Havana
Riviera Hotel after the storm?

2. Why did the author leave Vienna never to return
again?

Before the disaster in Havana, I had seen Frau Frieda
in Barcelona in so unexpected and fortuitous a way that it
seemed a mystery to me. It happened on the day Pablo
Neruda stepped on Spanish soil for the first time since the
Civil War, on a stopover during a long sea voyage to
Valparaiso. He spent a morning with us hunting big game
in the second-hand bookstores, and at Porter he bought
an old, dried-out volume with a torn binding for which he
paid what would have been his salary for two months at
the consulate in Rangoon. He moved through the crowd
like an invalid elephant, with a child’s curiosity in the
inner workings of each thing he saw, for the world appeared
to him as an immense wind-up toy with which life invented
itself.

I have never known anyone closer to the idea one has
of a Renaissance pope: He was gluttonous and refined.
Even against his will, he always presided at the table.
Matilde, his wife, would put a bib around his neck that
belonged in a barbershop rather than a dining room, but it
was the only way to keep him from taking a bath in sauce.
That day at Carvalleiras was typical. He ate three whole
lobsters, dissecting them with a surgeon’s skill, and at the
same time devoured everyone else’s plate with his eyes
and tasted a little from each with a delight that made the
desire to eat contagious: clams from Galicia, mussels from
Cantabria, prawns from Alicante, sea cucumbers from the
Costa Brava. In the meantime, like the French, he spoke
of nothing but other culinary delicacies, in particular the
prehistoric shellfish of Chile, which he carried in his heart.
All at once he stopped eating, tuned his lobster’s antennae,
and said to me in a very quiet voice:

‘There’s someone behind me who won’t stop looking at
me.’

Reprint 2025-26



7/I SELL MY DREAMS

I glanced over his shoulder, and it was true. Three
tables away sat an intrepid woman in an old-fashioned
felt hat and a purple scarf, eating without haste and staring
at him. I recognised her right away. She had grown old
and fat, but it was Frau Frieda, with the snake ring on her
index finger.

She was travelling from Naples on the same ship as
Neruda and his wife, but they had not seen each other on
board. We invited her to have coffee at our table, and I
encouraged her to talk about her dreams in order to astound
the poet. He paid no attention, for from the very beginning
he had announced that he did not believe in prophetic
dreams.

‘Only poetry is clairvoyant,’ he said.
After lunch, during the inevitable stroll along the

Ramblas, I lagged behind with Frau Frieda so that we could
renew our memories with no other ears listening. She told
me she had sold her properties in Austria and retired to
Oporto, in Portugal, where she lived in a house that she
described as a fake castle on a hill, from which one could
see all the way across the ocean to the Americas. Although
she did not say so, her conversation made it clear that,
dream by dream, she had taken over the entire fortune of
her ineffable patrons in Vienna. That did not surprise me,
however, because I had always thought her dreams were
no more than a stratagem for surviving. And I told her so.

She laughed her irresistible laugh. ‘You’re as impudent
as ever,’ she said. And said no more, because the rest of
the group had stopped to wait for Neruda to finish talking
in Chilean slang to the parrots along the Rambla de los
Pájaros. When we resumed our conversation, Frau Frieda
changed the subject.

‘By the way,’ she said, ‘you can go back to Vienna
now.’

Only then did I realise that thirteen years had gone by
since our first meeting.

‘Even if your dreams are false, I’ll never go back,’ I told
her. ‘Just in case.’

At three o’clock we left her to accompany Neruda to his
sacred siesta, which he took in our house after solemn

Reprint 2025-26



8/KALEIDOSCOPE

preparations that in some way recalled the Japanese tea
ceremony. Some windows had to be opened and others closed
to achieve the perfect degree of warmth, and there had to
be a certain kind of light from a certain direction, and
absolute silence. Neruda fell asleep right away, and woke
ten minutes later, as children do, when we least expected
it. He appeared in the living room refreshed, and with the
monogram of the pillowcase imprinted on his cheek.

‘I dreamed about that woman who dreams,’ he said.
Matilde wanted him to tell her his dream.
‘I dreamed she was dreaming about me,’ he said.
‘That’s right out of Borges,’ I said.
He looked at me in disappointment.
‘Has he written it already?’
‘If he hasn’t he’ll write it sometime,’ I said. ‘It will be

one of his labyrinths.’
As soon as he boarded the ship at six that evening, Neruda

took his leave of us, sat down at an isolated table, and began
to write fluid verses in the green ink he used for drawing
flowers and fish and birds when he dedicated his books. At
the first ‘All ashore’ we looked for Frau Frieda, and found her
at last on the tourist deck, just as we were about to leave
without saying good-bye. She too had taken a siesta.

‘I dreamed about the poet,’ she said.
In astonishment I asked her to tell me her dream.
‘I dreamed he was dreaming about me,’ she said, and

my look of amazement disconcerted her. ‘What did you
expect? Sometimes, with all my dreams, one slips in that
has nothing to do with real life.’

Stop and Think

 1. How did  Pablo Neruda know that somebody behind
him was looking at him?

 2. How did  Pablo  Neruda counter Frau Frieda’s claims
to clairvoyance?

I never saw her again or even wondered about her
until I heard about the snake ring on the woman who
died in the Havana Riviera disaster. And I could not resist

Reprint 2025-26



9/I SELL MY DREAMS

the temptation of questioning the Portuguese
ambassador when we happened to meet some months
later at a diplomatic reception. The ambassador spoke
about her with great enthusiasm and enormous
admiration. ‘You cannot imagine how extraordinary she
was,’ he said. ‘You would have been obliged to write a
story about her.’ And he went on in the same tone, with
surprising details, but without the clue that would have
allowed me to come to a final conclusion.

‘In concrete terms,’ I asked at last, ‘what did she do?’
‘Nothing,’ he said, with a certain disenchantment. ‘She
dreamed.’

Understanding the Text
1. Did the author believe in the prophetic ability of Frau Frieda?

2. Why did he think that Frau Frieda’s dreams were a stratagem
for surviving?

3. Why does the author compare Neruda to a Renaissance pope?

Talking about the Text
Discuss in groups

1. In spite of all the rationality that human beings are capable of,
most of us are suggestible and yield to archaic superstitions.

2. Dreams and clairvoyance are as much an element of the poetic
vision as religious superstition.

Appreciation
1. The story hinges on a gold ring shaped like a serpent with

emerald eyes. Comment on the responses that this image
evokes in the reader.

2. The craft of a master story-teller lies in the ability to interweave
imagination and reality. Do you think that this story illustrates this?

3. Bring out the contradiction in the last exchange between the
author and the Portuguese ambassador

‘In concrete terms,’ I asked at last, ‘what did she do?’ ‘Nothing,’
he said, with a  certain disenchantment. ‘She dreamed.’

4. Comment on the ironical element in the story.

Reprint 2025-26



10/KALEIDOSCOPE

Language Work
A. Vocabulary

Look up the meanings of the following phrases under ‘dream’
and ‘sell’ in the dictionary

dream         sell
dream on sell-by date
dream something away selling-point
(not) dream of doing something sell-out
dream something up selling price
look like a dream seller’s market

B. Grammar: Emphasis

Read this sentence carefully

One morning at nine o’clock, while we were having
breakfast on the terrace of the Havana Riviera Hotel
under a bright sun, a huge wave picked up several
cars that were driving down the avenue along the
seawall or parked on the pavement, and embedded
one of them in the side of the hotel.

The position of a word, phrase or an idea within a sentence
usually indicates the emphasis it receives. Generally, the most
emphatic place in the sentence is its end; the next most
emphatic is its beginning; and the least emphatic, its middle.

In the sentence above the most important fact is that the huge
wave embedded one of the cars in one side of the hotel.

The other details of time and place are given at the beginning.
The general statement of the ‘huge wave picking up several
cars’ precedes the particular car which is pertinent to the theme
of the story.

Let us rewrite the sentence, beginning with ‘a huge wave’ and
the first part following ‘hotel’ and notice the difference in the
effect.

A huge wave picked up several cars that were driving
down the avenue along the seawall or parked on the
pavement, and embedded one of them in the side of
the hotel, one morning at nine o’clock, while we were
having breakfast on the terrace of the Havana Riviera
Hotel under a bright sun.

Reprint 2025-26



11/I SELL MY DREAMS

TASK

Study the following sentences and underline the part which receives
emphasis

• I never saw her again or even wondered about her until I heard
about the snake ring on the woman who died in the Havana
Riviera disaster.

• That did not surprise me, however, because I had always thought
her dreams were no more than a stratagem for surviving.

• Although she did not say so, her conversation made it clear
that, dream by dream, she had taken over the entire fortune of
her ineffable patrons in Vienna.

• Three tables away sat an intrepid woman in an old-fashioned felt
hat and a purple scarf, eating without haste and staring at him.

• I stayed in Vienna for more than a month, sharing the straitened
circumstances of  the other students while I waited for money
that never arrived.

C. Pronunciation

The syllable is the basic unit of pronunciation. A word may
have a single syllable, such as ‘will’, ‘pen’ etc. A word, sometimes,
can have more than one syllable as for instance ‘willing’ (will-
ing). Each syllable contains a vowel sound, and usually one or
more consonants.

You can show division of a word into syllables like this

foolish fool-ish(2)

agreement a-gree-ment(3)

arithmetic a-rith-me-tic(4)

TASK

• Say your name aloud and decide how many syllables there are
in it. Do the same with the names of your classmates.

• Pick out five words each for two syllable, three syllable and four
syllable words from the lesson.

Suggested Reading
One Hundred Years in Solitude by Gabriel Garcia Marquez

Love in the Time of Cholera by Gabriel Garcia Marquez.

Reprint 2025-26



12/KALEIDOSCOPE
##2##
2
E v e l i n e

James Joyce is a major literary figure of the first
quarter of the twentieth century. He is known
for his bold experiments in narrative techniques
in fiction, and Ulysses is his most famous work.
‘Eveline’ is one of the fifteen stories of Dublin
life that form Dubliners, first published in 1914.
It is a sympathetic portrayal of Eveline, who has
within her reach escape from the drudgery of

James Joyce her life but cannot gather enough courage to
1882-1941 seize it.

She sat at the window watching the evening invade the
avenue. Her head was leaned against the window curtains
and in her nostrils was the odour of dusty cretonne. She
was tired.

Few people passed. The man out of the last house
passed on his way home; she heard his footsteps clacking
along the concrete pavement and afterwards crunching on
the cinder path before the new red houses. One time there
used to be a field there in which they used to play every
evening with other people’s children. Then a man from
Belfast bought the field and built houses in it—not like
their little brown houses but bright brick houses with
shining roofs. The children of the avenue used to play
together in that field—the Devines, the Waters, the Dunns,
little Keogh the cripple, she and her brothers and sisters.
Ernest, however, never played: he was too grown up. Her
father used often to hunt them in and out of the field with
his blackthorn stick; but usually little Keogh used to keep

Reprint 2025-26



13/EVELINE

nix* and call out when he saw her father coming. Still they
seemed to have been rather happy then. Her father was
not so bad then; and besides, her mother was alive. That
was a long time ago; she and her brothers and sisters
were all grown up; her mother was dead. Tizzie Dunn was
dead, too, and the Waters had gone back to England.
Everything changes. Now she was going to go away like
the others, to leave her home.

Home! She looked round the room, reviewing all its
familiar objects which she had dusted once a week for so
many years, wondering where on earth all the dust came
from. Perhaps she would never see again those familiar
objects from which she had never dreamed of being divided.
And yet during all those years she had never found out the
name of the priest whose yellowing photograph hung on
the wall above the broken harmonium beside the coloured
* nix: an old slang word, originally used by thieves, to refer to the member of a gang who

kept watch

Reprint 2025-26



14/KALEIDOSCOPE

print of the promises made to Blessed Margaret Mary
Alacoque. He had been a school friend of her father.
Whenever he showed the photograph to a visitor her father
used to pass it with a casual word: ‘He is in Melbourne
now.’

She had consented to go away, to leave her home. Was
that wise? She tried to weigh each side of the question. In
her home anyway she had shelter and food; she had those
whom she had known all her life about her. Of course she
had to work hard, both in the house and at business. What
would they say of her in the Stores when they found out
that she had run away with a fellow? Say she was a fool,
perhaps; and her place would be filled up by advertisement.
Miss Gavan would be glad. She had always had an edge on
her, especially whenever there were people listening.

‘Miss Hill, don’t you see these ladies are waiting?’
‘Look lively, Miss Hill, please.’
She wouId not cry many tears at leaving the Stores.
But in her new home, in a distant unknown country,

it would not be like that. Then she would be married—she,
Eveline. People would treat her with respect then. She
would not be treated as her mother had been. Even now,
though she was over nineteen, she sometimes felt herself
in danger of her father’s violence. She knew it was that
that had given her the palpitations. When they were growing
up he had never gone for her, like he used to go for Harry
and Ernest, because she was a girl; but latterly he had
begun to threaten her and say what he would do to her
only for her dead mother’s sake. And now she had nobody
to protect her. Ernest was dead and Harry, who was in the
church decorating business, was nearly always down
somewhere in the country. Besides, the invariable squabble
for money on Saturday nights had begun to weary her
unspeakably. She always gave her entire wages—seven
shillings—and Harry always sent up what he could but
the trouble was to get any money from her father. He said
she used to squander the money, that she had no head,
that he wasn’t going to give her his hard earned money to
throw about the streets, and much more, for he was usually
fairly bad on Saturday night. In the end he would give her

Reprint 2025-26



15/EVELINE

the money and ask her had she any intention of buying
Sunday’s dinner. Then she had to rush out as quickly as
she could and do her marketing, holding her black leather
purse tightly in her hand as she elbowed her way through
the crowds and returning home late under her load of
provisions. She had hard work to keep the house together
and to see that the two young children who had been left
to her charge went to school regularly and got their meals
regularly. It was hard work—a hard life—but now that she
was about to leave it she did not find it a wholly undesirable
life.

Stop and Think

1. Why did Eveline review all the familiar objects at
home?

2. Where was Eveline planning to go?

She was about to explore another life with Frank.
Frank was very kind, manly, open-hearted. She was to go
away with him by the night boat to be his wife and to live
with him in Buenos Aires where he had a home waiting for
her. How well she remembered the first time she had seen
him; he was lodging in a house on the main road where
she used to visit. It seemed a few weeks ago. He was
standing at the gate, his peaked cap pushed back on his
head and his hair tumbled forward over a face of bronze.
Then they had come to know each other. He used to meet
her outside the Stores every evening and see her home. He
took her to see The Bohemian Girl and she felt elated as
she sat in an unaccustomed part of the theatre with him.
He was awfully fond of music and sang a little. People
knew that they were courting and, when he sang about
the lass that loves a sailor, she always felt pleasantly
confused. He used to call her Poppens out of fun. First of
all it had been an excitement for her to have a fellow and
then she had begun to like him. He had tales of distant
countries. He had started as a deck boy at a pound a month
on a ship of the Allan Line going out to Canada. He told
her the names of the ships he had been on and the names

Reprint 2025-26



16/KALEIDOSCOPE

of the different services. He had sailed through the Straits
of Magellan and he told her stories of the terrible
Patagonians. He had fallen on his feet in Buenos Aires, he
said, and had come over to the old country just for a holiday.
Of course, her father had found out the affair and had
forbidden her to have anything to say to him.

‘I know these sailor chaps,’ he said.
One day he had quarrelled with Frank and after that

she had to meet her lover secretly.
The evening deepened in the avenue. The white of two

letters in her lap grew indistinct. One was to Harry; the
other was to her father. Ernest had been her favourite but
she liked Harry too. Her father was becoming old lately,
she noticed; he would miss her. Sometimes he could be
very nice. Not long before, when she had been laid up for a
day, he had read her out a ghost story and made toast for
her at the fire. Another day, when their mother was alive,
they had all gone for a picnic to the Hill of Howth. She
remembered her father putting on her mother’s bonnet to
make the children laugh.

Her time was running out but she continued to sit by
the window, leaning her head against the window curtain,
inhaling the odour of dusty cretonne. Down far in the
avenue she could hear a street organ playing. She knew
the air. Strange that it should come that very night to
remind her of the promise to her mother, her promise to
keep the home together as long as she could. She
remembered the last night of her mother’s illness; she was
again in the close dark room at the other side of the hall
and outside she heard a melancholy air of Italy. The organ
player had been ordered to go away and given six-pence.
She remembered her father strutting back into the sickroom
saying: ‘Damned Italians! coming over here!’

As she mused—the pitiful vision of her mother’s life
laid its spell on the very quick of her being that life of
commonplace sacrifices closing in final craziness. She
trembled as she heard again her mother’s voice saying
constantly with foolish insistence: ‘Derevaun Seraun!
Derevaun Seraun!’*
* Derevaun.... Seraun, possibly corrupt Gaelic for ‘the end of pleasure is pain’

Reprint 2025-26



17/EVELINE

Stop and Think

l. Who was Frank? Why did Eveline’s father quarrel
with him?

2. What significance does Eveline find in the organ-
player’s appearance on the day she had decided to
leave?

She stood up in a sudden impulse of terror. Escape! She
must escape! Frank would save her. He would give her life,
perhaps love, too. But she wanted to live. Why should she be
unhappy? She had a right to happiness. Frank would take
her in his arms, fold her in his arms. He would save her.

She stood among the swaying crowd in the station at
the North Wall. He held her hand and she knew that he
was speaking to her, saying something about the passage
over and over again. The station was full of soldiers with
brown baggages. Through the wide doors of the sheds she
caught a glimpse of the black mass of the boat, lying in
beside the quay wall, with illumined portholes. She
answered nothing. She felt her cheek pale and cold and,
out of a maze of distress, she prayed to God to direct her,
to show her what was her duty. The boat blew a long
mournful whistle into the mist. If she went, tomorrow she
would be on the sea with Frank, steaming toward Buenos
Aires. Their passage had been booked. Could she still draw
back after all he had done for her? Her distress awoke a
nausea in her body and she kept moving her lips in silent
fervent prayer.

A bell clanged upon her heart. She felt him seize her
hand:

‘Come!’
All the seas of the world tumbled about her heart. He

was drawing her into them: he would drown her. She
gripped with both hands at the iron railing.

‘Come!’
No! No! No! It was impossible. Her hands clutched the

iron in frenzy. Amid the seas she sent a cry of anguish.
‘Eveline! Evvy!’
He rushed beyond the barrier and called to her to

follow. He was shouted at to go on but he still called to

Reprint 2025-26



18/KALEIDOSCOPE

her. She set her white face to him, passive, like a helpless
animal. Her eyes gave him no sign of love or farewell or
recognition.

Understanding the Text
1. Name the two characters in this story whom Eveline liked and

loved, and two she did not. What were the reasons for her
feelings towards them?

2. Describe the conflict of emotions felt by Eveline on the day she
had decided to elope with Frank.

3. Why do you think Eveline let go of the opportunity to escape?

4. What are the signs of Eveline’s indecision that we see as the
hour of her departure with Frank neared?

Talking about the Text
1. Deciding between filial duty and the right to personal happiness

is problematic. Discuss.

2. Share with your partner any instance of your personal
experience where you, or somebody you know, had to make a
difficult choice.

Appreciation
1. The description in this story has symbolic touches. What do

you think the ‘window’, the ‘gathering dusk’, the ‘dusty cretonne
and its odour’ symbolise?

2. Note how the narrative proceeds through the consciousness of
Eveline.

3. In the last section of the story, notice these expressions
(i) A bell clanged upon her heart.
(ii) AlI the seas of the world tumbled upon her heart.

(iii) Her hands clutched the iron in frenzy.
(iv) She set her white face to him, passive, like a helpless

animal.

What are the emotions that these images evoke?

4. Do you think the author indicates his judgement of Eveline in
the story?

Reprint 2025-26



19/EVELINE

Language Work
A. Grammar: Parallelism

Notice the following sentence

One was to Harry; the other was to her father.

When you coordinate two or more elements in a sentence, they
are in the same grammatical form, that is they are parallel.
This ensures balance in the sentence.

In the sentence above, there is a reference to what was said in
the previous sentence: two letters.

The predicative pattern is the same and the two parts are
separated by a semi-colon.

Parallelism is a basic rhetorical principle. Equal form reinforces
equal meaning.

By placing equally important ideas successively you emphasise
their relationship to one another. It can show either similarity
or contrast as in

Then a man from Belfast bought the field and built
houses in it—not like their little brown houses but
bright brick houses with shining roofs.

Sometimes the choice of words establishes the parallel and
reinforces equal meaning as in

Ernest had been her favourite but she liked Harry
too.

TASK

Underline the parts that are parallel in the following sentences

• She had consented to go away, to leave her home.

• Strange that it should come that very night to remind her of the
promise to her mother, her promise to keep the home together
as long as she could.

• She prayed to God to direct her, to show her what was her duty.

• Frank would take her in his arms, fold her in his arms.

• Her time was running out but she continued to sit by the window,
leaning her head against the window curtain, inhaling the odour
of dusty cretonne.

• Not long before, when she had been laid up for a day, he had
read her out a ghost story and made toast for her at the fire.

Reprint 2025-26



20/KALEIDOSCOPE

B. Pronunciation

A word has as many syllables as it has vowels.

man (one syllable)

manner (two syllables)

The mark( ) indicates that the first syllable in ‘manner’ is more
prominent than the other.

In a word having more than one syllable, the one that is more
more prominent than the other syllable(s) is called the stressed
syllable.

TASK

Mark the stressed syllables in the following words chosen  from the
lesson. Consult the dictionary or ask the teacher if necessary.

photograph escape changes

threaten excitement farewell

illumined sailor sacrifice

invariable

Suggested Reading
Dubliners by James Joyce.

Reprint 2025-26



21/A WEDDING IN BROWNSVILLE
##3##
3
A Wedding in Brownsville

Isaac Bashevis Singer was born in Poland. His
father and grandfather were rabbis and he was
educated at the Warsaw Rabbinical Seminary. In
1935 he emigrated to the US and since then has
worked as a regular journalist and columnist for
the New York paper, The Jewish Daily Forward.
Apart from some early work published in Warsaw,
nearly all his fiction has been written in Yiddish
for this journal. It is relatively recently that Singer’s
work has been translated on any scale and that
his merit, and the endurance of his writing, have
been recognised by a general audience. He was

Isaac Bashevis Singer awarded the Nobel Prize for literature in 1978. His
1902–1991 publications include—A Friend of Kafka, The

Seance and Other Stories.

The wedding had been a burden to Dr Solomon Margolin
from the very beginning. True, it was to take place on a
Sunday, but Gretl had been right when she said that was
the only evening in the week they could spend together. It
always turned out that way. His responsibilities to the
community made him give away the evenings that belonged
to her. The Zionists had appointed him to a committee; he
was a board member of a Jewish scholastic society; he
had become co-editor of an academic Jewish quarterly.
And though he often referred to himself as an agnostic
and even an atheist, nevertheless for years he had been
dragging Gretl to Seders at Abraham Mekheles’, a Landsman
from Sencimin. Dr Margolin treated rabbis, refugees, and
Jewish writers without charge, supplying them with
medicines and, if necessary, a hospital bed. There had

Reprint 2025-26



22/KALEIDOSCOPE

been a time when he had gone regularly to the meetings of
the Senciminer Society, had accepted positions in their
ranks, and had attended all the parties. Now Abraham
Mekheles was marrying off his youngest daughter, Sylvia.
The minute the invitation arrived, Gretl had announced
her decision: she was not going to let herself be carted off
to a wedding somewhere out in the wilds of Brownsville. If
he, Solomon, wanted to go and gorge himself on all kinds
of greasy food, coming home at three o’clock in the morning,
that was his prerogative.

Dr Margolin admitted to himself that his wife was right.
When would he get a chance to sleep? He had to be at the
hospital early Monday morning. Moreover he was on a strict
fat-free diet. A wedding like this one would be a feast of
poisons. Everything about such celebrations irritated him
now: the Anglicised Yiddish, the Yiddishised English, the
ear-splitting music and unruly dances. Jewish laws and
customs were completely distorted; men who had no regard
for Jewishness wore skullcaps; and the reverend rabbis
and cantors aped the Christian ministers. Whenever he
took Gretl to a wedding or Bar Mitzvah, he was ashamed.
Even she, born a Christian, could see that American
Judaism was a mess. At least this time he would be spared
the trouble of making apologies to her.

Usually after breakfast on Sunday, he and his wife
took a walk in Central Park, or, when the weather was
mild, went to the Palisades. But today Solomon Margolin
lingered in bed. During the years, he had stopped attending
functions of the Senciminer Society; meanwhile the town
of Sencimin had been destroyed. His family there had been
tortured, burned, gassed. Many Senciminers had survived,
and, later, come to America from the camps, but most of
them were younger people whom he, Solomon, had not
known in the old country. Tonight everyone would be there;
the Senciminers belonging to the bride’s family and the
Tereshpolers belonging to the groom’s. He knew how they
would pester him, reproach him for growing aloof, drop
hints that he was a snob. They would address him
familiarly, slap him on the back, drag him off to dance.

Reprint 2025-26



23/A WEDDING IN BROWNSVILLE

Well, even so, he had to go to Sylvia’s wedding. He had
already sent out the present.

The day had dawned, grey and dreary as dusk.
Overnight, a heavy snow had fallen. Solomon Margolin had
hoped to make up for the sleep he was going to lose, but
unfortunately he had woken even earlier than usual. Finally
he got up. He shaved himself meticulously at the bathroom
mirror and also trimmed the grey hair at his temples. Today
of all days he looked his age: there were bags under his
eyes, and his face was lined. Exhaustion showed in his
features. His nose appeared longer and sharper than usual;
there were deep folds at the sides of his mouth. After
breakfast he stretched out on the living-room sofa. From
there he could see Gretl, who was standing in the kitchen,
ironing—blonde, faded, middle-aged. She had on a skimpy
petticoat, and her calves were as muscular as a dancer’s.
Gretl had been a nurse in the Berlin hospital where he
had been a member of the staff. Of her family, one brother,
a Nazi, had died of typhus in a Russian prison camp. A
second, who was a Communist, had been shot by the Nazis.
Her aged father vegetated at the home of his other daughter
in Hamburg, and Gretl sent him money regularly. She
herself had become almost Jewish in New York. She had
made friends with Jewish women, joined Hadassah, learned
to cook Jewish dishes. Even her sigh was Jewish. And she
lamented continually over the Nazi catastrophe. She had
her plot waiting for her beside his in that part of the
cemetery that the Senciminers had reserved for themselves.

Dr Margolin yawned, reached for the cigarette that
lay in an ashtray on the coffee table beside him, and began
to think about himself. His career had gone well. Ostensibly
he was a success. He had an office on West End Avenue
and wealthy patients. His colleagues respected him, and
he was an important figure in Jewish circles in New York.
What more could a boy from Sencimin expect? A self-taught
man, the son of a poor teacher of Talmud? In person he
was tall and quite handsome, and he had always had a
way with women. He still pursued them—more than was
good for him at his age and with his high blood pressure.

Reprint 2025-26



24/KALEIDOSCOPE

But secretly Solomon Margolin had always felt that he
was a failure. As a child he had been acclaimed a prodigy,
reciting long passages of the Bible and studying the Talmud
and Commentaries on his own. When he was a boy of
eleven, he had sent for a Responsum to the rabbi of Tarnow
who had referred to him in his reply as ‘great and
illustrious’. In his teens he had become a master in the
Guide for the Perplexed and the Kuzari. He had taught
himself algebra and geometry. At seventeen he had
attempted a translation of Spinoza’s Ethics from Latin into
Hebrew, unaware that it had been done before. Everyone
predicted he would turn out to be a genius. But he had
squandered his talents, continually changing his field of
study; and he had wasted years in learning languages, in
wandering from country to country. Nor had he had any
luck with his one great love, Raizel, the daughter of Melekh
the watchmaker. Raizel had married someone else and later
had been shot by the Nazis. All his life Solomon Margolin
had been plagued by the eternal questions. He still lay
awake at night trying to solve the mysteries of the universe.
He suffered from hypochondria and the fear of death
haunted even his dreams. Hitler’s carnage and the
extinction of his family had rooted out his last hope for
better days, had destroyed all his faith in humanity. He
had begun to despise the matrons who came to him with
their petty ills while millions were devising horrible deaths
for one another.

Gretl came in from the kitchen.
‘What shirt are you going to put on?’
Solomon Margolin regarded her quietly. She had had

her own share of troubles. She had suffered in silence for
her two brothers, even for Hans, the Nazi. She had gone
through a prolonged change of life. Now her face was
flushed and covered with beads of sweat. He earned more
than enough to pay for a maid, yet Gretl insisted on doing
all the housework herself, even the laundry. It had become
a mania with her. Every day she scoured the oven. She
was forever polishing the windows of their apartment on
the sixteenth floor and without using a safety belt. All the

Reprint 2025-26



25/A WEDDING IN BROWNSVILLE

other housewives in the building ordered their groceries
delivered, but Gretl lugged the heavy bags from the
supermarket herself.

Now husband and wife sized each other up wryly,
feeling the strangeness that comes of great familiarity. He
was always amazed at how she had lost her looks. No one
feature had altered, but something in her aspect had given
way: her pride, her hopefulness, her curiosity. He blurted
out:

‘What shirt? It doesn’t matter. A white shirt.’
‘You’re not going to wear the tuxedo? Wait, I’ll bring

you a vitamin.’
‘I don’t want a vitamin.’
‘But you yourself say they’re good for you.’
‘Leave me alone.’
‘Well, it’s your health, not mine.’
And slowly she walked out of the room, hesitating as if

she expected him to remember something and call her back.

Stop and Think

1. Who were the Senciminers?
2. Why did Dr Margolin not particularly want his wife

to accompany him to the wedding?

Dr Solomon Margolin took a last look in the mirror
and left the house. He felt refreshed by the half-hour nap
he had had after dinner. Despite his age, he still wanted
to impress people with his appearance—even the
Senciminers. He had his illusions. In Germany he had
taken pride in the fact that he looked like a Junker, and in
New York he was often aware that he could pass for an
Anglo-Saxon. He was tall, slim, blond, blue-eyed. His hair
was thinning, had turned somewhat grey, but he managed
to disguise these signs of age. He stooped a little, but in
company was quick to straighten up. Years ago in Germany
he had worn a monocle and though in New York that would
have been too pretentious, his glance still retained a
European severity. He had his principles. He had never
broken the Hippocratic Oath. With his patients he was

Reprint 2025-26



26/KALEIDOSCOPE

honourable to an extreme, avoiding every kind of cant;
and he had refused a number of dubious associations that
smacked of careerism. Gretl claimed his sense of honour
amounted to a mania. Dr Margolin’s car was in the garage—
not a Cadillac like that of most of his colleagues—but he
decided to go by taxi. He was unfamiliar with Brooklyn
and the heavy snow made driving hazardous. He waved
his hand and at once a taxi pulled over to the curb. He
was afraid the driver might refuse to go as far as
Brownsville, but he flicked the meter on without a word.
Dr Margolin peered through the frosted window into the
wintry Sunday night but there was nothing to be seen.
The New York streets sprawled out, wet, dirty, impenetrably
dark. After a while, Dr Margolin leaned back, shut his
eyes, and retreated into his own warmth. His destination
was a wedding. Wasn’t the world, like this taxi, plunging
away somewhere into the unknown toward a cosmic
destination? May be a cosmic Brownsville, a cosmic
wedding? Yes. But why did God—or whatever anyone
wanted to call Him—create a Hitler, a Stalin? Why did He
need world wars? Why heart attacks, cancers? Dr Margolin
took out a cigarette and lit it hesitantly. What had they
been thinking of, those pious uncles of his, when they
were digging their own graves? Was immortality possible?
Was there such a thing as the soul? All the arguments for
and against weren’t worth a pinch of dust.

The taxi turned onto the bridge across the East River
and for the first time Dr Margolin was able to see the sky.
It sagged low, heavy, red as glowing metal. Higher up, a
violet glare suffused the vault of the heavens. Snow was
sifting down gently, bringing a winter peace to the world,
just as it had in the past—forty years ago, a thousand
years ago, and perhaps a million years ago. Fiery pillars
appeared to glow beneath the East River; on its surface,
through black waves jagged as rocks, a tugboat was hauling
a string of barges loaded with cars. A front window in the
cab was open and icy gusts of wind blew in, smelling of
gasoline and the sea. Suppose the weather never changed
again? Who then would ever be able to imagine a summer
day, a moonlit night, spring? But how much imagination—

Reprint 2025-26



27/A WEDDING IN BROWNSVILLE

for what it’s worth—does a man actually have? On Eastern
Parkway the taxi was jolted and screeched suddenly to a
stop. Some traffic accident, apparently. The siren on police
car shrieked. A wailing ambulance drew nearer. Dr
Margolin grimaced. Another victim. Someone makes a false
turn of the wheel and all a man’s plans in this world are
reduced to nothing. A wounded man was carried to the
ambulance on a stretcher. Above a dark suit and blood-
spattered shirt and bow tie the face had a chalky pallor;
one eye was closed, the other partly open and glazed.
Perhaps he, too, had been going to a wedding, Dr Margolin
thought. He might even have been going to the same
wedding as I...

Some time later the taxi started moving again. Solomon
Margolin was now driving through streets he had never
seen before. It was New York, but it might just as well have
been Chicago or Cleveland. They passed through an
industrial district with factory buildings, warehouses of coal,
lumber, scrap iron. Negroes, strangely black, stood about
on the sidewalks, staring ahead, their great dark eyes full
of gloomy hopelessness. Occasionally the car would pass a
tavern. The people at the bar seemed to have something
unearthly about them, as if they were being punished here
for sins committed in another incarnation. Just when
Solomon Margolin was beginning to suspect that the driver,
who had remained stubbornly silent the whole time, had
gotten lost or else was deliberately taking him out of his
way, the taxi entered a thickly populated neighbourhood.
They passed a synagogue, a funeral parlour, and there,
ahead, was the wedding hall, all lit up, with its neon Jewish
sign and Star of David. Dr Margolin gave the driver a dollar
tip and the man took it without uttering a word.

Dr Margolin entered the outer lobby and immediately
the comfortable intimacy of the Senciminers engulfed him.
AII the faces he saw were familiar, though he didn’t
recognise individuals. Leaving his hat and coat at the
checkroom, he put on a skullcap and entered the hall. It
was filled with people and music, with tables heaped with
food, a bar stacked with bottles. The musicians were

Reprint 2025-26



28/KALEIDOSCOPE

playing an Israeli march that was a hodge-podge of
American jazz with Oriental flourishes. Men were dancing
with men, women with women, men with women. He saw
black skullcaps, white skullcaps, bare heads. Guests kept
arriving, pushing their way through the crowd, some still
in their hats and coats, munching hors d’oeuvres, drinking
schnapps. The hall resounded with stamping, screaming,
laughing, clapping. Flash bulbs went off blindingly as the
photographers made their rounds. Seeming to come from
nowhere, the bride appeared, briskly sweeping up her train,
followed by a retinue of bridesmaids. Dr Margolin knew
everybody, and yet knew nobody. People spoke to him,
laughed, winked, and waved, and he answered each one
with a smile, a nod, a bow. Gradually he threw off all his
worries, all his depression. He became half-drunk on the
amalgam of odours: flowers, sauerkraut, garlic, perfume,
mustard, and that nameless odour that only Senciminers
emit. ‘Hello, Doctor!’ ‘Hello Schloime-Dovid, you don’t
recognise me, eh? Look, he forgot!’ There were the
encounters, the regrets, the reminiscences of long ago.
‘But after all, weren’t we neighbours? You used to come to
our house to borrow the Yiddish newspaper!’ Someone had
already kissed him: a badly shaven snout, a mouth reeking
of whiskey and rotten teeth. One woman was so convulsed
with laughter that she lost an earring. Margolin tried to
pick it up, but it had already been trampled underfoot.
‘You don’t recognise me, eh? Take a good look! It’s Zissel,
the son of Chaye Beyle!’ ‘Why don’t you eat something?’
‘Why don’t you have something to drink? Come over here.
Take a glass. What do you want? Whiskey? Brandy?
Cognac? Scotch? With soda? With Coca Cola? Take some,
it’s good. Don’t let it stand. So long as you’re here, you
might as well enjoy yourself.’ ‘My father? He was killed.
They were all killed. I’m the only one left of the entire
family.’ ‘Berish the son of Feivish? Starved to death in
Russia—they sent him to Kazakhstan. His wife? In Israel.
She married a Lithuanian.’ ‘Sorele? Shot. Together with
her children.’ ‘Yentl? Here at the wedding. She was standing
here just a moment ago. There she is, dancing with that
tall fellow.’ ‘Abraham Zilberstein? They burned him in the

Reprint 2025-26



29/A WEDDING IN BROWNSVILLE

synagogue with twenty others. A mound of charcoal was
all that was left, coal and ash.’ ‘Yosele Budnik? He passed
away years ago. You must mean Yekele Budnik. He has a
delicatessen store right here in Brownsville—married a
widow whose husband made a fortune in real estate.’

‘Lechayim, Doctor! Lechayim, Schloime-Dovid! It doesn’t
offend you that I call you Schloime-Dovid? To me you’re
still the same Schloime-Dovid, the little boy with the blond
side-curls who recited a whole tractate of the Talmud by
heart. You remember, don’t you? It seems like only yesterday.
Your father, may he rest in peace, was beaming with pride...’
‘Your brother Chayim? Your Uncle Oyzer? They killed
everyone, everyone. They took a whole people and wiped
them out with German efficiency: gleichgeschaltet!’ ‘Have
you seen the bride yet? Pretty as a picture, but too much
make-up. Imagine, a grandchild of Reb Todros of Radzin!
And her grandfather used to wear two skullcaps, one in
front and one in back. ‘Do you see that young woman
dancing in the yellow dress? It’s Riva’s sister—their father
was Moishe the candlemaker. Riva herself? Where all the
others ended up: Auschwitz. How close we came ourselves!
All of us are really dead, if you want to call it that. We
were exterminated, wiped out. Even the survivors carry
death in the hearts. But it’s a wedding, we should be
cheerful.’ ‘Lechayim, Schloime-Dovid! I would like to
congratulate you. Have you a son or daughter to marry
off? No? Well, it’s better that way. What’s the sense of having
children if people are such murderers?’

Stop and Think

1. What is the Hippocratic oath?
2. What topic does the merry banter at the wedding

invariably lead to?

It was already time for the ceremony, but someone
still had not come. Whether it was the rabbi, the cantor,
or one of the in-laws who was missing, nobody seemed
able to find out. Abraham Mekheles, the bride’s father,
rushed around, scowled, waved his hand, whispered in

Reprint 2025-26



30/KALEIDOSCOPE

people’s ears. He looked strange in his rented tuxedo. The
Tereshpol mother-in-law was wrangling with one of the
photographers. The musicians never stopped playing for
an instant. The drum banged, the bass fiddle growled, the
saxophone blared. The dances became faster, more
abandoned, and more and more people were drawn in. The
young men stamped with such force that it seemed the
dance floor would break under them. Small boys romped
around like goats, and little girls whirled about wildly
together. Many of the men were already drunk. They
shouted boasts, howled with laughter, kissed strange
women. There was so much commotion that Solomon
Margolin could no longer grasp what was being said to
him and simply nodded yes to everything. Some of the
guests had attached themselves to him, wouldn’t move,
and kept pulling him in all directions, introducing him to
more and more people from Sencimin and Tereshpol. A
matron with a nose covered with warts pointed a finger at
him, wiped her eyes, called him Schloimele. Solomon
Margolin inquired who she was and somebody told him.
Names were swallowed up in the tumult. He heard the
same words over and over again: died, shot, burned. A
man from Tereshpol tried to draw him aside and was
shouted down by several Senciminers calling him an
intruder who had no business there. A latecomer arrived,
a horse and buggy driver from Sencimin who had become
a millionaire in New York. His wife and children had
perished, but, already, he had a new wife. The woman,
weighted with diamonds, paraded about in a low-cut gown
that bared a back, covered with blotches, to the waist. Her
voice was husky. ‘Where did she come from? Who was she?’
‘Certainly no saint. Her first husband was a swindler who
amassed a fortune and then dropped dead. Of what?
Cancer. Where? In the stomach. First you don’t have
anything to eat, then you don’t have anything to eat with.
A man is always working for the second husband.’ ‘What is
life anyway? A dance on the grave.’ ‘Yes, but as long as
you’re playing the game, you have to abide by the rules.’
‘Dr Margolin, why aren’t you dancing? You’re not among
strangers. We’re all from the same dust. Over there you

Reprint 2025-26



31/A WEDDING IN BROWNSVILLE

weren’t a doctor. You were only Schloime-Dovid, the son of
the Talmud teacher. Before you know it, we’ll all be lying
side by side.’

Margolin didn’t recall drinking anything but he felt
intoxicated all the same. The foggy hall was spinning like
a carousel; the floor was rocking. Standing in a corner, he
contemplated the dance. What different expressions the
dancers wore. How many combinations and permutations
of being the Creator had brought together here. Every face
told its own story. They were dancing together, these people,
but each one had his own philosophy, his own approach. A
man grabbed Margolin and for a while he danced in the
frantic whirl. Then, tearing himself loose, he stood apart.
Who was that woman? He found his eye caught by her
familiar form. He knew her! She beckoned to him. He stood
baffled. She looked neither young nor old. Where had he
known her—that narrow face, those dark eyes, that girlish
smile? Her hair was arranged in the old manner, with long
braids wound like a wreath around her head. The grace of
Sencimin adorned her—something he, Margolin, had long
since forgotten. And those eyes, he was in love with those
eyes and had been all his life. He half smiled at her and
the woman smiled back. There were dimples in her cheeks.
She too appeared surprised. Margolin, though he realised
he had begun to blush like a boy, went up to her.

‘I know you—but you’re not from Sencimin?’
‘Yes, from Sencimin.’
He had heard that voice long ago. He had been in love

with that voice.
‘From Sencimin—who are you, then?’
Her lips trembled.
‘You’ve forgotten me already?’
‘It’s a long time since I left Sencimin.’
‘You used to visit my father.’
‘Who was your father?’
‘Melekh the watchmaker.’
Dr Margolin shivered.
‘If I’m not out of my mind then I’m seeing things.’
‘Why do you say that?’
‘Because Raizel is dead.’

Reprint 2025-26



32/KALEIDOSCOPE

‘I’m Raizel.’
‘You’re Raizel? Here? Oh my God, if that’s true—then

anything is possible! When did you come to New York?’
‘Some time ago.’
‘From where?’
‘From over there.’
‘But everyone told me that you were all dead.’
‘My father, my mother, my brother Hershl...’
‘But you were married!’
‘I was.’
‘If that’s true, then anything is possible!’ repeated Dr

Margolin, still shaken by the incredible happening.
Someone must have purposely deceived him. But why? He
was aware there was a mistake somewhere but could not
determine where.

‘Why didn’t you let me know? After all...’
He fell silent. She too was silent for a moment.
‘I lost everything. But I still had some pride left.’
‘Come with me somewhere quieter—anywhere. This is

the happiest day of my life!’
‘But it’s night...’
‘Then the happiest night! Almost—as if the Messiah

had come, as if the dead had come to life!’
‘Where do you want to go? All right, let’s go.’
Margolin took her arm and felt at once the thrill, long

forgotten, of youthful desire. He steered her away from the
other guests, afraid that he might lose her in the crowd, or
that someone would break in and spoil his happiness.
Everything had returned on the instant: the
embarrassment, the agitation, the joy. He wanted to take
her away, to hide somewhere alone with her. Leaving the
reception hall, they went upstairs to the chapel where the
wedding ceremony was to take place. The door was standing
open. Inside, on a raised platform stood the permanent
wedding canopy. A bottle of wine and a silver goblet were
placed in readiness for the ceremony. The chapel with its
empty pews and only one glimmering light was full of
shadows. The music, so blaring below, sounded soft and
distant up here. Both of them hesitated at the threshold.

Margolin pointed to the wedding canopy.

Reprint 2025-26



33/A WEDDING IN BROWNSVILLE

‘We could have stood there.’
‘Yes.’
‘Tell me about yourself. Where are you now? What are

you doing?’
‘It is not easy to tell.’
‘Are you alone? Are you attached?’
‘Attached? No.’
‘Would you never have let me hear from you?’ he asked.

She didn’t answer.
Gazing at her, he knew his love had returned with full

force. Already, he was trembling at the thought that they
might soon have to part. The excitement and expectancy of
youth filled him. He wanted to take her in his arms and
kiss her, but at any moment someone might come in. He
stood beside her, ashamed that he had married someone
else, that he had not personally confirmed the reports of
her death. ‘How could I have suppressed all this love? How
could I have accepted the world without her? And what will
happen now with Gretl?—I’ll give her everything, my last
cent.’ He looked round toward the stairway to see if any of
the guests had started to come up. The thought came to
him that by Jewish law he was not married, for he and
Gretl had had only a civil ceremony. He looked at Raizel.

‘According to Jewish law, I’m a single man.’
‘Is that so?’
‘According to Jewish law, I could lead you up there

and marry you.’
She seemed to be considering the import of his words.
‘Yes, I realise...’
‘According to Jewish law, I don’t even need a ring. One

can get married with a penny.’
‘Do you have a penny?’
He put his hand to his breast pocket, but his wallet

was gone. He started searching in his other pockets. Have
I been robbed? he wondered. But how? I was sitting in the
taxi the whole time. Could someone have robbed me here
at the wedding? He was not so much disturbed as surprised.
He said falteringly:

‘Strange, but I don’t have any money.’

Reprint 2025-26



34/KALEIDOSCOPE

‘We’ll get along without it.’
‘But how am I going to get home?’
‘Why go home?’ she said, countering with a question.

She smiled with that homely smile of hers that was so full of
mystery. He took her by the wrist and gazed at her. Suddenly
it occurred to him that this could not be his Raizel. She was
too young. Probably it was her daughter who was playing
along with him, mocking him. For God’s sake, I’m completely
confused! he thought. He stood bewildered, trying to untangle
the years. He couldn’t tell her age from her features. Her
eyes were deep, dark, and melancholy. She also appeared
confused, as if she, too, sensed some discrepancy. The whole
thing is a mistake, Margolin told himself. But where exactly
was the mistake? And what had happened to the wallet?
Could he have left it in the taxi after paying the driver? He
tried to remember how much cash he had had in it, but was
unable to. ‘I must have had too much to drink. These people
have made me drunk—dead drunk!’ For a long time he stood
silent, lost in some dreamless state, more profound than a
narcotic trance. Suddenly he remembered the traffic collision
he had witnessed on Eastern Parkway. An eerie suspicion
came over him: perhaps he had been more than a witness?
Perhaps he himself had been the victim of that accident!
That man on the stretcher looked strangely familiar. Dr
Margolin began to examine himself as though he were one of
his own patients. He could find no trace of pulse or breathing.
And he felt oddly deflated as if some physical dimension were
missing. The sensation of weight, the muscular tension of
his limbs, the hidden aches in his bones, all seemed to be
gone. It can’t be, it can’t be, he murmured. Can one die without
knowing it? And what will Gretl do?

Stop and Think

1. Who was the woman that Dr Margolin suddenly
encountered at the wedding?

2. What were the events that led to his confused state
of mind?

Reprint 2025-26



35/A WEDDING IN BROWNSVILLE

He blurted out:
‘You’re not the same Raizel.’
‘No? Then who am I?’
‘They shot Raizel.’
‘Shot her? Who told you that?’
She seemed both frightened and perplexed. Silently

she lowered her head like someone receiving the shock
of bad news. Dr Margolin continued to ponder.
Apparently Raizel didn’t realise her own condition. He
had heard of such a state—what was it called? Hovering
in the World of Twilight. The Astral Body wandering in
semi-consciousness, detached from the flesh, without
being able to reach its destination, clinging to the
illusions and vanities of the past. But could there be
any truth to all this superstition? No, as far as he was
concerned, it was nothing but wishful thinking. Besides,
this kind of survival would be less than oblivion. ‘I am
most probably in a drunken stupor,’ Dr Margolin decided.
‘All this may be one long hallucination, perhaps a result
of food poisoning...’

He looked up, and she was still there. He leaned over
and whispered in her ear:

‘What’s the difference? As long as we’re together.’
‘I’ve been waiting for that all these years.’
‘Where have you been?’
She didn’t answer, and he didn’t ask again. He looked

around. The empty hall was full, all the seats taken. A
ceremonious hush fell over the audience. The music
played softly. The cantor intoned the benedictions. With
measured steps, Abraham Mekheles led his daughter
down the aisle.

(Translated by Chana Faerslein and Elizabeth Pollet)

Understanding the Text
1. What do you understand of Dr Margolin’s past? How does it

affect his present life?

Reprint 2025-26



36/KALEIDOSCOPE

2. What was Dr Margolin’s attitude towards his profession?

3. What is Dr Margolin’s view of the kind of life the American
Jewish community leads?

4. What were the personality traits that endeared Dr Margolin to
others in his community?

5. Why do you think Dr Margolin had the curious experience at
the wedding hall?

6. Was the encounter with Raizel an illusion or was the carousing
at the wedding-hall illusory? Was Dr Margolin the victim of the
accident and was his astral body hovering in the world of
twilight?

Talking about the Text
Discuss in small groups

1. Fiction often deals with human consciousness, rather than
with the reality of existence.

2. The ways in which survivors of holocausts deal with life.

Appreciation
1. Surrealism was an artistic and literary movement in France

between the two World Wars. Its basic idea is that the
automatic, illogical and uncontrolled associations of the mind
represent a higher reality than the world of practical life and
ordinary literature. Do you think this story could be loosely
classified as surrealistic? What elements in this story would
support the idea?

2. Comment on the technique used by the author to convey the
gruesome realities of the war and its devastating effect on the
psyche of human beings through an intense personal
experience.

Language Work

A.  Grammar: Sentence Variety

A long series of sentences of similar structure and length would
be monotonous. Sentences of varied length and pattern
contribute to a lively style. Let us look at this paragraph

(1) Usually after breakfast on Sunday, he and his
wife took a walk in Central Park, or, when the weather

Reprint 2025-26



37/A WEDDING IN BROWNSVILLE

was mild, went to the Palisades. (2) But today
Solomon Margolin lingered in bed. (3) During the
years, he had stopped attending functions of the
Senciminer Society; meanwhile the town of Sencimin
had been destroyed. (4) His family there had been
tortured, burned, gassed. (5) Many Senciminers had
survived, and, later, come to America from the camps,
but most of them were younger people whom he,
Solomon, had not known in the old country.
(6) Tonight everyone would be there; the Senciminers
belonging to the bride’s family and the Tereshpolers
belonging to the groom’s. (7) He knew how they would
pester him, reproach him for growing aloof, drop hints
that he was a snob. (8) They would address him
familiarly, slap him on the back, drag him off to dance.
(9) Well, even so, he had to go to Sylvia’s wedding.
(10) He had already sent out the present.

The paragraph has ten sentences in all. The word-lengths of
the sentences in the order in which they occur in the paragraph
are: 25, 07, 20, 08, 29, 19, 19, 15,10, 07. We find the range to
be between 7 and 29.

We find a similar variation in sentence patterns

Sentence (1) Compound sentence.  Two independent clauses
joined by the coordinating conjunction ‘or’

Sentence (2) Simple sentence

Sentence (3) Two simple sentences joined by a semi-colon.
Conjunction: meanwhile

Sentence (4) Simple sentence

Sentence (5) Compound-Complex sentence consisting of two
independent clauses joined by ‘and’; the third part has another
independent clause joined with the second by ‘but’. It has a
relative clause joined to it by the subordinator ‘whom’

Sentence (6) Simple sentence. A main clause followed by two
non-finite clauses set in apposition to the main clause

Sentence (7) Complex sentence. One main clause and three
parallel subordinate clauses, hinging on the subordinator
‘how’,  ‘they’ and  ‘would’ going with each clause and another
subordinate clause depending on ‘drop hints’

Sentence (8) Parallel independent clauses following the same
subject ‘They’. The auxiliary ‘would’ goes with each verb

Sentence (9) Simple sentence

Sentence (10) Simple sentence.

Reprint 2025-26



38/KALEIDOSCOPE

You will also notice the use of the past tense, past perfect for
events and the future. The story is narrated in the past. The
protagonist’s remote past are in the past perfect. The
protagonist’s expectation of what would happen at the wedding
is in the future.

Note that the variation of form emerges from the emphasis in
meaning.

TASK

Examine the paragraph beginning ‘Some time later the taxi started
moving again...’ for variety in sentence length and sentence structure.

B. Pronunciation

In a word such as ‘afternoon’ the third syllable (noon) is the
most prominent. This is called the primary stress

after noon

You will also notice that the first syllable is less prominent
than the third syllable. This is called the secondary stress. In
the dictionary, the primary stress and the secondary stress
are indicated as

after noon

The middle syllable is unstressed.

TASK

• Say the following words with correct stress. These words carry
stress-pattern similar to the example given above.

understand apprehend rearrange
refugee addressee

• Given below are some words chosen from the lesson. Mark the
primary and secondary stresses for each word.

invitation responsible seventeen
American illustrious ambulance
association honourable permanent
creator

Suggested Reading
The Seance and Other Stories by Isaac Bashevis Singer

The Slave by Isaac Bashevis Singer.

Reprint 2025-26



39/TOMORROW
##4##
4
Tomorrow

Joseph Conrad, born of Polish parents in the Russian
Ukraine, began a seafaring life in 1874. He learnt
English at the age of 21, and in 1886 became a British
citizen. His famous works include The Nigger of the
Narcissus (1898), Lord Jim (1900) and Nostromo
(1904). His greatest skill lies in his capacity to evoke
an atmosphere through careful attention to detail.
He uses the method of story within a story to convey
his sense of the inexplicable inner character of life

Joseph Conrad and the shifting quality of the mind. All Conrad’s
1857-1924 characters suffer from a sense of isolation.

What was known of Captain Hagberd in the little seaport
of Colebrook was not exactly in his favour. He did not belong
to the place. He had come to settle there under
circumstances not at all mysterious—he used to be very
communicative about them at the time—but extremely
morbid and unreasonable. He was possessed of some little
money evidently, because he bought a plot of ground, and
had a pair of ugly yellow brick cottages run up very cheaply.
He occupied one of them himself and let the other to Josiah
Carvil—blind Carvil, the retired boat-builder—a man of
evil repute as a domestic tyrant.

These cottages had one wall in common, shared in a
line of iron railing dividing their front gardens; a wooden
fence separated their back gardens. Miss Bessie Carvil
was allowed, as it were of right, to throw over it the tea-
cloths, blue rags, or an apron that wanted drying.

‘It rots the wood, Bessie my girl,’ the captain would

Reprint 2025-26



40/KALEIDOSCOPE

remark mildly, from his side of the fence, each time he
saw her exercising that privilege.

She was a tall girl; the fence was low, and she could
spread her elbows on the top. Her hands would be red
with the bit of washing she had done, but her forearms
were white and shapely, and she would look at her father’s
landlord in silence—in an informed silence which had an
air of knowledge, expectation and desire.

‘It rots the wood,’ reported Captain Hagberd. ‘It is the
only unthrifty, careless habit I know in you. Why don’t you
have a clothes-line out in your back yard?’

Miss Carvil would say nothing to this—she only shook
her head negatively. The tiny back yard on her side had a
few stone-bordered little beds of black earth, in which the
simple flowers she found time to cultivate appeared
somehow extravagantly overgrown, as if belonging to an
exotic clime; and Captain Hagberd’s upright, hale person,
clad in No.1 sailcloth from head to foot, would be emerging
knee-deep out of rank grass and the tall weeds on his side
of the fence. He appeared, with the colour and uncouth
stiffness of the extraordinary material in which he chose
to clothe himself—‘for the time being’, would be his
mumbled remark to any observation on the subject—like a
man roughened out of granite, standing in a wilderness
not big enough for a decent billiard-room. A heavy figure of
a man of stone, with a red handsome face, a blue wandering
eye, and a great white beard flowing to his waist and never
trimmed as far as Colebrook knew.

Seven years before, he had seriously answered ‘Next
month, I think’ to the chaffing attempt to secure his custom
made by that distinguished local wit, the Colebrook barber,
who happened to be sitting insolently in the tap-room of
the New Inn near the harbour, where the captain had
entered to buy an ounce of tobacco. After paying for his
purchase with three half-pence extracted from the corner
of a handkerchief which he carried in the cuff of his sleeve,
Captain Hagberd went out. As soon as the door was shut
the barber laughed. ‘The old one and the young one will be
strolling arm in arm to get shaved in my place presently.

Reprint 2025-26



41/TOMORROW

The tailor shall be set to work, and the barber, and the
candlestick maker. High old times are coming for Colebrook;
they are coming, to be sure. It used to be ‘‘next week’’, now
it has come to ‘‘next month’’, and so on—soon it will be
‘‘next spring’’, for all I know.’

Noticing a stranger listening to him with a vacant grin,
he explained, stretching out his legs cynically, that this
queer old Hagberd, a retired coasting-skipper, was waiting
for the return of a son of his. The boy had been driven
away from home, he shouldn’t wonder; had run away to
sea and had never been heard of since. Put to rest in Davy
Jones’s locker this many a day, as likely as not. That old
man came flying to Colebrook three years ago all in black
broadcloth (had lost his wife lately then), getting out of a
third-class smoker as if the devil had been at his heels;
and the only thing that brought him down was a letter—a
hoax probably. Some joker had written to him about a
seafaring man with some such name who was supposed to
be hanging about some girl or other, either in Colebrook or
in the neighbourhood. ‘Funny, ain’t it?’ The old chap had
been advertising in the London papers for Harry Hagberd,
and offering rewards for any sort of likely information. And
the barber would go on to describe with sardonic gusto
how that stranger in mourning had been seen exploring
the country, in carts, on foot, taking everybody into his
confidence, visiting all the inns and alehouses for miles
around, stopping people on the road with his questions,
looking into the very ditches almost; first in the greatest
excitement, then with a plodding sort of perseverance,
growing slower and slower; and he could not even tell you
plainly how his son looked. The sailor was supposed to be
one of two that had left a timber ship, and to have been
seen dangling after some girl; but the old man described a
boy of fourteen or so—‘a clever-looking, high-spirited boy’.
And when people only smiled at this he would rub his
forehead in a confused sort of way before he slunk off,
looking offended. He found nobody, of course; not a trace
of anybody—never heard of anything worth belief, at any
rate; but he had not been able, somehow, to tear himself
away from Colebrook.

Reprint 2025-26



42/KALEIDOSCOPE

‘It was the shock of this disappointment, perhaps,
coming soon after the loss of his wife, that had driven him
crazy on that point,’ the barber suggested, with an air of
great psychological insight. After a time the old man
abandoned the active search. His son had evidently gone
away; but he settled himself to wait. His son had been
once at least in Colebrook in preference to his native place.
There must have been some reason for it, he seemed to
think, some very powerful inducement, that would bring
him back to Colebrook again.

‘Ha, ha, ha! Why, of course, Colebrook. Where else?
That’s the only place in the United Kingdom for your long-
lost sons. So he sold up his old home in Colchester, and
down he comes here. Well, it’s a craze, like any other.
Wouldn’t catch me going crazy over any of my youngsters
clearing out. I’ve got eight of them at home.’ The barber
was showing off his strength of mind in the midst of a
laughter that shook the tap-room.

Stop and Think

1. What brought Captain Hagberd to Colebrook?
2. Why did the people of Colebrook not have a

favourable opinion of Captain Hagberd?

Strange though, that sort of thing, he would confess
with the frankness of a superior intelligence, seemed to be
catching. His establishment, for instance, was near the
harbour, and whenever a sailorman came in for a hair-cut
or a shave—if it was a strange face he couldn’t help thinking
directly, ‘Suppose he’s the son of old Hagberd!’ He laughed
at himself for it. It was a strong craze. He could remember
the time when the whole town was full of it. But he had
his hopes of the old chap yet. He would cure him by a
course of judicious chaffing. He was watching the progress
of the treatment. Next week—next month—next year! When
the old skipper had put off the date of that return till next
year, he would be well on his way to not saying any more
about it. In other matters he was quite rational, so this,
too, was bound to come. Such was the barber’s firm opinion.

Reprint 2025-26



43/TOMORROW

Nobody had ever contradicted him; his own hair had
gone grey since that time, and Captain Hagberd’s beard
had turned quite white, and had acquired a majestic flow
over the No.1 canvas suit, which he had made for himself
secretly with tarred twine, and had assumed suddenly,
coming out in it one fine morning, whereas the evening
before he had been seen going home in his mourning of
broadcloth. It caused a sensation in the High Street—
shopkeepers coming to their doors, people in the houses
snatching up their hats to run out—a stir at which he
seemed strangely surprised at first, and then scared; but
his only answer to the wondering questions was that
startled and evasive ‘For the present’.

That sensation had been forgotten long ago; and
Captain Hagberd himself, if not forgotten, had come to be
disregarded—the penalty of dailiness—as the sun itself is
disregarded unless it makes its power felt heavily. Captain
Hagberd’s movements showed no infirmity; he walked stiffly
in his suit of canvas, a quaint and remarkable figure; only
his eyes wandered more furtively perhaps than of yore.
His manner abroad had lost its excitable watchfulness; it
had become puzzled and diffident, as though he had
suspected that there was somewhere about him something
slightly compromising, some embarrassing oddity; and yet
had remained unable to discover what on earth this
something wrong could be.

He was unwilling now to talk with the townsfolk. He
had earned for himself the reputation of an awful skinflint,
of a miser in the matter of living. He mumbled regretfully
in the shops, bought inferior scraps of meat after long
hesitations; and discouraged all allusions to his costume.
It was as the barber had foretold. For all one could tell, he
had recovered already from the disease of hope; and only
Miss Bessie Carvil knew that he said nothing about his
son’s return because with him it was no longer ‘next week’,
‘next month’, or even ‘next year’. It was ‘tomorrow’.

In their intimacy of back yard and front garden he
talked with her paternally, reasonably, and dogmatically,
with a touch or arbitrariness. They met on the ground of
unreserved confidence, which was authenticated by an

Reprint 2025-26



44/KALEIDOSCOPE

affectionate wink now and then. Miss Carvil had come to
look forward rather to these winks. At first they had
discomposed her: the poor fellow was mad. Afterwards she
had learned to laugh at them: there was no harm in him.
Now she was aware of an unacknowledged, pleasurable,
incredulous emotion, expressed by a faint blush. He winked
not in the least vulgarly; his thin red face with a well-
modelled curved nose had a sort of distinction—the more
so that when he talked to her he looked with a steadier
and more intelligent glance. A handsome, hale, upright,
capable man, with a white beard. You did not think of his
age. His son, he affirmed, had resembled him amazingly
from his earliest babyhood.

Harry would be one-and-thirty next July, he declared.
Proper age  to get married with a nice, sensible girl that
could appreciate a good home. He was a very high-spirited
boy. High-spirited husbands were the easiest to manage.
These mean, soft chaps, that you would think butter
wouldn’t melt in their mouths, were the ones to make a
woman thoroughly miserable. And there was nothing like
home—a fireside—a good roof: no turning out of your warm
bed in all sorts of weather. ‘Eh, my dear?’

Captain Hagberd had been one of those sailors that
pursue their calling within sight of land. One of the many
children of a bankrupt farmer, he had been apprenticed
hurriedly to a coasting-skipper, and had remained on the
coast all his sea life. It must have been a hard one at first:
he had never taken to it; his affection turned to the land,
with its innumerable houses, with its quiet lives gathered
round its firesides. Many sailors feel and profess a rational
dislike for the sea, but his was a profound and emotional
animosity—as if the love of the stabler element had been
bred into him through many generations.

‘People did not know what they let their boys in for
when they let them go to sea,’ he expounded to Bessie. ‘As
soon make convicts of them at once.’ He did not believe
you ever got used to it. The weariness of such a life got
worse as you got older. What sort of trade was it in which
more than half your time you did not put your foot inside
your house? Directly you got out to sea you had no means

Reprint 2025-26



45/TOMORROW

of knowing what went on at home. One might have thought
him weary of distant voyages: and the longest he had ever
made had lasted a fortnight, of which the most part had
been spent at anchor, sheltering from the weather. As soon
as his wife had inherited a house and enough to live on
(from a bachelor uncle who had made some money in the
coal business) he threw up his command of an East-coast
collier with a feeling as though he had escaped from the
galleys. After all these years he might have counted on the
fingers of his two hands all the days he had been out of
sight of England. He had never known what it was to be
out of soundings. ‘I have never been further than eighty
fathoms from the land’ was one of his boasts.

Bessie Carvil heard all these things. In front of their
cottage grew an undersized ash; and on summer afternoons
she would bring out a chair on the grass-plot and sit down
with her sewing. Captain Hagberd, in his canvas suit,
leaned on a spade. He dug every day in his front plot. He
turned it over and over several times every year, but was
not going to plant anything ‘just at present’.

To Bessie Carvil he would state more explicitly: ‘Not
till our Harry comes home tomorrow.’ And she had heard
this formula of hope so often that it only awakened the
vaguest pity in her heart for that hopeful old man.

Everything was put off in that way, and everything
was being prepared likewise for tomorrow. There was a
boxful of packets of various flower-seeds to choose from,
for the front garden. ‘He will doubtless let you have your
say about that, my dear,’ Captain Hagberd intimated to
her across the railing.

Miss Bessie’s head remained bowed over her work.
She had heard all this so many times. But now and then
she would rise, lay down her sewing, and come slowly to
the fence. There was a charm in these gentle ravings. He
was determined that his son should not go away again for
the want of a home all ready for him. He had been filling
the other cottage with all sorts of furniture. She imagined
it all new, fresh with varnish, piled up as in a warehouse.
There would be tables wrapped up in sacking: rolls of

Reprint 2025-26



46/KALEIDOSCOPE

carpets thick and vertical, like fragments of columns; the
gleam of white marble tops in the dimness of the drawn
blinds. Captain Hagberd always described his purchases
to her, carefully, as to a person having a legitimate interest
in them. The overgrown yard of his cottage could be laid
over with concrete...after tomorrow.

‘We may just as well do away with the fence. You could
have your drying-line out, quite clear of your flowers.’ He
winked, and she would blush faintly.

This madness that had entered her life through the
kind impulses of her heart had reasonable details. What if
some day his son returned? But she could not even be
quite sure that he ever had a son: and if he existed
anywhere he had been too long away. When Captain
Hagberd got excited in his talk she would steady him by a
pretence of belief, laughing a little to salve her conscience.

Stop and Think

1. What sort of a seaman had Captain Hagberd been?
2. Captain Hagberd constantly hinted at something that

made Bessie blush. What was it?

Only once she had tried pityingly to throw some doubt
on that hope doomed to disappointment, but the effect of
her attempt had scared her very much. All at once over
that man’s face there came an expression of horror and
incredulity, as though he had seen a crack open out in the
firmament.

‘You—you—you don’t think he’s drowned!’
For a moment he seemed to her ready to go out of his

mind, for in his ordinary state she thought him more sane
than people gave him credit for. On that occasion the
violence of the emotion was followed by a most paternal
and complacent recovery.

‘Don’t alarm yourself, my dear,’ he said a little
cunningly, ‘the sea can’t keep him. He does not belong to
it. None of us Hagberds ever did belong to it. Look at me; I
didn’t get drowned. Moreover, he isn’t a sailor at all; and if
he is not a sailor he’s bound to come back. There’s nothing

Reprint 2025-26



47/TOMORROW

to prevent him coming back...’
His eyes began to wander.
‘Tomorrow.’
She never tried again, for fear the man should go out

of his mind on the spot. He depended on her. She seemed
the only sensible person in the town; and he would
congratulate himself frankly before her face on having
secured such a level-headed wife for his son. The rest of
the town, he confided to her once, in a fit of temper, was
certainly queer. The way they looked at you—the way they
talked to you! He had never got on with anyone in the
place. Didn’t like the people. He would not have left his
own country if it had not been clear that his son had taken
a fancy to Colebrook.

She humoured him in silence, listening patiently by
the fence; crocheting with downcast eyes. Blushes came
with difficulty on her dead-white complexion, under the
negligently twisted opulence of mahogany-coloured hair.
Her father was frankly carroty.

She had a full figure; a tired, unrefreshed face. When
Captain Hagberd vaunted the necessity and propriety of a
home and the delights of one’s own fireside, she smiled a
little, with her lips only. Her home delights had been
confined to the nursing of her father during the ten best
years of her life.

A bestial roaring coming out of an upstairs window
would interrupt their talk. She would begin at once to roll
up her crochet-work or fold her sewing, without the slightest
sign of haste. Meanwhile the howls and roars of her name
would go on, making the fishermen strolling upon the sea-
wall on the other side of the road turn their heads towards
the cottages. She would go in slowly at the front door, and
a moment afterwards there would fall a profound silence.
Presently she would reappear, leading by the hand a man,
gross and unwieldy like a hippopotamus, with a bad-
tempered, surly face.

He was a widowed boat-builder, whom blindness had
overtaken years before in the full flush of business. He
behaved to his daughter as if she had been responsible for
its incurable character. He had been heard to bellow at

Reprint 2025-26



48/KALEIDOSCOPE

the top of his voice, as if to defy Heaven, that he did not
care: he had made enough money to have ham and eggs
for his breakfast every morning. He thanked God for it, in
a fiendish tone as though he were cursing.

Captain Hagberd had been so unfavourably impressed
by his tenant that once he told Miss Bessie, ‘He is a very
extravagant fellow, my dear.’

She was knitting that day, finishing a pair of socks for
her father, who expected her to keep up the supply dutifully.
She hated knitting, and, as she was just at the heel part,
she had to keep her eyes on her needles.

‘Of course it isn’t as if he had a son to provide for,’
Captain Hagberd went on a little vacantly. ‘Girls, of course,
don’t require so much—h’m—h’m. They don’t run away from
home, my dear.’

‘No,’ said Miss Bessie, quietly.
Captain Hagberd, amongst the mounds of turned-up

earth, chuckled. With his maritime rig, his weather-beaten
face, his beard of Father Neptune, he resembled a deposed
sea-god who had exchanged the trident for the spade.

‘And he must look upon you as already provided for, in
a manner. That’s the best of it with the girls. The
husbands...’ He winked. Miss Bessie, absorbed in her
knitting, coloured faintly.

‘Bessie! my hat!’ old Carvil bellowed out suddenly. He
had been sitting under the tree mute and motionless, like
an idol of some remarkably monstrous superstition. He
never opened his mouth but to howl for her, at her,
sometimes about her; and then he did not moderate the
terms of his abuse. Her system was never to answer him
at all; and he kept up his shouting till he got attended to—
till she shook him by the arm, or thrust the mouthpiece of
his pipe between his teeth. He was one of the few blind
people who smoke. When he felt the hat being put on his
head he stopped his noise at once. Then he rose, and they
passed together through the gate.

He weighed heavily on her arm. During their slow,
toilful walks she appeared to be dragging with her for a
penance the burden of that infirm bulk. Usually they
crossed the road at once (the cottages stood in the fields

Reprint 2025-26



49/TOMORROW

near the harbour, two hundred yards away from the end of
the street), and for a long, long time they would remain in
view, ascending imperceptibly the flight of wooden steps
that led to the top of the sea-wall. It ran on from east to
west, shutting out the Channel like a neglected railway
embankment, on which no train had ever rolled within
memory of man. Groups of sturdy fishermen would emerge
upon the sky, walk along for a bit, and sink without haste.
Their brown nets, like the cobwebs of gigantic spiders, lay
on the shabby grass of the slope; and looking up from the
end of the street, the people of the town would recognise the
two Carvils, by the creeping slowness of their gait. Captain
Hagberd, pottering aimlessly about his cottages, would raise
his head to see how they got on in their promenade.

Stop and Think

1. What were Bessie’s reactions to old Hagberd’s ravings?
2. What sort of a person was Mr Carvil?

He advertised still in the Sunday papers for Harry
Hagberd. These sheets were read in foreign parts to the
end of the world, he informed Bessie. At the same time he
seemed to think that his son was in England—so near to
Colebrook that he would of course turn up ‘tomorrow’.
Bessie, without committing herself to that opinion in so
many words, argued that in that case the expense of
advertising was unnecessary; Captain Hagberd had better
spend that weekly half-crown on himself. She declared
she did not know what he lived on. Her argumentation
would puzzle him and cast him down for a time. ‘They all
do it,’ he pointed out. There was a whole column devoted
to appeals after missing relatives. He would bring the
newspaper to show her. He and his wife had advertised for
years; only she was an impatient woman. The news from
Colebrook had arrived the very day after her funeral; if
she had not been so impatient she might have been here
now, with no more than one day more to wait. ‘You are not
an impatient woman, my dear.’

Reprint 2025-26



50/KALEIDOSCOPE

‘I’ve no patience with you, sometimes,’ she would say.
If he still advertised for his son he did not offer rewards

for information any more: for, with the muddled lucidity of
a mental derangement, he had reasoned himself into a
conviction as clear as daylight that he had already attained
all that could be expected in that way. What more could he
want? Colebrook was the place, and there was no need to
ask for more. Miss Carvil praised him for his good sense,
and he was soothed by the part she took in his hope, which
had become his delusion; in that idea which blinded his
mind to truth and probability, just as the other old man in
the other cottage had been made blind, by another disease,
to the light and beauty of the world.

But anything he could interpret as a doubt—any
coldness of assent, or even a simple inattention to the
development of his projects of a home with his returned
son and his son’s wife—would irritiate him into flings and
jerks and wicked side glances. He would dash his spade
into the ground and walk to and fro before it. Miss Bessie
called it his tantrums. She shook her finger at him. Then,
when she came out again, after he had parted with her in
anger, he would watch out of the corner of his eyes for the
least sign of encouragement to approach the iron railings
and resume his fatherly and patronising relations.

For all their intimacy, which had lasted some years
now, they had never talked without a fence or a railing
between them. He described to her all the splendours
accumulated for the setting-up of their housekeeping, but
had never invited her to an inspection. No human eye was
to behold them till Harry had his first look. In fact, nobody
had ever been inside his cottage: he did his own housework,
and he guarded his son’s privilege so jealously that the
small objects of domestic use he bought sometimes in the
town were smuggled rapidly across the front garden under
his canvas coat. Then, coming out, he would remark
apologetically, ‘It was only a small kettle, my dear.’

And, if not too tired with her drudgery, or worried
beyond endurance by her father, she would laugh at him
with a blush, and say: ‘That’s all right, Captain Hagberd; I
am not impatient.’

Reprint 2025-26



51/TOMORROW

‘Well, my dear, you haven’t long to wait now,’ he would
answer with a sudden bashfulness, and looking about
uneasily, as though he had suspected that there was
something wrong somewhere.

Every Monday she paid him his rent over the railings.
He clutched the shillings greedily. He grudged every penny
he had to spend on his maintenance, and when he left her
to make his purchases his bearing changed as soon as he
got into the street. Away from the sanction of her pity, he
felt himself exposed without defence. He brushed the walls
with his shoulder. He mistrusted the queerness of the
people: yet, by then, even the town children had left off
calling after him, and the tradesmen served him without a
word. The slightest allusion to his clothing had the power
to puzzle and frighten especially, as if it were something
utterly unwarranted and incomprehensible.

In the autumn, the driving rain drummed on his
sailcloth suit saturated almost to the stiffness of sheet
iron, with its surface flowing with water. When the weather
was too bad, he retreated under the tiny porch, and,
standing close against the door, looked at his spade left
planted in the middle of the yard. The ground was so much
dug up all over, that as the season advanced it turned to a
quagmire. When it froze hard, he was disconsolate. What
would Harry say? And as he could not have so much of
Bessie’s company at that time of year, the roars of old
Carvil, that came muffled through the closed windows,
calling her indoors, exasperated him greatly.

‘Why don’t that extravagant fellow get you a servant?’
he asked impatiently one mild afternoon. She had thrown
something over her head to run out for a while.

‘I don’t know,’ said the pale Bessie, wearily, staring away
with her heavy-lidded, grey, and unexpectant glance. There
were always smudgy shadows under her eyes, and she did
not seem able to see any change or any end to her life.

‘You wait till you get married, my dear,’ said her only
friend, drawing closer to the fence. ‘Harry will get you one.’

His hopeful craze seemed to mock her own want of
hope with so bitter an aptness that in her nervous irritation
she could have screamed at him outright. But she only

Reprint 2025-26



52/KALEIDOSCOPE

said in self-mockery, and speaking to him as though he
had been sane, ‘Why, Captain Hagberd, your son may not
even want to look at me.’

He flung his head back and laughed his throaty affected
cackle of anger.

‘What! That boy? Not want to look at the only sensible
girl for miles around? What do you think I am here for, my
dear—my dear—my dear? What? You wait. You just wait.
You’ll see tomorrow. I’ll soon—’

‘Bessie! Bessie! Bessie!’ howled old Carvil inside.
‘Bessie!—my pipe!’ That fat blind man had given himself
up to a very lust of laziness. He would not lift his hand to
reach for the things she took care to leave at his very
elbow. He would not move a limb; he would not rise from
his chair, he would not put one foot before another in that
parlour (where he knew his way as well as if he had his
sight) without calling her to his side and hanging all his
atrocious weight on her shoulder. He would not eat one
single mouthful of food without her close attendance. He
had made himself helpless beyond his affliction, to enslave
her better. She stood still for a moment, setting her teeth
in the dusk, then turned and walked slowly indoors.

Stop and Think

1. What was the point of similarity between Captain
Hagberd and old Mr Carvil?

2. Why did Bessie sometimes show signs of irritation
and disgust?

Captain Hagberd went back to his spade. The shouting
in Carvil’s cottage stopped, and after a while the window
of the parlour downstairs was lit up. A man coming from
the end of the street with a firm leisurely step passed on,
but seemed to have caught sight of Captain Hagberd,
because he turned back a pace or two. A cold white light
lingered in the western sky. The man leaned over the gate
in an interested manner.

‘You must be Captain Hagberd,’ he said, with easy
assurance.

Reprint 2025-26



53/TOMORROW

The old man spun round, pulling out his spade, startled
by the strange voice.

‘Yes, I am,’ he answered nervously.
The other, smiling straight at him, uttered very slowly:

‘You’ve been advertising for your son, I believe?’
‘My son Harry,’ mumbled Captain Hagberd, off his

guard for once. ‘He’s coming home tomorrow.’
‘The devil he is!’ The stranger marvelled greatly, and

then went on, with only a slight change of tone: ‘You’ve
grown a beard like Father Christmas himself.’

Captain Hagberd drew a little nearer, and leaned
forward over his spade. ‘Go your way’, he said, resentfully
and timidly at the same time, because he was always afraid
of being laughed at. Every mental state, even madness,
has its equilibrium based upon self-esteem. Its disturbance
causes unhappiness: and Captain Hagberd lived amongst
a scheme of settled notions which it pained him to feel
disturbed by people’s grins. Yes, people’s grins were awful.
They hinted at something wrong: but what? He could not
tell; and that stranger was obviously grinning—had come
on purpose to grin. It was bad enough on the streets, but
he had never before been outraged like this.

The stranger, unaware how near he was of having his
head laid open with a spade, said seriously: ‘I am not
trepassing where I stand, am I? I fancy there’s something
wrong about your news. Suppose you let me come in.’

‘You come in!’ murmured old Hagberd, with
inexpressible horror.

‘I could give you some real information about your son—
the very latest tip, if you care to hear.’

‘No,’ shouted Hagberd. He began to pace wildly to and
fro, he shouldered his spade, he gesticulated with his other
arm. ‘Here’s a fellow—a grinning fellow, who says there’s
something wrong. I’ve got more information than you’re
aware of. I’ve all the information I want. I’ve had it for
years—for years—for years—enough to last me till to-
morrow. Let you come in, indeed! What would Harry say?’

Bessie Carvil’s figure appeared in black silhouette on
the parlour window: then, with the sound of an opening

Reprint 2025-26



54/KALEIDOSCOPE

door, flitted out before the other cottage, all black, but
with something white over her head. These two voices
beginning to talk suddenly outside (she had heard them
indoors) had given her such an emotion that she could not
utter a sound.

Captain Hagberd seemed to be trying to find his way
out of a cage. His feet squelched in the puddles left by his
industry. He stumbled in the holes of the ruined grass-
plot. He ran blindly against the fence.

‘Here, steady a bit!’ said the man at the gate, gravely,
stretching his arm over and catching him by the sleeve.
‘Somebody’s been trying to get at you. Hallo! what’s this
rig you’ve got on? Storm canvas, by George!’ He had a big
laugh. ‘Well, you are a character!’

Captain Hagberd jerked himself free, and began to back
away shrinkingly. ‘For the present,’ he muttered, in a
crestfallen tone.

‘What’s the matter with him?’ The stranger addressed
Bessie with the utmost familiarity, in a deliberate,
explanatory tone. ‘I didn’t want to startle the old man’. He
lowered his voice as though he had known her for years. ‘I
dropped into a barber’s on my way, to get a two penny
shave, and they told me there he was something of a
character. The old man has been a character all his life.’

Captain Hagberd, daunted by the allusion to his
clothing, had retreated inside, taking his spade with him;
and the two at the gate, startled by the unexpected
slamming of the door, heard the bolts being shot, the
snapping of the lock, and the echo of an affected gurgling
laugh within.

‘I didn’t want to upset him,’ the man said, after a short
silence. ‘What’s the meaning of all this? He isn’t quite
crazy?’

‘He has been worrying a long time about his lost son,’
said Bessie, in a low, apologetic tone.

‘Well, I am his son.’
‘Harry!’ she cried—and was profoundly silent.
‘Know my name? Friends with the old man, eh?’
‘He’s our landlord,’ Bessie faltered out, catching hold

of the iron railing.

Reprint 2025-26



55/TOMORROW

‘Owns both them rabbit-hutches, does he?’ commented
young Hagberd scornfully: ‘just the thing he would be proud
of. Can you tell me who’s that chap coming tomorrow? You
must know something of it. I tell you, it’s a swindle on the
old man—nothing else.’

She did not answer, helpless before an insurmountable
difficulty, appalled before the necessity, the impossibility
and the dread of an explanation in which she and madness
seemed involved together.

‘Oh—I am so sorry,’ she murmured.
‘What’s the matter?’ he said, with serenity. ‘You needn’t

be afraid of upsetting me. It’s the other fellow that’ll be
upset when he least expects it. I don’t care a hang; but
there will be some fun when he shows his mug tomorrow. I
don’t care that for the old man’s pieces, but right is right.
You shall see me put a head on that coon—whoever he is!’

He had come nearer, and towered above her on the
other side of the railings. He glanced at her hands. He
fancied she was trembling, and it occurred to him that
she had her part perhaps in that little game that was to be
sprung on his old man tomorrow. He had come just in time
to spoil their sport. He was entertained by the idea—
scornful of the baffled plot. But all his life he had been full
of indulgence for all sorts of women’s tricks; she really
was trembling very much; her wrap had slipped off her
head. ‘Poor devil!’ he thought. ‘Never mind about that chap.
I daresay he’ll change his mind before tomorrow. But what
about me? I can’t loaf about the gate till the morning.’

She burst out: ‘It is you—you yourself that he’s waiting
for. It is you who come tomorrow.’

He murmured ‘Oh! It’s me!’ blankly, and they seemed
to become breathless together. Apparently he was pondering
over what he had heard; then, without irritation, but
evidently perplexed, he said: ‘I don’t understand. I hadn’t
written or anything. It’s my chum who saw the paper and
told me—this very morning... Eh? what?’

He bent his ear; she whispered rapidly, and he listened
for a while, muttering the words ‘yes’ and ‘I see’ at times.
Then, ‘But why won’t today do?’ he queried at last.

Reprint 2025-26



56/KALEIDOSCOPE

‘You didn’t understand me!’ she exclaimed impatiently.
The clear streak of light under the clouds died out in the
west. Again he stooped slightly to hear better; and the
deep night buried everything of the whispering woman and
the attentive man, except the familiar contiguity of their
faces, with its air of secrecy and caress.

He squared his shoulders; the broad-brimmed shadow
of a hat sat cavalierly on his head. ‘Awkward, this, eh?’ he
appealed to her. ‘Tomorrow? Well, well! Never heard tell of
anything like this. It’s all tomorrow, then, without any
sort of today, as far as I can see.’

She remained still and mute.
‘And you have been encouraging this funny notion,’ he

said.
‘I never contradicted him.’
‘Why didn’t you?’
‘What for should I?’ she defended herself. ‘It would

only have made him miserable. He would have gone out of
his mind.’

‘His mind!’ he muttered, and heard a short nervous
laugh from her.

‘Where was the harm? Was I to quarrel with the poor
old man? It was easier to half believe it myself.’

‘Aye, aye,’ he meditated intelligently. ‘I suppose the
old chap got around you somehow with his soft talk. You
are good-hearted.’

Her hands moved up in the dark nervously. ‘And it
might have been true. It was true. It has come. Here it is.
This is the tomorrow we have been waiting for.’

She drew a breath, and he said good-humouredly: ‘Aye,
with the door shut. I wouldn’t care if... And you think he
could be brought round to recognise me... Eh? What?...
You could do it? In a week you say? H’m, I daresay you
could—but do you think I could hold out a week in this
dead-alive place? Not me. I want either hard work, or an
all-fired racket, or more space than there is in the whole
of England. I have been in this place, though, once before,
and for more than a week. The old man was advertising for
me then, and a chum I had with me had a notion of getting

Reprint 2025-26



57/TOMORROW

a couple of quid out of him by writing a lot of silly nonsense
in a letter. That lark did not come off, though. We had to
clear out—and none too soon. But this time I’ve a chum
waiting for me in London, and besides...’

Bessie Carvel was breathing quickly.
‘What if 1 tried a knock at the door?’ he suggested.
‘Try,’ she said.
Captain Hagberd’s gate squeaked, and the shadow of

his son moved on, then stopped with another deep laugh
in the throat, like the father’s, only soft and gentle, thrilling
to the woman’s heart, awakening to her ears.

‘He isn’t frisky—is he? I would be afraid to lay hold of
him. The chaps are always telling me I don’t know my own
strength.’

‘He’s the most harmless creature that ever lived,’ she
interrupted.

‘You wouldn’t say so if you had seen him chasing me
upstairs with a hard leather strap,’ he said; ‘I haven’t
forgotten it in sixteen years.’

She got warm from head to foot under another soft
subdued laugh. At the rat-tat-tat of the knocker her heart
flew into her mouth.

‘Hey, dad! Let me in. I am Harry, I am. Straight! Come
back home a day too soon.’

One of the windows upstairs ran up.
‘A grinning information fellow,’ said the voice of old

Hagberd, up in the darkness. ‘Don’t you have anything to
do with him. It will spoil everything.’

She heard Harry Hagberd say, ‘Hallo, dad’, then a
clanging clatter. The window rumbled down, and he stood
before her again.

‘It’s just like old times. Nearly walloped the life out of
me to stop me going away, and now I come back he throws
a confounded shovel at my head to keep me out. It grazed
my shoulder.’

Reprint 2025-26



58/KALEIDOSCOPE

Stop and Think

1. Who was the stranger who met Captain Hagberd?
What was the Captain’s reaction to the meeting?

2. What did young Hagberd think it meant when old
Hagberd said that his son would be coming home
‘tomorrow’?

3. What reasons did Bessie give for encouraging old
Hagberd in his insane hopes?

She shuddered.
‘I wouldn’t care,’ he began, ‘only I spent my last shillings

on the railway fare and my last twopence on a shave—out
of respect for the old man.’

‘Are you really Harry Hagberd?’ she asked swiftly. ‘Can
you prove it?’

‘Can I prove it? Can any one else prove it?’ he said
jovially. ‘Prove with what? What do I want to prove? There
isn’t a single corner in the world, barring England, perhaps,
where you could not find some man, or more likely a
woman, that would remember me for Harry Hagberd. I am
more like Harry Hagberd than any man alive: and I can
prove it to you in a minute, if you will let me step inside
your gate.’

‘Come in,’ she said.
He entered then the front garden of the Carvils. His

tall shadow strode with a swagger; she turned her back on
the window and waited, watching the shape, of which the
footfalls seemed the most material part. The light fell on a
tilted hat; a powerful shoulder, that seemed to cleave the
darkness; on a leg stepping out. He swung about and stood
still, facing the illuminated parlour window at her back,
turning his head from side to side, laughing softly to
himself.

‘Just fancy, for a minute, the old man’s beard stuck
on to my chin. Hey? Now say. I was the very spit of him
from a boy.’

‘It’s true,’ she murmured to herself.
‘And that’s about as far as it goes. He was always one

of your domestic characters. Why, I remember how he used

Reprint 2025-26



59/TOMORROW

to go about looking very sick for three days before he had
to leave home on one of his trips to South Shields for coal.
He had a standing charter from the gas-works. You would
think he was off on a whaling cruise—three years and a
tail. Ha, ha! Not a bit of it. Ten days on the outside. The
Skimmer of the Seas was a smart craft. Fine name, wasn’t
it? Mother’s uncle owned her...’

He interrupted himself, and in a lowered voice, ‘Did
he ever tell you what mother died of?’ he asked.

‘Yes,’ said Miss Bessie, bitterly. ‘From impatience.’
He made no sound for a while; then brusquely: ‘They

were so afraid I would turn out badly that they fairly drove
me away. Mother nagged at me for being idle, and the old
man said he would cut my soul out of my body rather than
let me go to sea. Well, it looked as if he would do it too—so
I went. It looks to me sometimes as if I had been born to
them by a mistake—in that other hutch of a house.’

‘Where ought you to have been born by rights?’ Bessie
Carvil interrupted him defiantly.

‘In the open, upon a beach, on a windy night,’ he said,
quick as lightning. Then he mused slowly. ‘They were
characters, both of them, by George; and the old man keeps
it up well—don’t he? A damned shovel on the—Hark! who’s
that making that row? “Bessie, Bessie.” It’s in your house.’

‘It’s for me,’ she said with indifference.
He stepped aside, out of the streak of light. ‘Your

husband?’ he inquired, with the tone of a man accustomed
to unlawful trysts. ‘Fine voice for a ship’s deck in a
thundering squall.’

‘No; my father. I am not married.’
‘You seem a fine girl, Miss Bessie dear,’ he said at

once.
She turned her face away.
‘Oh, I say,—what’s up? Who’s murdering him?’
‘He wants his tea.’ She faced him, still and tall, with

averted head, with her hands hanging clasped before her.
‘Hadn’t you better go in?’ he suggested, after watching

for a while the nape of her neck, a patch of dazzling white
skin and soft shadow above the sombre line of her

Reprint 2025-26



60/KALEIDOSCOPE

shoulders. Her wrap had slipped down to her elbows. ‘You’ll
have all the town coming out presently. I’ll wait here a bit.’

Her wrap fell to the ground, and he stooped to pick it
up: she had vanished. He threw it over his arm, and
approaching the window squarely he saw a monstrous form
of a fat man in an armchair, an unshaded lamp, the yawning
of an enormous mouth in a big feat face encircled by a
ragged halo of hair,—Miss Bessie’s head and bust. The
shouting stopped; the blind ran down. He lost himself in
thinking how awkward it was. Father mad; no getting into
the house. No money to get back; a hungry chum in London
who would begin to think he had been given the go-by.
‘Damn!’ he muttered. He could break the door in, certainly;
but they would perhaps bundle him into chokey for that
without asking questions—no great matter, only he was
confoundedly afraid of being locked up, even in mistake.
He turned cold at the thought. He stamped his feet on the
sodden grass.

‘What are you?—a sailor?’ said an agitated voice.
She had flitted out, a shadow herself, attracted by the

reckless shadow waiting under the wall of her home.
‘Anything. Enough of a sailor to be worth my salt before

the mast. Came home that way this time.’
‘Where do you come from?’ she asked.
‘Right away from a jolly good spree,’ he said, ‘by the

London train—see? Ough! I hate being shut up in a train. I
don’t mind a house so much.’

‘Ah,’ she said; ‘that’s lucky.’
‘Because in a house you can at any time open the

blamed door and walk away straight before you.’
‘And never come back?’
‘Not for sixteen years at least,’ he laughed. ‘To a rabbit

hutch, and get a confounded old shovel...’
‘A ship is not so very big,’ she taunted.
‘No, but the sea is great.’
She dropped her head, and as if her ears had been

opened to the voices of the world, she heard beyond the
rampart of sea-wall the swell of yesterday’s gale breaking
on the beach with monotonous and solemn vibrations, as
if all the earth had been a tolling bell.

Reprint 2025-26



61/TOMORROW

‘And then, why, a ship’s a ship. You love her and leave
her; and a voyage isn’t a marriage.’ He quoted the sailor’s
saying lightly.

‘It is not a marriage,’ she whispered.
‘I never took a false name, and I’ve never yet told a lie

to a woman. What lie? Why, the lie—. Take me or leave me,
I say: and if you take me, then it is...’ He hummed a snatch
very low, leaning against the wall.

Oh, oh, ho! Rio!...
And fare thee well,
My bonnie young girl,
We’re bound to Rio... Grande.
‘Capstan song,’ he explained. Her teeth chattered.
‘You are cold,’ he said. ‘Here’s that affair of yours I

picked up.’ She felt his hands about her, wrapping her
closely. ‘Hold the ends together in front,’ he commanded.

‘What did you come here for?’ she asked, repressing a
shudder.

‘Five quid,’ he answered promptly. ‘We let our spree go
on a little too long and got hard up.’

‘You’ve been drinking?’ she said.
‘Blind three days; on purpose. I am not given that way—

don’t you think. There’s nothing and nobody that can get
over me unless I like. I can be as steady as a rock. My
chum sees the paper this morning and says he to me: “Go
on, Harry: loving parent. That’s five quid sure.” So we
scraped all our pockets for the fare. Devil of a lark!’

‘You have a hard heart, I am afraid,’ she sighed.
‘What for? For running away? Why! he wanted to make

a lawyer’s clerk of me—just to please himself. Master in
his own house; and my poor mother egged him on—for my
good, I suppose. Well, then—so long; and I went. No, I tell
you: the day I cleared out, I was all black and blue from
his great fondness for me. Ah! he was always a bit of a
character. Look at that shovel, now. Off his chump? Not
much. That’s just exactly like my dad. He wants me here
just to have somebody to order about. However, we two
were hard up; and what’s five quid to him—once in sixteen
hard years?’

Reprint 2025-26



62/KALEIDOSCOPE

‘Oh, but I am sorry for you. Did you never wait to come
back home?’

‘Be a lawyer’s clerk and rot here—in some such place
as this?’ he cried in contempt. ‘What! if the old man set me
up in a home today, I would kick it down about my ears—
or else die there before the third day was out.’

‘And where else is it that you hope to die?’
‘In the bush somewhere; in the sea; on a blamed

mountain-top for choice. At home? Yes! the world’s my
home; but I expect I’ll die in a hospital some day. What of
that? Any place is good enough, as long as I’ve lived; and
I’ve been everything you can think of almost but a tailor or
soldier. I’ve been a boundary rider; I’ve sheared sheep; and
humped my swag; and harpooned a whale. I’ve rigged ships,
and prospected for gold, and skinned dead bullocks,—and
turned my back on more money than the old man would
have scraped in his whole life. Ha, ha!’

He overwhelmed her. She pulled herself together and
managed to utter, ‘Time to rest now.’

He straightened himself up, away from the wall, and
in a severe voice said, ‘Time to go.’

But he did not move. He leaned back again, and
hummed thoughtfully a bar or two of an outlandish tune.

She felt as if she were about to cry. ‘That’s another of
your cruel songs,’ she said.

‘Learned it in Mexico—in Sonora.’ He talked easily. ‘It
is the song of the Gambusinos. You don’t know? The song
of restless men. Nothing could hold them in one place—
not even a woman. You used to meet one of them now and
again, in the old days, on the edge of the gold country,
away north there beyond the Rio Gila. I’ve seen it. A
prospecting engineer in Mazatlan took me along with him
to help look after the waggons. A sailor’s a handy chap to
have about you anyhow. It’s all a desert: cracks in the
earth that you can’t see the bottom of; and mountains—
sheer rocks standing up high like walls and church spires,
only a hundred times bigger. The valleys are full of boulders
and black stones. There’s not a blade of grass to see; and
the sun sets more red over that country than I have seen
it anywhere—blood-red and angry. It is fine.’

Reprint 2025-26



63/TOMORROW

‘You do not want to go back there again?’ she
stammered out.

He laughed a little. ‘No. That’s the blamed gold country.
It gave me the shivers sometimes to look at it—and we
were a big lot of men together, mind; but these Gambusinos
wandered alone. They knew that country before anybody
had ever heard of it. They had a sort of gift for prospecting,
and the fever of it was on them too; and they did not seem
to want the gold very much. They would find some rich
spot, and then turn their backs on it; pick up perhaps a
little—enough for a spree—and then be off again, looking
for more. They never stopped long where there were houses:
they had no wife, no chick, no home, never a chum. You
couldn’t be friends with a Gambusino; they were too
restless—here today, and gone, God knows where, to-
morrow. They told no one of their finds, and there has
never been a Gambusino well off. It was not for the gold
they cared; it was the wandering about looking for it in the
stony country that got into them and wouldn’t let them
rest: so that no woman yet born could hold a Gambusino
for more than a week. That’s what the song says. It’s all
about a pretty girl that tried hard to keep hold of a
Gambusino lover, so that he should bring her lots of gold.
No fear! Off he went, and she never saw him again.’

‘What became of her?’ she breathed out.
‘The song don’t tell. Cried a bit, I daresay. They were

the fellows: kiss and go. But it’s the looking for a thing—a
something... Sometimes I think I am a sort of Gambusino
myself.’

‘No woman can hold you, then, she began in a brazen
voice, which quavered suddenly before the end.

‘No longer than a week,’ he joked, playing upon her
very heartstrings with the gay, tender note of his laugh;
‘and yet I am fond of them all. Anything for a woman of the
right sort. The scrapes they got me into, and the scrapes
they got me out of! I love them at first sight. I’ve fallen in
love with you already, Miss—Bessie’s your name—eh?’

She backed away a little, and with a trembling laugh:
‘You haven’t seen my face yet.’

Reprint 2025-26



64/KALEIDOSCOPE

He bent forward gallantly. ‘A little pale: it suits some.
But you are a fine figure of a girl. Miss Bessie.’

She was all in a flutter. Nobody had ever said so much
to her before.

Stop and Think

1. What makes Bessie convinced that the young man is
indeed Harry?

2. What kind of life had Harry lived after he left home?

His tone changed. ‘I am getting middling hungry,
though. Had no breakfast today. Couldn’t you scare up
some bread from that tea for me, or—’

She was gone already. He had been on the point of
asking her to let him come inside. No matter. Anywhere
would do. Devil of a fix! What would his chum think?

‘I didn’t ask you as a beggar,’ he said jestingly, taking
a piece of bread-and-butter from the plate she held before
him. ‘I asked as a friend. My dad is rich, you know.’

‘He starves himself for your sake.’
‘And I have starved for his whim,’ he said, taking up

another piece.
‘All he has in the world is for you,’ she pleaded.
‘Yes, if I come here to sit on it like a dam’ toad in a

hole. Thank you; and what about the shovel, eh? He always
had a queer way of showing his love.’

‘I could bring him round in a week,’ she suggested
timidly.

He was too hungry to answer her; and, holding the
plate submissively to his hand, she began to whisper up to
him in a quick, panting voice. He listened, amazed, eating
slower and slower, till at last his jaws stopped altogether.
‘That’s his game, is it?’ he said, in a rising tone of scathing
contempt. An ungovernable movement of his arm sent the
plate flying out of her fingers. He shot out a violent curse.

She shrank from him, putting her hand against the
wall.

‘No!’ he raged. ‘He expects! Expects me—for his rotten
money!... Who wants his home? Mad—not he! Don’t you

Reprint 2025-26



65/TOMORROW

think. He wants his own way. He wanted to turn me into a
miserable lawyer’s clerk, and now he wants to make of me
a blamed tame rabbit in a cage. Of me! Of me! His subdued
angry laugh frightened her now.

‘The whole world ain’t a bit too big for me to spread my
elbows in, I can tell you—what’s your name—Bessie—let
alone a dam’ parlour in a hutch. Marry! He wants me to
marry and settle! And as likely as not he has looked out
the girl too—dash my soul! And do you know the Judy,
may I ask?’

She shook all over with noiseless dry sobs; but he was
fuming and fretting too much to notice her distress. He bit
his thumb with rage at the mere idea. A window rattled
up.

‘A grinning, information fellow,’ pronounced old
Hagberd dogmatically, in measured tones. And the sound
of his voice seemed to Bessie to make the night itself mad—
to pour insanity and disaster on the earth. ‘Now I know
what’s wrong with the people here, my dear. Why, of course!
With this mad chap going about. Don’t you have anything
to do with him, Bessie. Bessie, I say!’

They stood as if dumb. The old man fidgeted and
mumbled to himself at the window. Suddenly he cried
piercingly: ‘Bessie—I see you. I’ll tell Harry.’

She made a movement as if to run away, but stopped
and raised her hands to her temples. Young Hagberd,
shadowy and big, stirred no more than a man of bronze.
Over their heads the crazy night whimpered and scolded
in an old man’s voice.

‘Send him away, my dear. He’s only a vagabond. What
you want is a good home of your own. That chap has no
home—he’s not like Harry. He can’t be Harry. Harry is
coming tomorrow. Do you hear? One day more,’ he babbled
more excitedly; ‘never you fear—Harry shall marry you.’

His voice rose very shrill and mad against the regular
deep soughing of the swell coiling heavily about the outer
face of the sea-wall.

Reprint 2025-26



66/KALEIDOSCOPE

Stop and Think

1. What does Bessie tell Harry about his father’s plans
for him?

2. What did Captain Hagberd call out to Bessie from
the window?

‘He will have to. I shall make him, or if not’—he swore
a great oath—‘I’ll cut him off with a shilling tomorrow, and
leave everything to you. I shall. To you. Let him starve.’

The window rattled down.
Harry drew a deep breath, and took one step towards

Bessie. ‘So it’s you—the girl,’ he said, in a lowered voice.
She had not moved, and she remained half turned away
from him, pressing her head in the palms of her hands.
‘My word!’ he continued, with an invisible half-smile on
his lips. ‘I have a great mind to stop...’

Her elbows were trembling violently.
‘For a week,’ he finished without a pause.
She clapped her hands to her face.
He came up quite close, and took hold of her wrists

gently. She felt his breath on her ear.
‘It’s a scrape I am in—this, and it is you that must see

me through.’ He was trying to uncover her face. She
resisted. He let her go then, and stepping back a little,
‘Have you got any money?’ he asked. ‘I must be off now.’

She nodded quickly her shamefaced head, and he
waited, looking away from her, where, trembling all over
and bowing her neck, she tried to find the pocket of her
dress.

‘Here it is!’ she whispered. ‘Oh, go away! go away for
God’s sake! If I had more—more—I would give it all to
forget—to make you forget.’

He extended his hand. ‘No fear! I haven’t forgotten a
single one of you in the world. Some gave me more than
money—but I am a beggar now—and you women always
had to get me out of my scrapes.’

He swaggered up to the parlour window, and in the
dim light filtering through the blind, looked at the coin
lying in his palm. It was a half-sovereign. He slipped it

Reprint 2025-26



67/TOMORROW

into his pocket. She stood a little on one side, with her
head drooping, as if wounded; with her arms hanging
passive by her side, as if dead.

‘You can’t buy me in,’ he said, ‘and you can’t buy yourself
out.’

He set his hat firmly with a little tap, and next moment
she felt herself  lifted up in the powerful embrace of his
arms. Her feet lost the ground; her head hung back; he
showered kisses on her face with a silent and overmastering
ardour, as if in haste to get at her very soul. He kissed her
pale cheeks, her hard forehead, her heavy eyelids, her faded
lips; and the measured blows and sighs of the rising tide
accompanied the enfolding power of his arms, the
overwhelming might of his caresses. It was as if the sea,
breaking down the wall protecting all the homes of the
town, had sent a wave over her head. It passed on; she
staggered backwards, with her shoulders against the wall,
exhausted, as if she had been stranded there after a storm
and a shipwreck.

She opened her eyes after a while; and, listening to
the firm, leisurely footsteps going away with their conquest,
began to gather her skirts, staring all the time before her.
Suddenly she darted through the open gate into the dark
and deserted street.

‘Stop!’ she shouted. ‘Don’t go!’
And listening with an attentive poise of the head, she

could not tell whether it was the beat of the swell or his
fateful tread that seemed to fall cruelly upon her heart.
Presently every sound grew fainter, as though she were
slowly turning into stone. A fear of this awful silence came
to her—worse than the fear of death. She called upon her
ebbing strength for the final appeal:

‘Harry!’
Not even the dying echo of a footstep. Nothing. The

thundering of the surf, the voice of the restless sea itself,
seemed stopped. There was not a sound—no whisper of
life, as though she were alone, and lost in that stony country
of which she had heard, where madmen go looking for gold
and spurn the find.

Reprint 2025-26



68/KALEIDOSCOPE

Captain Hagberd, inside his dark house, had kept on
the alert. A window ran up; and in the silence of the stony
country a voice spoke above her head, high up in the black
air—the voice of madness, lies and despair—the voice of
inextinguishable hope. ‘Is he gone yet—that information
fellow? Do you hear him about, my dear?’

She burst into tears. ‘No! no! no! I don’t hear him any
more,’ she sobbed.

He began to chuckle up there triumphantly. ‘You
frightened him away. Good girl. Now we shall be all right.
Don’t you be impatient, my dear. One day more.’

In the other house old Carvil, wallowing regally in his
arm-chair, with a globe lamp burning by his side on the
table, yelled for her in a fiendish voice: ‘Bessie! Bessie!
You, Bessie!’

She heard him at last, and, as if overcome by fate,
began to totter silently back towards her stuffy little inferno
of a cottage. It had no lofty portal, no terrific inscription of
forfeited hopes—she did not understand wherein she had
sinned.

Captain Hagberd had gradually worked himself into a
state of noisy happiness up there.

‘Go in! Keep quiet!’ she turned upon him tearfully,
from the doorstep below.

He rebelled against her authority in his great joy at
having got rid at last of that ‘something wrong’. It was as if
all the hopeful madness of the world had broken out to
bring terror upon her heart, with the voice of that old man
shouting of his trust in an everlasting tomorrow.

Understanding the Text
1. What is the consistency one finds in the old man’s madness?

2. How does Captain Hagberd prepare for Harry’s homecoming?

3. How did Bessie begin to share Hagberd’s insanity regarding
his son?

4. What were Harry’s reasons for coming to meet old Hagberd?

5. Why does Harry’s return prove to be a disappointment for
Bessie?

Reprint 2025-26



69/TOMORROW

Talking about the Text
Discuss in small groups or pairs

1. ‘Every mental state, even madness, has its equilibrium based
upon self-esteem. Its disturbance causes unhappiness’.

2. Joyce’s ‘Eveline’ and Conrad’s ‘Tomorrow’ are thematically
similar.

Appreciation
1. Comment on the technique used by the author to unfold the

story of Captain Hagberd’s past.

2. Identify instances in the story in which you find streaks of
insanity in people other than Hagberd.  What implications do
they suggest?

Language Work
A. Figures of speech: Allusion

Notice the comparison in the following sentence

With his maritime rig, his weather-beaten face, his beard of
Father Neptune, he resembled a deposed sea-god who had
exchanged the trident for the spade.

In this sentence there is a comparison made between Hagberd
and Neptune, the god of sea in Roman mythology who is shown
with a trident in his hand.

The figure of speech which makes a casual or indirect reference
to a famous historical or literary event or figure is called
allusion.

TASK

Pick out one or two other examples of allusion from the story and
comment briefly on the comparison made.

B. Pronunciation

• Words often have a different stress pattern when their
grammatical function changes. Read the following words

   Verb      Noun

inform infor mation

hesitate hesi tation

Reprint 2025-26



70/KALEIDOSCOPE

TASK

Now complete the columns below and mark the syllable that receives
primary stress.

   Verb   Noun

present ..............

examine .............

............ production

calculate ...............

............... distribution

specialise ................

Suggested Reading
‘An Outpost of Progress’ by Joseph Conrad

Heart of Darkness by Joseph Conrad.

Reprint 2025-26



71/ONE CENTIMETRE
##5##
5
One Centimetre

Bi Shu-min has been serving her country, China, as
a doctor for over twenty years. She also has  a
Master’s degree in literature from the Beijing Teacher’s
College.
Bi Shu-min is one of the best known writers currently
working in China. Her works have been translated
into many languages. She has won innumerable
literary awards both in China and in Taiwan. ‘One

Bi Shu-min Centimetre’ is a fine example of a mature artist
Born 1952 working at the height of her powers.

When Tao Ying rides on the bus alone, quite often she does
not bother to buy a ticket.

Why should she? Without her, the bus would still be
stopping at every stop, a driver and a conductor would
still have to be employed, and the same amount of petrol
used.

Clearly Tao Ying has to be astute. When the bus
conductor looked like the responsible type, she would buy
a ticket as soon as she got on board. But if he appeared to
be casual and careless, she would not dream of paying,
considering it a small punishment for him and a little
saving for herself.

Tao Ying works as a cook in the canteen of a factory.
She spends all day next to an open fire, baking screw-
shaped wheat cakes with sesame butter.

Today she is with her son Xiao Ye. She follows him
onto the bus. As the doors shut her jacket is caught,
ballooning up like a tent behind her. She twists this way
and that, finally wrenching herself free.

Reprint 2025-26



72/KALEIDOSCOPE

‘Mama, tickets!’ Xiao Ye says. Children are often more
conscious of rituals than adults. Without a ticket in his
hand, the ride doesn’t count as a proper ride.

On the peeling paint of the door somebody has painted
the shape of a pale finger. It points at a number: 1.10 m.

Xiao Ye pushed through. His hair looks as fluffy as a
bundle of straw—dry and without lustre. As a rule, Tao
Ying is very careful with her purse, but she has never
skimped on her child’s diet. Nonetheless the goodness in
his food refuses to advance beyond his hairline. As a result
Xiao Ye is healthy and clever, but his hair is a mess.

Tao Ying tries to smooth it down, as if she was brushing
away topsoil to get to a firm foundation. She can feel the
softness of her son’s skull, rubbery and elastic to the touch.
Apparently there is a gap on the top of everyone’s head,
where the two halves meet. If they don’t meet properly, a
person can end up with a permanently gaping mouth. Even
when the hemispheres are a perfect match, it still takes a
while  for them to seal. This is the door to life itself—if it
remains open, the world outside will feel like water, flowing
into the body through this  slit. Every time Tao Ying
happens upon this aperture on her son’s head, she would
be overwhelmed by a sense of responsibility. It was she
who had brought this delicate creature into the world after
all. Although she senses her own insignificance in the
world, that her existence makes no difference to anyone
else, she also realises that to this little boy she is the
centre of the universe and she must try to be the most
perfect, flawless mother possible.

Between Xiao Ye’s round head and the tip of the painted
digit setting out the height requirement for a ticket rests
the beautiful slender fingers of Tao Ying. Since she is in
contact with oil all day, her nails are shiny, glistening like
the smooth curved back of a sea shell.

‘Xiao Ye, you are not quite tall enough, still one
centimetre away,’ she tells him softly. Tao Ying does not
come from a privileged background, and has not read very
many books. But she likes to be gentle and gracious, to set
an example for her son and make a good impression. This

Reprint 2025-26



73/ONE CENTIMETRE

elevates her sense of self-worth and makes her feel like an
aristocrat.

‘Mama! I’m tall enough, I’m tall enough!’ Xiao Ye shouts
at the top of his voice, stamping on the floor as if it were a
tin drum. ‘You told me the last time I could have a ticket
the next time, this is the next time. You don’t keep your
word!’ He looks up at his mother angrily.

Tao Ying looks down at her son. A ticket costs twenty
cents. Twenty cents is not to be scoffed at. It can buy a
cucumber, two tomatoes or, at a reduced price, three
bunches of radishes or enough spinach to last four days.
But Xiao Ye’s face is raised up like a half-open blossom,
waiting to receive his promise from the sun.

‘Get in! Don’t block the entrance! This is not a train,
where you stand from Beijing to Bao Ding. We’re almost at
the next stop...!’ the conductor bellows.

Normally, an outburst like this would certainly have
discouraged Tao Ying from buying a ticket. But today she
says, ‘Two tickets, please.’

The fierce conductor has beady eyes. ‘This child is one
centimetre short of requiring a ticket.’

Xiao Ye shrinks, not just one but several centimetres—
the need for a ticket has all of a sudden become interwoven
with the pride of a small child.

To be able to purchase self-esteem with twenty cents
is something that can only happen in childhood and
certainly no mother can resist an opportunity to make her
son happy.

‘I would like to buy two tickets,’ she says politely.
Xiao Ye holds the two tickets close to his lips and

blows, making a sound like a paper windmill.
They had entered through the central doors of the bus,

but alight towards the front. Here another conductor is
poised to examine their tickets. Tao Ying thinks that this
man can’t be very bright. What mother accompanied by a
child would try to avoid paying the correct fare? However
poor she would never have allowed herself to lose face in
front of her own son.

Reprint 2025-26



74/KALEIDOSCOPE

She hands over the tickets nonchalantly. The conductor
asks: ‘Are you going to claim these back?’ ‘No.’ In fact Tao
Ying ought to have kept the tickets so that the next time
there is a picnic or an outing at work she could use her
bicycle and then claim back the fare with the stubs. Both
she and her husband are blue-collar workers, and any
saving would have been a help. But Xiao Ye is a smart boy,
and might well question her aloud, ‘Mama, can we claim
back tickets even when we are on a private outing?’ In
front of the child, she would never lie.

It is exhausting to follow rules dictated by parental
guide-books all the time, but Tao Ying is determined to be
the ideal mother and create a perfect example for her son
to look up to. She needs really to concentrate—living this
way is not unlike carrying an audience with you wherever
you go. But her actions are full of love and tenderness. For
instance, whenever she eats a watermelon in front of Xiao
Ye, she would take care not to bite too close to the rind
even though she doesn’t actually think there is much
difference between the flesh and the skin. True, the
sweetness gradually diminishes as you work your way
through the red towards the green, but every part of the
melon is equally refreshing. In any case the skin of a melon
is supposed to have a beneficial cooling effect, and is often
used as medicine.

One day, she came across her son eating a melon in
the same manner she did. When Xiao Ye looked up, Tao
Ying could see a white melon seed stuck to his forehead.
She was furious: ‘Who taught you to gnaw at a melon like
that? Are you going to wash your face in it too?’ Xiao Ye
was terrified. The small hand holding the melon began to
tremble, but the big round eyes remained defiant.

Children are the best imitators in the world. From
then on Tao Ying realised that if she wanted her son to
behave as if he were the product of a cultured home, then
she must concentrate and never fail in her own example.
This was very difficult, like ‘shooting down aeroplanes with
a small gun’—but with determination, she knew that
nothing was impossible. With this clear objective in mind,

Reprint 2025-26



75/ONE CENTIMETRE

Tao Ying found her life becoming more focused, more
challenging.

Stop and Think

1. What made Tao Ying decide whether to buy a ticket
or not when she rode a bus alone?

2. Why did she insist on buying tickets both for herself
and her son that day?

Today she is taking Xiao Ye to visit a big temple. He
has never seen the Buddha before. Tao Ying is not a believer
and she does not intend to ask him to kow-tow. That is
superstition, she knows.

The tickets cost five dollars a piece—these days even
temples are run like businesses. Tao Ying’s ticket was a
gift from Lao Chiang, who worked at the meat counter. The
ticket was valid for a month, and today was the last day.
Lao Chiang was one of those people who seemed to know
everybody. Occasionally he would produce a battered
coverless month-old magazine and say: ‘Seen this before?
This is called the Big Reference, not meant for the eyes of
the common people.’ Tao Ying had never seen anything
like this before and wondered how such a small rag, smaller
even than a regular newspaper, could be called a Big
Reference. She asked Lao Chiang but he seemed confused.
He said everybody called it that—perhaps if you were to
take out the pages and laid them flat they would end up
bigger than a normal newspaper. It seemed to make sense.
Studying this publication written in large print, Tao Ying
could see that it was full of speculation about the war in
the Middle East. Foremost on everyone’s mind seemed to
be whether the export of dates from Iraq to China would
continue as it did in the sixties during the famine. In any
case, Tao Ying was full of admiration for Lao Chiang. In
return for her indiscriminate respect, Lao Chiang decided
to reward her with a ticket for the temple. ‘Is there just
the one?’ Tao asked, not without gratitude but with some
uncertainty. ‘Forget your husband, take your son and open
his eyes! Children under 110 centimeters do not need a

Reprint 2025-26



76/KALEIDOSCOPE

ticket. If you don’t want to go, sell it at the door and you’ll
earn enough to buy a couple of watermelons!’ Lao Chiang
had always been a practical man.

Tao Ying decided to take the day off and go on an outing
with Xiao Ye.

It is rare to find such a large patch of grass in the
middle of the city. Even before they got there, there was
something refreshing, something green in the air, as if
they were approaching a valley, or a waterfall. Xiao Ye
snatches the ticket from his mother’s hand, puts it between
his lips, and flies towards the gilded gates of the temple. A
little animal rushing to quench his thirst.

Tao Ying suddenly feels a little sad. Is the mere
attraction of a temple enough for Xiao Ye to abandon his
mother? But almost immediately she banishes the thought—
hasn’t she brought her son here today to make him happy?

The guard at the gate is a young man dressed in a red
top and black trousers. Tao Ying feels somehow that he
ought to have been in yellow. This uniform makes him
look somewhat like a waiter.

Xiao Ye knows exactly what he has to do. Moving
amongst the crowd, he seems like a tiny drop of water in
the current of a large river.

The young man takes the ticket from his mouth,
plucking a leaf from a spring branch.

Tao Ying’s gaze softly envelopes her son, a strand of
silk unwinding towards him, following his every gesture.

‘Ticket.’ The youth in red bars her way with one arm,
his voice as pithy as if he was spitting out a date stone.

Tao Ying points at her son with infinite tenderness.
She feels that everybody should see how lovely he is.

‘I am asking for your ticket.’ The red youth does not
budge.

‘Didn’t the child just give it to you?’ Tao Ying’s voice is
peaceful. This boy is too young, years away from being a
father, she thinks. Tao Ying is not working today and is in
a really good mood. She is happy to be patient.

‘That was his ticket, now I need to see yours.’ The
youth remains unmoved.

Reprint 2025-26



77/ONE CENTIMETRE

Tao Ying has to pause for a moment before it sinks
in—there are two of them and they need a ticket each.

‘I thought that children were exempt?’ She is confused.
‘Mama, hurry up!’ Xiao Ye shouts to her from inside

the doors.
‘Mama is coming!’ Tao Ying shouts back. A crowd is

beginning to gather, so many fishes swarming towards a
bright light.

Tao Ying starts to panic. She wants this fracas to end,
her child is waiting for her.

‘Who told you he doesn’t need a ticket?’ The guard tilts
his head—the more onlookers the better.

‘It says so on the back of the ticket.’
‘Exactly what does it say?’ This boy is obviously not a

professional.
‘It says that children under 110 centimetres do not

have to pay.’ Tao Ying is full of confidence. She moves to
pick up one of the tickets from a box next to the guard and
reads out what is printed on the back for all to hear.

‘Stop right there!’ The youth has turned nasty. Tao
Ying realises she should not have touched the box and
quickly withdraws her hand.

‘So you are familiar with the rules and regulations are
you?’ Now the young man addresses her with the formal
‘you’. Tao Ying detects the sarcasm in his tone but she
simply nods.

‘Well, your son is over 110 centimetres,’ he says with
certainty.

‘No he isn’t.’ Tao Ying is still smiling.
Everybody begins to look at the mother with suspicion.
‘He just ran past the mark. I saw it clearly.’ The guard

is equally firm, pointing at a red line on the wall which
looks like an earthworm inching across the road after a
rainstorm.

‘Mama, why are you taking so long? I thought I had
lost you!’ Xiao Ye shouts to her affectionately. He runs
towards his mother, as if she was one of his favourite toys.

The crowd titters. Good, they think, here is proof, the
whole matter can be cleared up at once.

Reprint 2025-26



78/KALEIDOSCOPE

The youth is getting a little nervous. He is just doing
his job. He is certain he is right. But this woman seems
very confident, perhaps that would be awful...

Tao Ying remains calm. In fact, she feels a little smug.
Her son loves excitement. This is turning into something
of an event so it is bound to delight him.

‘Come over here,’ the youth commands.
The crowd holds its breath.
Xiao Ye looks at his mother. Tao Ying gives him a little

nod. He walks over to the guard graciously, coughs a little,
adjusts his jacket. In front of the gaze of the crowd, Xiao
Ye is every inch the hero as he approaches the earthworm.

Then—the crowd looks, and sees—the worm comes to
Xiao Ye’s ear.

How is this possible?
Tao Ying is by his side in two paces. The flat of her

hand lands heavily on the little boy’s head, making a sound
as crisp as a ping-pong ball popping underfoot.

Xiao Ye stares at his mother. He is not crying. He is
shocked by the pain. He has never been hit before.

The crowd draws its breath.
‘Punishing a child is one thing, hitting him on the

head is totally unacceptable!’
‘What a way for a mother to behave! So what if you

have to buy another ticket? This is a disgrace, hitting a
child to cover up your own mistake!’

‘She can’t be his natural mother...’
Everybody has an opinion.
Tao Ying is feeling a little agitated now. She had not

meant to hit Xiao Ye. She meant to smooth down his hair,
But she realises that even if Xiao Ye were bald at this
instant, he would still be towering above the worm on the
wall.

‘Xiao Ye, don’t stand on tip-toe!’ Tao Ying’s voice is
severe.

‘Mama, I’m not...’ Xiao Ye begins to cry.
It’s true. He isn’t. The worm crawls somewhere next to

his brow.
The guard stretches himself lazily. His vision is sharp,

Reprint 2025-26



79/ONE CENTIMETRE

he has caught quite a few people who had tried to get
through without paying. ‘Go get a ticket!’ he screams at
Tao Ying. All pretence of courtesy has by now been eaten
up by the worm.

‘But my son is less than one meter ten!’ Tao Ying insists
even though she realises she stands alone.

‘Everyone who tries to escape paying always says the
same thing. Do you think these people are going to believe
you, or are they going to believe me? This is a universally
accepted measurement. The International Standard Ruler
is in Paris, made of pure platinum. Did you know that?’

Tao is flummoxed. All she knows is that to make a
dress she needs two metres eighty centimetres, she does
not know where the International Ruler is kept. She is
only astonished at the power of the Buddha which can
make her son grow several centimetres within minutes!

‘But we were on the bus just now and he wasn’t as
tall...’

‘No doubt when he was born he wasn’t as tall either!’
the youth sneers, chilling the air.

Reprint 2025-26



80/KALEIDOSCOPE

Standing in the middle of the jeering crowd, Tao Ying’s
face has turned as white as her ticket.

‘Mama, what is happening?’ Xiao Ye comes away from
the earthworm to hold his mother’s frozen hand with his
own little warm one.

‘It’s nothing. Mama has forgotten to buy a ticket for
you.’ Tao Ying can barely speak.

‘Forgotten? That’s a nice way of putting it! Why don’t
you forget you have a son as well?’ The youth will not
forgive her calm confidence of a moment ago.

‘What more do you want?’ Tao Ying’s temper rises. In
front of her child, she must preserve her dignity.

‘You have a nerve! This is not to do with what I want,
clearly you must apologise! God knows how you had
managed to get hold of a complimentary ticket in the first
place. To get in free is not enough, now you want to sneak
in an extra person. Have you no shame? Don’t think you
can get away with this, go, get yourself a valid ticket!’ The
youth is now leaning on the wall, facing the crowd as if he
is pronouncing an edict from on high.

Tao Ying’s hands are trembling like the strings on a
pei-pa. What should she do? Should she argue with him?
She is not afraid of a good fight but she doesn’t want her
child to be witness to such a scene. For the sake of Xiao
Ye, she will swallow her pride.

‘Mama is going to buy a ticket. You wait here, don’t
run off.’ Tao Ying tries to smile. This outing is such a rare
occasion, whatever happens she mustn’t spoil the mood.
She is determined to make everything all right.

‘Mama, did you really not buy a ticket?’ Xiao Ye looks
at her, full of surprise and bewilderment. The expression
on her child’s face frightens her.

She cannot buy this ticket today! If she went ahead,
she would never be able to explain herself to her son.

‘Let’s go!’ She gives Xiao Ye a yank. Thankfully the
child has strong bones, or his arm might have fallen off.

‘Let’s go and play in the park.’ Tao Ying wants her son
to be happy, but the little boy has fallen silent, sullen.
Xiao Ye has suddenly grown up.

Reprint 2025-26



81/ONE CENTIMETRE

Stop and Think

1. Did Tao Ying really intend to cheat at the temple?
2.  Why did Tao Ying change her intention to buy another

ticket?

As they walk past an ice-cream seller, Xiao Ye says,
‘Mama, give me money!’

Taking the money, Xiao Ye runs towards an old woman
behind the stall and says to her: ‘Please measure me!’ It is
only then that Tao Ying notices the old lady sitting next to
a pair of scales for measuring weight and height.

The old woman extends with difficulty the measuring
pole, pulling it out centimetre by centimetre.

She strains to make out the numbers: ‘One metre
eleven.’

Tao Ying begins to wonder if she has encountered a
ghost or is her son beginning to resemble a shoot of
bamboo, growing every time you look at him?

Something moist begins to glisten in Xiao Ye’s eyes.
Leaving his mother behind and without a backward glance,
he starts to run away.  He trips. One moment he is in the
air, taking flight like a bird, another and he has dropped
to the ground with a heavy thud.  Tao Ying rushes over to
lend a hand but just as she is about to reach him Xiao Ye
has picked himself up and is off again. Tao Ying stops in
her tracks. If she gives chase Xiao Ye will only keep falling.
Watching her son’s vanishing silhouette, her heart begins
to break: Xiao Ye, aren’t you going to look back at your
mother?

Xiao Ye runs for a long time and eventually comes to a
halt. He throws a quick glance backwards to find his
mother, but the moment he can see her, he takes off once
more...

Tao Ying finds the whole incident incomprehensible.
She wanders back to the old woman and asks politely:
‘Excuse me, these scales you have...’

‘My scales are here to make you happy! Don’t you want
your son to grow tall? Every mother wants her sons to

Reprint 2025-26



82/KALEIDOSCOPE

shoot up, but don’t forget when he is tall, that means you’ll
be old! Mine are flattering scales,’ the old woman explains
kindly, but Tao Ying remains baffled.

‘You see my scales are old and not very accurate and
they make people seem lighter than they really are. I have
also adjusted it to make them seem taller. These days it is
fashionable to be long and lean—mine are fitness scales!’
The old woman might be kind, but she is not without
cunning.

So that is the reason! Xiao Ye should have heard this
speech! But he is a long way away and in any case would
he have understood the convoluted logic?

Xiao Ye still looks suspicious, as if mother has turned
into a big bad wolf, ready to eat him up. Later when they
are back at home, Tao Ying takes out her own tape measure
and insists on measuring him again.

‘I don’t want to! Everybody says I am tall enough except
you. It’s because you don’t want to buy me a ticket, don’t
think I don’t know. If you measure me I am bound to get
shorter again. I don’t trust you! I don’t trust you!’

The yellow tape in Tao Ying’s hands has turned into a
poisonous viper.

Stop and Think

1. Were the old lady’s scales a reliable measure of height
and weight? What convoluted logic were her
measurements based on?

2. What was the conflict between the mother and son?

***
‘Chef! Your cakes look as if they are wearing

camouflage uniforms, all black and brown!’ a customer
queuing in front of her counter shouts out.

The cakes are ruined. They are full of burnt marks,
and look like tiny terrapins,

Sorry sorry sorry.
Tao Ying feels very guilty. She is usually very

conscientious in her work, but these couple of days she
often finds herself distracted.

Reprint 2025-26



83/ONE CENTIMETRE

She must rescue the situation! At night, after Xiao Ye
has gone to sleep, Tao Ying straightens his little legs so
that he is lying as flat as a piece of newly shrunken fabric.
Tao Ying then stretches her tape from the soles of his feet
to the top of his head—one metre nine centimetres.

She decides to write a letter to the administrators at
the temple.

She picks up her brush but suddenly realises that
this is harder than she thinks! Seeing her deep in thought
with knitted brows, her husband says, ‘So what do you
imagine might happen even if you wrote to them?’

He is right, she doesn’t know if anything would come
of it. But in order to melt the ice in her son’s eyes, she
must do something.

At last the letter is done. There is a man in the factory
nicknamed ‘the Writer’. People say he has had some small
articles published at the back of a news rag once. Tao Ying
finds him and respectfully offers up her literary work.

‘This sounds like an official communication. Not lively
enough, not moving.’ The Writer traces the letter with his
nicotine-stained fingers.

Tao Ying doesn’t know what an official communication
is but she detects a tone of dissatisfaction in the scholar’s
voice. She looks at the lines he is pointing to, and nods in
agreement.

‘What you need to do is this. You must open with a
strong and righteous claim, fawned by a passage of stunning
originality so that your work stands out and grabs the
attention of the editor. This would make him pick it out of
a large pile on his desk. It has to catch his eyes like a
blinding light, an apple in a mound of potatoes. But most
important of all, your letter must touch his heart. Have
you heard of the saying, grieving soldiers always win?’

Tao Ying keeps nodding.
The Writer is encouraged to continue: ‘Let us look at

the opening paragraph—it should go something like this:
‘‘The power of the Buddha is surely infinite! The foot of a
five-year-old boy has scarcely touched the threshold of the
temple and he has grown two centemetres; but alas, the
power of the Buddha is finite after all—on his return home

Reprint 2025-26



84/KALEIDOSCOPE

the boy shrinks back to his original size...’’ I know this is
not yet perfect, but have a think about it along these lines...’

Tao Ying tries to memorise the words of the Writer, but
she finds it hard to recall all of it. Back home she makes a
few corrections as best she can, and sends out the letter.

***
The Writer comes by her stall at lunch-time. Tao Ying’s

face is framed in a small window where she is collecting
vouchers. She looks like a photograph, staring out at the
camera with a sombre expression.

‘Please wait a moment,’ and she disappears behind
the frame.

The Writer suspects the cakes are burnt again. Perhaps
Tao Ying has gone to find a few which are less burnt than
others, to thank him for pointing her in the right direction.

‘This is for you, with extra sugar and sesame,’ Tao
Ying says shyly.

This is the greatest gift a baker could offer a friend as
a token of gratitude.

***
Then comes the long wait.
Tao Ying looks through the newspapers every day,

reading everything from cover to cover including small
classified advertisements for videos. In the meantime she
would listen to the radio, imagining that one morning she
will hear her own letter read out by one of those
announcers with a beautiful voice. Afterwards she would
go down to the post office, in case the administrative
department of the temple has replied to her letter,
apologising for their misdeed...

She has imagined a hundred different scenarios, but
not what actually happens.

The days have been like the white flour she works
with, one very much like another. Xiao Ye appears to have
recovered from the ordeal but Tao Ying firmly believes that
he has not really forgotten.

Finally, one day, she hears a question, ‘Which way is
it to comrade Tao’s home?’

Reprint 2025-26



85/ONE CENTIMETRE

‘I know, I’ll take you.’ Xiao Ye excitedly shows two elderly
gentlemen in uniform through the front door. ‘Mama, we
have visitors!’

Tao Ying is doing the laundry, immersed in soap up to
her armpits.

‘We are from the administrative office at the temple.
The local newspaper has forwarded your letter to us and
we have come to ascertain the truth.’

Tao Ying is very nervous, and somewhat depressed.
Chiefly because her house is very messy, and she has not
had the time to tidy up. If they think that she is prone to
laziness they might not believe her.

‘Xiao Ye, why don’t you go out to play?’ In Tao Ying’s
fantasies, Xiao Ye would be in the room to witness the
revelation of the truth. Now that the moment has finally
arrived, she feels uncomfortable having him there. She
cannot predict what will happen. These are after all the
people who employed the youth in red, so how reasonable
can they be?

The younger of the two speaks. ‘We have investigated
the matter with the party concerned, and he insisted he
was in the right. Don’t tell the boy to leave, we want to
measure him.’

Xiao Ye obeys and stands next to the wall. The white
of the wall looks like a virgin canvas and Xiao Ye a painting
filling up the space. He leans tightly against the wall as if
the act of measuring his height has once again stirred up
some terrifying memory in the recesses of his mind.

The men are very serious. First of all they draw a bold
line across the wall from the top of Xiao Ye’s head. Then
they take out a metallic tape and take the measurement
from the line to the floor. The metal of the tape glistens
like a flowing stream in sunlight.

Tao Ying regains her calm.
‘What does it say?’
‘One metre ten, just so,’ the younger man answers.
‘This is not just so. There was a delay of one month

and nine days before you came. A month ago he wasn’t
this tall.’

Reprint 2025-26



86/KALEIDOSCOPE

The two officials look at each other. This is a statement
they cannot refute.

They produce a five-dollar bill from a pocket. The note
pokes out of an envelope. They have evidently come
prepared. Before they left the temple, they must have
checked the height of the earthworm, and realised it was
not drawn accurately.

‘The other day you and your son were unable to enter.
This is a small token to redress the situation.’ This time it
is the elder of the two gentlemen who speaks. His
demeanour is kind, so he must be the more senior of the
two.

Tao Ying remains still. That day’s happiness can never
be bought again.

‘If you don’t want the money, here are two tickets. You
and your son are welcome to visit the temple any time.’
The younger man is even more polite.

This is a tempting proposition indeed, but Tao Ying
shakes her head. To her, to her son, that place will always
be associated with unhappy memories now.

‘So which would you prefer,’ both men ask in unison.
In fact Tao Ying is asking herself the same question.

She is gracious by nature—if the youth in red had come in
person to apologise today, she would not have made him
feel awkward.

So what is it that she wants?
She shoves Xiao Ye in front of the two elderly officials.
‘Say Grandpa,’ she tells him.
‘Grandpa.’ Xiao Ye sounds infinitely sweet.
‘Dear Leaders, please take back the money, and the

tickets. Kindly do not punish the guard on duty, he was
only doing his job...’

The two officials are puzzled.
Tao Ying nudges Xiao Ye closer: ‘Gentlemen, would

you be so kind as to explain to my son exactly what
happened on that day. Please tell him that his mother has
not done anything wrong...’

Reprint 2025-26



87/ONE CENTIMETRE

Understanding the Text
1. How did Tao Ying’s son influence the way she led her life?

2. Pick out instances from the story to show that official rules are
often arbitrary.

3. Tao Ying was very careful about spending money. What were
her reasons for refusing the compensation offered by the temple
officials?

4. Why was her final vindication important to Tao Ying?

Talking about the Text
Discuss the following in pairs or in small groups

1. The way a child looks at the world is very different from that of
an adult.

2. There is always a gap between what we really are and what we
wish to appear to be to others.

Appreciation
1. Comment on the significance of the first sentence of the story

to its theme.

2. Would  you describe the author’s portrayal of Tao Ying’s
character in the story as sympathetic, critical or realistic?

3. Identify the episodes that bring out the ambivalent attitude to
ethics commonly seen in human life?

4. How effectively does the narrative technique adopted in this
story illustrate ‘unity of thought’?

Language Work
A. Figures of Speech

a. Simile

Notice the underlined phrases in the following sentences

(i) As the doors shut her jacket is caught, ballooning up like
a tent behind her.

The comparison here is between the ballooning of the jacket
and a tent made explicit by the use of the conjunction,
‘like’.

(ii) The white of the wall looks like a virgin canvas and Xiao Ye
a painting filling up the space.

Reprint 2025-26



88/KALEIDOSCOPE

The comparison in (ii) is between the whiteness of the wall and
a virgin canvas made explicit by the use of ‘like’. In the second
‘like’ is understood. Xiao Ye is like a painting…

Such explicit comparisons are called similes.

b. Metaphor

Sometimes comparisons are made by the application of words
or phrases to a concept that they do not literally denote.

An example of this is

But in order to melt the ice in her son’s eyes, she must do
something.

Here the ice stands for the coldness and distance in her son’s
eyes and how she wishes to make him come closer to her.

The comparison of a mental attitude to ice is not explicitly
emphasised but is understood. Similes and metaphors add to
the richness of language and help to make the reader visualise
more vividly the thoughts of the author.

TASK

Pick out examples of simile and metaphor from the story and state the
two elements or concepts that are compared and the manner of
comparison.

B. Pronunciation

Look at the word ‘object’

We can see that

(i) It is a two-syllable word: ob - ject

(ii) It can be used as both a noun and a verb.

Examples

(i) Place the object on the table. (noun)

[Pronounce ob as in bob]

(ii) I ob ject, your honour. (verb)

[Pronounce ob as in hub]

• The stress and the way the word is pronounced change
accordingly.

• You will notice that, when used as a noun, the word carries
the stress on the first syllable; when used as a verb, the
stress is received on the second syllable.

• Also, the way you pronounce the initial syllable would
change.

Reprint 2025-26



89/ONE CENTIMETRE

TASK

The following words can be used as both a noun and a verb

conduct protest permit
              progress                  desert

• Where would the stress fall? Mark the stress when the word is
used

(i) as a noun

(ii) as a verb

• Is there a change in the pronunciation of the first syllable? Form
words that rhyme with the pronunciation of the first syllable, as
in the example of ‘object’ given above.

Suggested Reading
The Vintage Book of Contemporary Chinese Fiction ed. by Carolyn
Choa and David Su Li-Qun

This Kind of Woman: Ten Stories by Japanese Women Writers
1960-1976. ed. by Yukiko Tanaka and Elizabeth Hansen.

Reprint 2025-26



90/KALEIDOSCOPE

Poetry

INTRODUCTION

A poem is a composition in verse, usually
characterised by concentrated and
heightened language in which words are
chosen for their sound and suggestive power
as well as for their meaning, and using
techniques such as rhythm and metre. To
read and hear good poetry is to appreciate the
subtleties of cadence and rhythm, the variety
of pace and pattern and all that goes to make
up the music of poetry.

Every poem that we read adds to, in some
degree, our total conception of poetry.

Of the eight poets in this selection, four are
from the classical tradition: Donne, Milton,
Blake and Coleridge. The other four are
closer to contemporary times: Yeats,
A.K.Ramanujan, Emily Dickinson and
Kamala Das.

Reprint 2025-26

##6##

1
A Lecture Upon the Shadow

John Donne was representative of the
metaphysical poets of his time. He set the
metaphysical mode by vibrancy of language
and startling imagery, and a preference for
a diction modelled on direct utterances. He
was brought up as a Roman Catholic (later
he converted to Anglicanism), and was Dean
of St. Paul’s Church till his death.
The total effect of a metaphysical poem at its
best is to startle the reader into seeing and
knowing what he has not really noticed or
thought about before. Like all Donne’s poetry
this poem too reflects an emphasis on the
intellect and wit as against feeling and John Donne
emotion. 1572-1631

Stand still and I will read to thee
A Lecture, Love, in loves philosophy,
   These three houres that we have spent,
   Walking here, Two shadowes went
Along with us, which we our selves produc’d;
But, now the Sunne is just above our head,
   We doe those shadowes tread;
   And to brave clearnesse all things are reduc’d.
So whilst our infant loves did grow,
Disguises did, and shadowes, flow,
From us, and our cares; but now ’tis not so.

That love hath not attain’d the high’st degree,
Which is still diligent lest others see.
Except our loves at this noone stay,

Reprint 2025-26



92/KALEIDOSCOPE

We shall new shadowes make the other way.
   As the first were made to blinde
   Others; these which come behinde
Will worke upon our selves, and blind our eyes.
If our loves faint, and westwardly decline;

   To me thou, falsely thine;
   And I to thee mine actions shall disguise.
The morning shadowes were away,
But these grow longer all the day,
But oh, loves day is short, if love decay.

Love is a growing, or full constant light;
And his first minute, after noone, is night.

Understanding the Poem
1. How do the shadows before noon differ from the shadows after

noon? What do the two kinds of shadow represent?

2. Love is described as light. What makes the poet talk about
shadows?

3. Comment on the use of the image of the shadows for the idea
that the poet wants to convey.

4. The poet seems to be addressing his beloved in the poem. What
is the message he wishes to convey to her?

5. Instead of  ‘A Lecture Upon Love’ the poet calls the poem ‘A
Lecture Upon the Shadow’. What is the effect that this has on
our reading of the poem?

Reprint 2025-26



93/A LECTURE UPON THE SHADOW

Language Work
1. Notice the spelling of the following words

houres shadowes Sunne
noone clearnesse behinde

The ‘e’ that was used in Donne’s period got dropped from English
orthography later. Pick out the other words in the poem that
have this peculiar feature.

2. Take note also that the apostrophe is not used for indicating
the possessive form: loves philosophy.

3. Examples from other poems from this period:

• How neatly doe we give one onely name

• To parents issue and the sunnes bright starre!

Try this out
Notice the adjectives in phrases such as ‘infant loves’ and
‘brave clearnesse’. What is the meaning of these adjectives

(i) in isolation

(ii) as part of these phrases.

Suggested Reading

‘Go and Catch a Falling Star’ by John Donne

‘The Flea’ by John Donne.

Reprint 2025-26



94/KALEIDOSCOPE
##7##
2
Poems by Milton

John Milton began writing poetry at the age of
ten. After finishing his formal education at
Cambridge, he read almost everything available
in Latin, Greek, Italian and English. He was
appointed Latin Secretary where he worked
so hard that eyestrain, from years of late night
reading, caused him to become totally blind at
the age of forty- five. In the final years of his
life he wrote (through dictation) Paradise Lost John Milton
and Paradise Regained. 1608-1674

I

On Time

Fly envious Time, till thou run out thy race,
Call on the lazy leaden-stepping hours,
Whose speed is but the heavy Plummets pace;
And glut thy self with what thy womb devours,
Which is no more than what is false and vain,
And merely mortal dross;
So little is our loss,
So little is thy gain.
For when as each thing bad thou hast entomb’d,
And last of all, thy greedy self consum’d,
Then long Eternity shall greet our bliss
With an individual kiss;
And Joy shall overtake us as a flood,
When every thing that is sincerely good
And perfectly divine,
With Truth, and Peace, and Love shall ever shine

Reprint 2025-26



95/POEMS BY MILTON

About the supreme Throne
Of him, t’whose happy-making sight alone,
When once our heav’nly guided soul shall clime,
Then all this Earthy grossnes quit,
Attir’d with Stars, we shall for ever sit,
Triumphing over Death, and Chance, and thee O Time.

NOTES

Envious Time: According to ancient mythology Cronos devoured
each of his children at birth.

Plummets: A lead weight whose slow mechanism activates the
ticking mechanism in a clock.

Understanding the Poem
1. Why has the poet pitted the flight of Time against the ‘lazy

leaden-stepping hours’ and ‘the heavy Plummets pace’?

2. What are the things associated with the temporal and what
are associated with the eternal?

3. What guides human souls towards divinity? Who is the final
winner in the race against Time?

II
On Shakespear.* 1630

What needs my Shakespear for his honour’d Bones,
The labour of an age in piled Stones,
Or that his hallow’d reliques  should be hid
Under a Star-ypointing Pyramid?
Dear son of memory, great heir of Fame,
What need’st thou such weak witness of thy name?
Thou in our wonder and astonishment
Hast built thy self a live-long Monument.
For whilst to th’shame of slow endeavouring art,
Thy easie numbers flow, and that each heart
Hath from the leaves of thy unvalu’d Book,
Those Delphic lines with deep impression took,
Then thou our fancy of it self bereaving

Reprint 2025-26



96/KALEIDOSCOPE

Dost make us Marble with too much conceaving;
And so Sepulcher’d in such pomp dost lie,
That Kings for such a Tomb would wish to die.

*Notice the spelling of ‘Shakespear’ and of the words ‘easie’,
‘conceaving’.

Understanding the Poem
1. Why does Milton feel it is not necessary to put up a monument

in stone for Shakespeare?

2. What does the ‘weak witness of thy name’ refer to?

3. How does Milton describe Shakespeare as the source of
inspiration for all succeeding generations of poets?

4. What is the best tribute that posterity has bestowed on
Shakespeare?

Language Study

Etymology is the study of the history of linguistic change. When
applied to individual words, it is an account of (i) the history of
a word (ii) the derivation of a word.

The dictionary meaning of a word is followed by notes on its
origin.

For the word ‘entomb’d’ the information we get is: [late ME
entoumbe(n)  MF entombe(r)]. This means that

• The word is found in late Middle English

• The word is of French origin and is found in use from 1578

• Also, about 30 per cent of the words in English are of French
origin. Borrowings from French reached its height after the
Norman Conquest (1066)—between 1250 and 1400.

Suggested Reading
‘On his Blindness’ by John Milton.

Reprint 2025-26

##8##

3
Poems by Blake

William Blake was a poet, painter and engraver.
He abhorred the rationalism and materialism of
his times. What he saw and painted were human
beings beset with evil, yet striving for the divine
within them.
Blake’s lyrics appeared in two sets of volumes:
Songs of Innocence (from which The Divine Image
has been chosen) and Songs of Experience (from
which The Human Abstract has been taken)
representing the two contrary states of the human

William Blake soul. Most of the poems in the first volume have
1757-1827 counterparts in the second.

I
The Divine Image

To Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love
All pray in their distress;
And to these virtues of delight
Return their thankfulness.

For Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love
Is God our father dear,
And Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love
Is Man, his child and care.

For Mercy has a human heart,
Pity a human face,
And Love, the human form divine,
And Peace, the human dress.

Reprint 2025-26



98/KALEIDOSCOPE

Reprint 2025-26



99/POEMS BY BLAKE

Then every man, of every clime,
That prays in his distress,
Prays to the human form divine,
Love, Mercy, Pity, Peace.

And all must love the human form,
In heathen, turk, or jew;
Where Mercy, Love, and Pity dwell
There God is dwelling too.

II
The Human Abstract

Pity would be no more
If we did not make somebody Poor;
And Mercy no more could be
If all were as happy as we.

And mutual fear brings peace,
Till the selfish loves increase:
Then Cruelty knits a snare,
And spreads his baits with care.

He sits down with holy fears,
And waters the ground with tears;
Then Humility takes its root
Underneath his foot.

Soon spreads the dismal shade
Of Mystery over his head;
And the Caterpillar and Fly
Feed on the Mystery.

And it bears the fruit of Deceit,
Ruddy and sweet to eat;
And the Raven his nest has made
In its thickest shade.

Reprint 2025-26



100/KALEIDOSCOPE

Reprint 2025-26



101/POEMS BY BLAKE

The Gods of the earth and sea
Sought thro’ Nature to find this Tree;
But their search was all in vain:
There grows one in the Human Brain.

Note: Blake’s poetry was published in a manner most unusual in
literature and art history; he personally manufactured each
copy. The verses were not typeset but were, with the engravings
that illustrated them, cut into copper plates. The pages
themselves he illuminated in water colours. Thus Blake can
be called the first multi-media artist.

Understanding the Poem
1. How are these two matched poems related to each other in

content? How is the human being depicted in the Song of
Innocence and how is he/she depicted in the Song of Experience?
Do we find both aspects working in an average human being?

2. How would you explain the lines

For Mercy has a human heart,
Pity a human face,
And Love, the human form divine,
And Peace, the human dress.

3. How do Mercy, Pity, Peace and Love get distorted in the human
brain?

4. Blake’s poetry expresses one aspect of his multi-dimensional
view of human experience—of mankind once whole and happy,
now fallen into discord and tyranny, from which it must be
rescued. Explain with reference to these two poems.

Language Work
1. Certain words in the poem have been capitalised. Can you think

of reasons for this?

2. Count the syllables in the lines of ‘The Divine Image’. Do you
see a pattern?

The first line has eight and the second line has six syllables.
Two syllables make a foot in poetry. Here the first syllable of
each foot is unstressed and the second syllable is stressed.

Reprint 2025-26



102/KALEIDOSCOPE

Try this Out
Read ‘The Chimney Sweeper’ in Songs of Innocence, and then
‘The Chimney Sweeper’ in Songs of Experience, and contrast
the two. You could also read ‘The Lamb’ and ‘The Tiger’.

Suggested Reading
Songs of Innocence by William Blake

Songs of Experience by William Blake.

Reprint 2025-26

##9##

4
Kubla Khan

Or
A Vision in a Dream: A Fragment

S.T. Coleridge was imaginative even as a child.
He studied at Cambridge. In 1797, he met
Wordsworth; the two belonged to the first
generation of Romantic poets. Coleridge was
responsible for presenting the supernatural as
real and Wordsworth would try to render
ordinary reality as remarkable and strange.
Byron, Shelley and Keats belonged to the next
generation of Romantic Poets.
The genesis of this poem was a vision seen by
Coleridge in a trance-like state of mind. He tried
to capture its essence but an interruption caused S.T.Coleridge
an irreparable break in his poetic flow. 1772-1834

In Xanadu did Kubla Khan
A stately pleasure-dome decree:
Where Alph, the sacred river, ran
Through caverns measureless to man
Down to a sunless sea.
So twice five miles of fertile ground
With walls and towers were girdled round:
And there were gardens bright with sinuous rills,

* Kubla Khan founded the Mongol dynasty in China in the thirteenth century.

* You will notice that this poem is incomplete. There is a reason behind this. In 1797, when
Coleridge fell ill, some medicine was prescribed, from the effects of which he fell asleep in
his chair while reading about Kubla Khan. In the three hours of profound sleep, he had a
wonderful dream. On awakening he distinctly recollected it, and began to write it down,
when he was interrupted by a chance visitor. The poem thus remained incomplete.

Reprint 2025-26



104/KALEIDOSCOPE

Where blossomed many an incense-bearing tree;
And here were forests ancient as the hills,
Enfolding sunny spots of greenery.

But oh! that deep romantic chasm which slanted
Down the green hill athwart a cedarn cover!
A savage place! as holy and enchanted
As e’er beneath a waning moon was haunted
By woman wailing for her demon-lover!
And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething,
As if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing,
A mighty fountain momently was forced;
Amid whose swift half-intermitted burst
Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail,
Or chaffy grain beneath the thresher’s flail:
And ’mid these dancing rocks at once and ever
It flung up momently the sacred river.
Five miles meandering with a mazy motion
Through wood and dale the sacred river ran,
Then reached the caverns measureless to man,
And sank in tumult to a lifeless ocean:
And ’mid this tumult Kubla heard from far
Ancestral voices prophesying war!
The shadow of the dome of pleasure
Floated midway on the waves;
Where was heard the mingled measure
From the fountain and the caves.
It was a miracle of rare device,
A sunny pleasure dome with caves of ice!

A damsel with a dulcimer
In a vision once I saw:
It was an Abyssinian maid,
And on her dulcimer she played,
Singing of Mount Abora.
Could I revive within me
Her symphony and song,
To such a deep delight, ’twould win me,
That with music loud and long,

Reprint 2025-26



105/KUBLA KHAN

I would build that dome in air,
That sunny dome! those caves of ice!
And all who heard should see them there,
And all should cry, Beware! Beware!
His flashing eyes, his floating hair!
Weave a circle round him thrice,
And close your eyes with holy dread,
For he on honeydew hath fed,
And drunk the milk of Paradise.

Understanding the Poem
Find out where the river Alph is.

1. Does the poem have a real geographical location? How does
the poet mix up the real and the imaginary to give a sense of
the surreal?

2. Pick out

(i) contrasting images that are juxtaposed throughout the
poem.

(ii) images that strike the eye and images that strike the ear,
both positive and negative.

(iii) the words used to describe the movement of water.

3. What is the discordant note heard at the end of the third
stanza? Can we relate this to the grandeur and turmoil that
are a part of an emperor’s life?

4. Which are the lines that refer to magical elements?

5. What is poetic ecstasy likened to?

6. The poem is a fragment. What do you think has made it a lasting
literary piece?

Language Study
Dulcimer is a string instrument struck with two light hammers, used
both in China and in Europe in different forms.

TASK

Write short descriptions of five other rare musical instruments that are
used by folk cultures.

Reprint 2025-26



106/KALEIDOSCOPE

Try this Out
The poem is a product of subconscious fusion of dream images
and ideas from Coleridge’s wide reading. Which of the details
in the poem do you think are factual, and which imaginary?
Surf the internet to get interesting details.

Suggested Reading
‘The Rime of the Ancient Mariner’ by S.T. Coleridge

‘Christabel’ by S.T. Coleridge.

Reprint 2025-26

##10##

5
Trees

Emily Dickinson is regarded as one of
America’s quintessential poets of the nineteenth
century. She lived an introverted and hermetic
life, and published very few of her poems in
her lifetime. Her output, 1789 poems in all, were
published posthumously.
Her poetry is characterised by unconventional

Emily Dickinson capitalisation and extensive use of dashes,

1830-1886 along with unusual imagery and lyric style.

The Trees like Tassels hit – and – swung –
There seemed to rise a Tune
From Miniature Creatures
Accompanying the Sun –

Far Psalteries of Summer –
Enamoring the Ear
They never yet did satisfy –
Remotest – when most fair

The Sun shone whole at intervals –
Then Half – then utter hid –
As if Himself were optional
And had Estates of Cloud

Sufficient to enfold Him
Eternally from view –
Except it were a whim of His
To let the Orchards grow –

Reprint 2025-26



108/KALEIDOSCOPE

A Bird sat careless on the fence –
One gossiped in the Lane
On silver matters charmed a Snake
Just winding round a Stone –

Bright Flowers slit a Calyx
And soared upon a Stem
Like Hindered Flags – Sweet hoisted –
With Spices – in the Hem –

’Twas more – I cannot mention –
How mean – to those that see
Vandyke’s Delineation
Of Nature’s – Summer Day!

Responding to the Poem
1. What imagery does the poet use to delineate

Summer’s day more picturesquely than any painter
could?

2. What do you understand by ‘Psalteries of Summer’?

3. In which lines are creatures attributed with human
qualities?  How does this add to the beauty of the Summer’s
day?

4. How would you explain the image of the ‘Hindered Flags’?

5. Why are the pronouns referring to the Sun capitalised?

6. Give examples from the poem to show that great poetry is a
result of close observation of natural phenomena.

Language Study
You came across ‘dulcimer’ in the poem ‘Kubla Khan’. Did you
note down ‘Psaltery’ as another musical instrument? They are
very similar. Look up the illustrations for the two in an
illustrated dictionary. Find out in what ways they are different
from one another.

Suggested Reading
The Complete Poems of Emily Dickinson.

Reprint 2025-26

##11##

6
The Wild Swans at Coole

W.B. Yeats was an Irish poet, dramatist
and mystic. He was one of the driving
forces behind the Irish Literary Revival,
and was co-founder of the Abbey
Theatre. He was awarded the Nobel Prize W.B.Yeats
for Literature in 1923. 1865-1939

The trees are in their autumn beauty,                          A
The woodland paths are dry,                                        B
Under the October twilight the water                            C
Mirrors a still sky;                                                        B
Upon the brimming water among the stones                 D
Are nine-and-fifty swans.                                              E

The nineteenth autumn has come upon me                  G
Since I first made my count;
I saw, before I had well finished,
All suddenly mount
And scatter wheeling in great broken rings
Upon their clamorous wings.

I have looked upon those brilliant creatures,
And now my heart is sore.
All’s changed since I, hearing at twilight,

Reprint 2025-26



110/KALEIDOSCOPE

The first time on this shore,
The bell-beat of their wings above my head,
Trod with a lighter tread.
Unwearied still, lover by lover,
They paddle in the cold
Companionable streams or climb the air;
Their hearts have not grown old;
Passion or conquest,  wander where they will,
Attend upon them still.

But now they drift on the still water,
Mysterious, beautiful;
Among what rushes will they build,
By what lake’s edge or pool
Delight men’s eyes when I awake some day
To find they have flown away?

Understanding the Poem
1. How do the ‘trees in their autumn beauty’, ‘dry woodland paths’,

‘October twilight’, ‘still sky’ connect to the poet’s own life?

2. What do ‘the light tread’ and ‘the sore heart’ refer to?

3. What is the contrast between the liveliness of the swans and
human life?

4. What contributes to the beauty and mystery of the swans’ lives?

Language Study
Notice the rhyme scheme in the poem. Do you notice a
consistent pattern? We use a new letter for every new sound at
the end of the lines. The rhyme scheme for the first stanza is
given alongside the lines. Do it for the rest of the poem.

Suggested Reading
The Green Helmet by W.B. Yeats

The Celtic Twilight by W.B. Yeats.

Reprint 2025-26

##12##

7
Time and Time Again

A.K. Ramanujan is one of India’s finest English-
language poets. He is best known for his
pioneering translations of ancient Tamil poetry
into modern English. At the time of his death he
was professor of linguistics at the University of
Chicago and was recognised as the world’s
most profound scholar of South Indian
languages and culture.
His interests included anthropology and folklore.
These influenced his work as a craftsman of
English. This poem represents the complex
distillation of a lifetime of unusual thought and A.K.Ramanujan
feeling. 1929-1993

Or listen to the clocktowers
of any old well-managed city

beating their gongs round the clock, each slightly
off the others’ time, deeper or lighter

in its bronze, beating out a different
sequence each half-hour, out of the accidents

of alloy, a maker’s shaking hand
in Switzerland, or the mutual distances

commemorating a donor’s whim,
the perennial feuds and seasonal alliance

of Hindu, Christian, and Muslim—
cut off sometimes by a change of wind,

a change of mind, or a siren
between the pieces of a backstreet quarrel.

Reprint 2025-26



112/KALEIDOSCOPE

One day you look up and see one of them
eyeless, silent, a zigzag sky showing

through the knocked-out clockwork, after a riot,
a peace-march time bomb, or a precise act

Of nature in a night of lightnings.

Responding to the Poem

1. What did you think the poem was about when you read the
first few lines?

2. From which line does the import of the title strike the reader?

3. What makes for the differences between the timekeeping of the
various clocks? What is the implicit comparison?

4. Why is the act of nature described as ‘precise’?

5. Which of the following reflects the poet’s attitude towards
communal disharmony

(i) Critical condemnation

(ii) Helpless acceptance

(iii) Wistful lament

6. Is the poet’s attitude a representation of how the average Indian
feels both towards human violence and nature’s fury?

Suggested Reading
The Interior Landscape by A.K. Ramanujan

Poems of Love and War by A.K. Ramanujan.

Reprint 2025-26

##13##

8
Blood

One of the greatest literary figures in Malayalam,
Kamala Das was born in the year 1934 in
Punnayurkulum, in South Malabar, Kerala. Her
work, in poetry and in prose, has given her a
permanent place in modern Malayalam literature
as well as in Indian writing in English. She is best
known for her feminist writings and focus on
womanhood.
She has been the recipient of such famous awards
as the Poetry Award for the Asian PEN Anthology,
the Kerala Sahitya Akademi Award for the best

Kamala Das collection of short stories in Malayalam, and the
1934-2009 Chaman Lal Award for fearless journalism.

When we were children
My brother and I
And always playing on the sands
Drawing birds and animals
Our great-grandmother said one day,
You see this house of ours
Now three hundred years old,
It’s falling to little bits
Before our very eyes
The walls are cracked and torn
And moistened by the rains,
The tiles have fallen here and there
The windows whine and groan
And every night
The rats come out of the holes
And scamper past our doors.
The snake-shrine is dark with weeds

Reprint 2025-26



114/KALEIDOSCOPE

And all the snake-gods in the shrine
Have lichen on their hoods.
O it hurts me she cried,
Wiping a reddened eye
For I love this house, it hurts me much
To watch it die.
When I grow old, I said,
And very very rich
I shall rebuild the fallen walls
And make new this ancient house.
My great-grandmother
Touched my cheeks and smiled.
She was really simple.
Fed on God for years
All her feasts were monotonous
For the only dish was always God
And the rest mere condiments.
She told us how she rode her elephant
When she was ten or eleven
Every Monday without fail
To the Siva shrine
And back to home again
And, told us of the jewel box
And the brocade from the north
And the perfumes and the oils
And the sandal for her breasts
And her marriage to a prince
Who loved her deeply for a lovely short year
And died of fever, in her arms
She told us
That we had the oldest blood
My brother and she and I
The oldest blood in the world
A blood thin and clear and fine
While in the veins of the always poor
And in the veins
Of the new-rich men
Flowed a blood thick as gruel
And muddy as a ditch.

Reprint 2025-26



115/BLOOD

Finally she lay dying
In her eighty sixth year
A woman wearied by compromise
Her legs quilted with arthritis
And with only a hard cough
For comfort
I looked deep into her eyes
Her poor bleary eyes
And prayed that she would not grieve
So much about the house.
I had learnt by then
Most lessons of defeat,
Had found out that to grow rich
Was a difficult feat.
The house was crouching
On its elbows then,
It looked that night in the pallid moon
So grotesque and alive.
When they burnt my great grandmother
Over logs of the mango tree
I looked once at the house
And then again and again
For I thought I saw the windows close
Like the closing of the eyes
I thought I heard the pillars groan
And the dark rooms heave a sigh.
I set forth again
For other towns,
Left the house with the shrine
And the sands
And the flowering shrubs
And the wide rabid mouth of the Arabian Sea.

* * *
I know the rats are running now
Across the darkened halls
They do not fear the dead
I know the white ants have reached my home
And have raised on walls

Reprint 2025-26



116/KALEIDOSCOPE

Strange totems of burial.
At night, in stillness,
From every town I live in
I hear the rattle of its death
The noise of rafters creaking
And the windows’ whine.
I have let you down
Old house, I seek forgiveness
O mother’s mother’s mother
I have plucked your soul
Like a pip from a fruit
And have flung it into your pyre
Call me callous
Call me selfish
But do not blame my blood
So thin, so clear, so fine
The oldest blood in the world
That remembers as it flows
All the gems and all the gold
And all the perfumes and the oils
And the stately
Elephant ride...

Responding to the Poem
1. What makes the depiction of a crumbling village house so

authentic in the poem? Is this a common feature of most village
houses in the context of rapid urbanisation? Is the poet
speaking from actual experience?

2. What aspects of Indian society and history get highlighted in
the poem?

3. Does the poem bring out the contrast between tradition and
modernity? Illustrate your answer with examples from the poem.

4. While the poet respected her grandmother’s sentiments of royal
grandeur, we can also see that she revolts against it. Identify
the lines which bring this out.

5. Which lines reveal the poet’s criticism of class distinctions?

6. Is it ‘selfishness’ and ‘callousness’ that makes the poet break
her childhood promise to her grandmother of renovating the
house? Why does she do nothing about rebuilding the house?

Reprint 2025-26



117/BLOOD

7. What do you understand of the conflict in the poet’s conscience?

Language Study
Comment on the changes in poetic expression in English from
the time of Donne to that of Kamala Das with reference to

• prosodic features (rhyme, rhythm and metre)

• vocabulary

• language

• themes.

Suggested Readings
The Old Playhouse and Other Poems by Kamala Das

Summer in Calcutta by Kamala Das

The Descendants by Kamala Das.

Reprint 2025-26



118/KALEIDOSCOPE

Non-fiction

INTRODUCTION

Non-fiction is virtually everything that we read as
literature but that does not come under the
categories of novel, short story, play or poem. Non-
fiction, then, is writing that is factually true. It
can include articles, editorials, reports, critical
essays and interviews, humorous sketches,
biographies and autobiographies, lectures,
speeches and sermons.

This section contains six non-fiction pieces, three
by established writers of the canon: George
Bernard Shaw, Virginia Woolf and D.H.Lawrence;
one each by Ingmar Bergman, Amartya Sen and
Isaac Asimov.

The themes are: freedom, stream of consciousness,
importance of the novel as a creative form, the
details that make film-making a creative art and
the argumentative tradition in Indian culture
based on the famous dialogue between Krishna
and Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita. Asimov’s piece
talks of the universe of science fiction, correlating
it to accounts of mythical superhuman beings in
the pre-scientific universe which served to fulfil
the same emotional needs as science fiction does.

The purpose of such writing is to explain, analyse,
define or clarify something—to provide us with
information and to show the how and why of
things.

Reprint 2025-26



119/FREEDOM
##14##
1
Freedom

George Bernard Shaw was a dramatist and critic.
His work as a London newspaper critic of music
and drama resulted in The Quintessence of
Ibsenism. His famous plays include Arms and
the Man, Candida and Man and Superman.
His works present a fearless intellectual criticism,
sugar-coated by a pretended lightness of tone. He

G.B. Shaw rebelled against muddled thinking, and sought to
1856-1950 puncture hollow pretensions.

What is a perfectly free person? Evidently a person who
can do what he likes, when he likes, and where he likes,
or do nothing at all if he prefers it. Well, there is no such
person, and there never can be any such person. Whether
we like it or not, we must all sleep for one third of our
lifetime—wash and dress and undress—we must spend a
couple of hours eating and drinking—we must spend nearly
as much in getting about from place to place. For half the
day we are slaves to necessities which we cannot shirk,
whether we are monarchs with a thousand slaves or humble
labourers with no servants but their wives. And the wives
must undertake the additional heavy slavery of child-
bearing, if the world is still to be peopled.

These natural jobs cannot be shirked. But they involve
other jobs which can. As we must eat we must first provide
food; as we must sleep, we must have beds, and bedding
in houses with fireplaces and coals; as we must walk
through the streets, we must have clothes to cover our
nakedness. Now, food and houses and clothes can be

Reprint 2025-26



120/KALEIDOSCOPE

produced by human labour. But when they are produced
they can be stolen. If you like honey you can let the bees
produce it by their labour, and then steal it from them. If
you are too lazy to get about from place to place on your
own legs you can make a slave of a horse. And what you do
to a horse or a bee, you can also do to a man or woman or
a child, if you can get the upper hand of them by force or
fraud or trickery of any sort, or even by teaching them
that it is their religious duty to sacrifice their freedom to
yours.

So beware! If you allow any person, or class of persons,
to get the upper hand of you, he will shift all that part of
his slavery to Nature that can be shifted on to your
shoulders; and you will find yourself working from eight to
fourteen hours a day when, if you had only yourself and
your family to provide for, you could do it quite comfortably
in half the time or less. The object of all honest governments
should be to prevent your being imposed on in this way.
But the object of most actual governments, I regret to say,
is exactly the opposite. They enforce your slavery and call
it freedom. But they also regulate your slavery, keeping
the greed of your masters within certain bounds. When
chattel slavery of the negro sort costs more than wage
slavery, they abolish chattel slavery and make you free to
choose between one employment or one master and another
and this they call a glorious triumph for freedom, though
for you it is merely the key of the street. When you complain,
they promise that in future you shall govern the country
for yourself. They redeem this promise by giving you a vote,
and having a general election every five years or so.

At the election two of their rich friends ask for your
vote and you are free to choose which of them you will vote for
to spite the other—a choice which leaves you no freer than
you were before, as it does not reduce your hours of labour by
a single minute. But the newspapers assure you that your
vote has decided the election, and that this constitutes you a
free citizen in a democratic country. The amazing thing about
it is that you are fool enough to believe them.

Now mark another big difference between the natural
slavery of man to Nature and the unnatural slavery of

Reprint 2025-26



121/FREEDOM

man to man. Nature is kind to her slaves. If she forces you
to eat and drink, she makes eating and drinking so pleasant
that when we can afford it we eat and drink too much. We
must sleep or go mad: but then sleep is so pleasant that
we have great difficulty in getting up in the morning. And
firesides and families seem so pleasant to the young that
they get married and join building societies to realise their
dreams. Thus, instead of resenting our natural wants as
slavery, we take the greatest pleasure in their satisfaction.
We write sentimental songs in praise of them. A tramp can
earn his supper by singing Home, Sweet Home.

The slavery of man to man is the very opposite of this.
It is hateful to the body and to the spirit. Our poets do not
praise it: they proclaim that no man is good enough to be
another man’s master. The latest of the great Jewish
prophets, a gentleman named Marx, spent his life in
proving that there is no extremity of selfish cruelty at which
the slavery of man to man will stop if it be not stopped by
law. You can see for yourself that it produces a state of
continual civil war—called the class war—between the
slaves and their masters, organised as Trade Unions on
one side and Employers’ Federations on the other. Saint
Thomas More, who has just been canonized, held that we
shall never have a peaceful and stable society until this
struggle is ended by the abolition of slavery altogether,
and the compulsion of everyone to do his share of the
world’s work with his own hands and brains, and not to
attempt to put it on anyone else.

Naturally the master class, through its parliaments
and schools and newspapers, makes the most desperate
efforts to prevent us from realising our slavery. From our
earliest years we are taught that our country is the land of
the free, and that our freedom was won for us by our
forefathers when they made King John sign Magna Charta
(also spelt Carta)—when they defeated the Spanish
Armada—when they cut off King Charles’s head—when they
made King William accept the Bill of Rights—when they
issued and made good the American Declaration of
Independence—when they won the battles of Waterloo and

Reprint 2025-26



122/KALEIDOSCOPE

Trafalgar on the playing-fields of Eton—and when, only
the other day, they quite unintentionally changed the
German, Austrian, Russian, and Ottoman empires into
republics.

When we grumble, we are told that all our miseries
are our own doing because we have the vote. When we say
‘What good is the vote?’ we are told that we have the Factory
Acts, and the Wages Boards, and free education, and the
New Deal, and the dole; and what more could any
reasonable man ask for? We are reminded that the rich
are taxed a quarter—a third—or even a half and more of
their incomes; but the poor are never reminded that they
have to pay that much of their wages as rent in addition to
having to work twice as long every day as they would need
if they were free.

Whenever famous writers protest against this
imposture—say Voltaire and Rousseau and Tom Paine
in the eighteenth century, or Cobbett and Shelley, Karl
Marx and Lassalle in the nineteenth, or Lenin and
Trotsky in the twentieth—you are taught that they are
atheists and libertines, murderers and scoundrels, and
often it is made a criminal offence to buy or sell their
books. If their disciples make a revolution, England
immediately makes war on them and lends money to the
other Powers to join her in forcing the revolutionists
restore the slave order. When this combination was
successful at Waterloo, the victory was advertised as
another triumph for British freedom; and the British
wage-slaves, instead of going into mourning like Lord
Byron, believed it all and cheered enthusiastically. When
the revolution wins, as it did in Russia in 1922, the
fighting stops; but the abuse, the calumnies, the lies
continue until the revolutionised State grows into a first-
rate military power. Then our diplomatists, after having
for years denounced the revolutionary leaders as the
most abominable villains and tyrants, have to do a right
turn and invite them to dinner.

Reprint 2025-26



123/FREEDOM

Stop and Think

1. What are the links between natural jobs, labour and
slavery?

2. What ought to be the object of all governments, and
what do we actually find it to be?

Now, though this prodigious mass of humbug is meant
to delude the enslaved masses only, it ends in deluding
the master class much more completely. A gentleman whose
mind has been formed at a preparatory school for the sons
of gentlemen, followed by a public school  and university
course, is much more thoroughly taken in by the falsified
history and dishonest political economy and the snobbery
taught in these places than any worker can possibly be,
because the gentleman’s education teaches him that he is
a very fine fellow, superior to the common run of men
whose duty it is to brush his clothes, carry his parcels,
and earn his income for him, and as he thoroughly agrees
with this view of himself, he honestly believes that the
system which has placed him in such an agreeable situation
and done such justice to his merits is the best of all possible
systems, and that he should shed his blood, and yours, to
the last drop in its defence. But the great mass of our
rack-rented, underpaid, treated-as-inferiors cast-off-on-
the-dole workers cannot feel so sure about it as the
gentleman. The facts are too harshly against it. In hard
times, such as we are now passing through, their disgust
and despair sometimes lead them to kick over the traces,
upset everything, and they have to be rescued from mere
gangsterism by some Napoleonic genius who has a fancy
for being an emperor, and who has the courage and brains
and energy to jump at the chance. But the slaves who give
three cheers for the emperor might just as well have made
a cross on a British or American ballot paper as far as
their freedom is concerned.

  So far I have mentioned nothing but plain natural
and historical facts. I draw no conclusions, for that would
lead me into controversy, and controversy would not be
fair when you cannot answer me back. I am never

Reprint 2025-26



124/KALEIDOSCOPE

controversial over the wireless. I do not even ask you to
draw your own conclusions, for you might draw some very
dangerous ones, unless you have the right sort of head for
it. Always remember that though nobody likes to be called a
slave, it does not follow that slavery is a bad thing. Great
men, like Aristotle, have held that the law and order and
government would be impossible unless the persons the
people have to obey are beautifully dressed and decorated,
robed and uniformed, speaking with a special accent,
travelling in first-class carriages or the most expensive cars,
or on the best-groomed and best-bred horses, and never
cleaning their own boots, not doing anything for themselves
that can possibly be done by ringing a bell and ordering
some common person to do it. And this means, of course,
that they must be made very rich without any obligation
other than to produce an impression of almost godlike
superiority on the minds of common people. In short, it is
contended, you must make men ignorant idolaters before
they will become obedient workers and law-abiding citizens.

To prove this, we are reminded that, although nine
out of ten voters are common workers, it is with the greatest
difficulty that a few of them can be persuaded to vote for
the members of their own class. When women were
enfranchised and given the right to sit in Parliament, the
first use they made of their votes was to defeat all the
women candidates who stood for the freedom of the workers
and had given them years of devoted and distinguished
service. They elected only one woman—a titled lady of great
wealth and exceptionally fascinating personality.

Now this, it is said, is human nature, and you cannot
change human nature. On the other hand, it is maintained
that human nature is the easiest thing in the world to
change if you catch it young enough, and that the idolatry
of the slave class and the arrogance of the master class
are themselves entirely artificial products of education and
of a propaganda that plays upon our infants long before
they have left their cradles. An opposite mentality could,
it is argued, be produced by a contrary education and
propaganda. You can turn the point over in your mind for
yourself; do not let me prejudice you one way or the other.

Reprint 2025-26



125/FREEDOM

The practical question at the bottom of it all is how
the income of the whole country can best be distributed
from day to day. If the earth is cultivated agriculturally in
vast farms with motor ploughs and chemical fertilisers,
and industrially in huge electrified factories full of
machinery that a girl can handle, the product may be so
great that an equal distribution of it would provide enough
to give the unskilled labourers as much as the managers
and the men of the scientific staff. But do not forget, when
you hear tales of modern machinery enabling one girl to
produce as much as a thousand men could produce in the
reign of good Queen Anne, that this marvelous increase
includes things like needles and steel pins and matches,
which we can neither eat nor drink nor wear. Very young
children will eat needles and matches eagerly—but the
diet is not a nourishing one. And though we can now
cultivate the sky as well as the earth, by drawing nitrogen
from it to increase and improve the quality of our grass
and, consequently, of our cattle and milk and butter and
eggs, Nature may have tricks up her sleeve to check us if
the chemists exploit her too greedily.

And now to sum up. Wipe out from your dreams of
freedom the hope of being able to do as you please all the
time. For at least twelve hours of your day Nature orders
you to do certain things, and will kill you if you don’t do
them. This leaves twelve hours for working; and here again
Nature will kill you unless you either earn your living or
get somebody else to earn it for you. If you live in a civilised
country your freedom is restricted by the laws of the land
enforced by the police, who oblige you to do this, and not
to do that, and to pay rates and taxes. If you do not obey
these laws the courts will imprison you, and, if you go too
far, kill you. If the laws are reasonable and are impartially
administered you have no reason to complain, because
they increase your freedom by protecting you against
assault, highway robbery, and disorder generally.

But as society is constituted at present, there is
another far more intimate compulsion on you: that of your
landlord and that of your employer. Your landlord may
refuse to let you live on his estate if you go to chapel instead

Reprint 2025-26



126/KALEIDOSCOPE

of to church, or if you vote for anyone but his nominee, or
if you practise osteopathy, or if you open a shop. Your
employer may dictate the cut, colour, and condition of your
clothes, as well as your hours of work. He can turn you
into the street at any moment to join the melancholy band
of lost spirits called the Unemployed. In short, his power
over you is far greater than that of any political dictator
could possibly be. Your only remedy at present is the Trade
Union weapon of the strike, which is only the old Oriental
device of starving on your enemy’s doorstep until he does
you justice. Now, as the police in this country will not
allow you to starve in your employer’s doorstep, you must
starve on your own—if you have one. The extreme form of
the strike—the general strike of all workers at the same
moment—is also the extreme form of human folly, as, if
completely carried out, it would extinguish the human race
in a week. And the workers would be the first to perish.
The general strike is Trade Unionism gone mad. Sane Trade
Unionism would never sanction more than one big strike
at a time, with all the other trades working overtime to
support it.

Now let us put the case in figures. If you have to work
for twelve hours a day you have four hours a day to do
what you like with, subject to the laws of the land, and
your possession of money enough to buy an interesting
book or pay for a seat at the pictures, or, on a half-holiday,
at a football match, or whatever your fancy may be. But
even here Nature will interfere a good deal, for, if your
eight hours’ work has been of a hard physical kind, and
when you get home you want to spend your four hours in
reading my books to improve your mind, you will find
yourself fast asleep in half a minute, and your mind will
remain in its present benighted condition.

I take it, then, that nine out of ten of us desire more
freedom, and that this is why we listen to wireless talks
about it. As long as we go on as we are—content with a
vote and a dole—the only advice we can give one another
is that of Shakespeare’s Iago: ‘Put money in thy purse.’
But as we get very little money into our purses on pay-day,
and all the rest of the week other people are taking money

Reprint 2025-26



127/FREEDOM

out of it, Iago’s advice is not very practical. We must change
our politics before we can get what we want; and meanwhile
we must stop gassing about freedom, because the people
of England in the lump don’t know what freedom is, never
having had any. Always call freedom by its old English
name of leisure, and keep clamouring for more leisure and
more money to enjoy it in return for an honest share of
work. And let us stop singing Rule, Britannia! until we
make it true. Until we do, let us never vote for a
parliamentary candidate who talks about our freedom and
our love of liberty, for, whatever political name he may
give himself, he is sure to be at bottom an Anarchist who
wants to live on our labour without being taken up by the
police for it as he deserves.

And now suppose we at last win a lot more leisure and
a lot more money than we are accustomed to. What are we
going to do with them? I was taught in my childhood that
Satan will find mischief still for idle hands to do. I have
seen men come into a fortune and lose their happiness,
their health, and finally their lives by it as certainly as if
they had taken daily doses of rat poison instead of
champagne and cigars. It is not at all easy to know what
to do with leisure unless we have been brought up to it.

I will, therefore, leave you with a conundrum to think
over. If you had your choice, would you work for eight hours
a day and retire with a full pension at forty-five, or would
you rather work four hours a day and keep on working
until you are seventy? Now don’t send the answer to me,
please talk it over with your wife.

Stop and Think

1. What causes the master class to be more deluded
than the enslaved classes?

2. According to Aristotle, what are the conditions to
be fulfilled for the common people to accept law and
order, and government, and all that they imply?

3. How can reasonable laws, impartially administered,
contribute to one’s freedom?

4. What are the ways in which individual freedom gets
restricted?

Reprint 2025-26



128/KALEIDOSCOPE

Understanding Freedom and Discipline

Jiddu Krishnamurti was a world renowned writer
and speaker on fundamental philosophical and
spiritual subjects such as the purpose of meditation,
human relationships, and how to bring about
positive change in global society. His supporters,
working through several non-profit foundations,
oversee a number of independent schools centred
on his views on education, in India, England and
the United States. His talks, group and individual
discussions, and other writings are published in

J. Krishnamurti a variety of formats including print, audio-video
1895-1986 as well as online, in many languages.

The problem of discipline is really quite complex, because
most of us think that through some form of discipline we
shall eventually have freedom. Discipline is the cultivation
of resistance, is it not? By resisting, by building a barrier
within ourselves against something which we consider
wrong, we think we shall be more capable of
understanding and of being free to live fully; but that is
not a fact, is it? Surely, it is only when there is freedom,
real freedom to think, to discover—that you can find
out anything.

But freedom obviously cannot exist in a frame. And
most of us live in a frame, in a world enclosed by ideas, do
we not? For instance, you are told by your parents and
your teachers what is right and what is wrong. You know
what people say, what the priest says, what tradition says,
and what you have learned in school. All this forms a kind
of enclosure within which you live; and, living in that
enclosure, you say you are free. Are you? Can a man ever
be free as long as he lives in a prison?

So, one has to break down the prison walls of tradition.
One has to experiment and discover on one’s own, and not
merely follow somebody, however good, however noble and
exciting that person may be, and however happy one may
feel in his presence. What has significance is to be able to

Reprint 2025-26



129/FREEDOM

examine and not just accept all the values created by
tradition, all the things that people have said are good,
beneficial, worthwhile. The moment you accept, you begin
to conform, to imitate; and conforming, imitating, following,
can never make one free and happy.

Our elders say that you must be disciplined. Discipline
is imposed upon you by yourself, and by others from outside.
But what is important is to be free to think, to inquire, so
that you begin to find out for yourself. To think deeply, to
go into things and discover for oneself what is true, is very
difficult; it requires alert perception, constant inquiry, and
most people have neither the inclination nor the energy
for that. They say, ‘You know better than I do; you are my
guru, my teacher, and I shall follow you.’

So, it is very important that from the tenderest age
you are free to find out, and are not enclosed by a wall of
do’s and don’ts; for if you are constantly told what to do
and what not to do, what will happen to your intelligence?
You will be a thoughtless entity who just walks into some
career, who is told by his parents whom to marry or not to
marry; and that is obviously not the action of intelligence.
You may pass your examinations and be very well off, you
may have good clothes and plenty of jewels, you may have
friends and prestige; but as long as you are bound by
tradition, there can be no intelligence.

Surely, intelligence comes into being only when you
are free to question, free to think out and discover, so that
your mind becomes very active, very alert and clear. Then
you are a fully integrated individual—not a frightened entity
who, not knowing what to do, inwardly feels one thing and
outwardly conforms to something different.

Intelligence demands that you break away from
tradition and live on your own; but you are enclosed by
your parents’ ideas and by the traditions of society. So
there is a conflict going on inwardly, is there not? You are
all young, but I don’t think you are too young to be aware
of this. So there is an inward struggle going on; and as
long as you do not resolve that struggle you are going to be
caught in conflict, in pain, in sorrow, everlastingly wanting
to do something and being prevented from doing it.

Reprint 2025-26



130/KALEIDOSCOPE

If you go into it very carefully you will see that discipline
and freedom are contradictory, and that in seeking real freedom
there is set going quite a different process which brings its
own clarification so that you just do not do certain things.

While you are young it is very important that
you be free to find out, and be helped to find out,
what you really want to do in life. If you don’t find out while
you are young, you will never find out, you
will never be free and happy individuals. The seed
must be sown now, so that you begin now to take the initiative.

On the road you have often passed villagers carrying
heavy loads, have you not? Those poor women with torn
and dirty clothes, with insufficient food, working day after
day for a pittance—do you have any feeling for them? Or
are you so frightened, so concerned about yourself, about
your examinations, about your looks, about your saris, that
you never pay any attention to them? Do you feel you are
much better than they, that you belong to a higher class
and therefore need have no regard for them? Don’t you
want to help them? No? That indicates how you are
thinking. Are you so dulled by centuries of tradition, by
what your fathers and mothers say, so conscious of
belonging to a certain class, that you do not even look at
the villagers? Are you actually so blinded that you do not
know what is happening around you?

It is fear—fear of what your parents will say, of what
the teachers will say, fear of tradition, fear of life—that
gradually destroys sensitivity, is it not? To be sensitive is
to feel, to receive impressions, to have sympathy for those
who are suffering, to have affection, to be aware of the
things that are happening around you. When the temple
bell is ringing, are you aware of it? Do you listen to the
sound? Do you ever see the sunlight on the water? Are you
aware of the poor people, the villagers who have been
controlled, trodden down for centuries by exploiters? When
you see a servant carrying a heavy carpet, do you give him
a helping hand?

All this implies sensitivity. But, you see, sensitivity is
destroyed when one is disciplined, when one is fearful or
concerned with oneself. To be concerned about one’s looks,

Reprint 2025-26



131/FREEDOM

about one’s saris, to think about oneself all the time—
which most of us do in some form or other—is to be
insensitive, for then the mind and heart are enclosed and
one loses all appreciation of beauty.

To be really free implies great sensitivity. There is no
freedom if you are enclosed by self-interest or by various
walls of discipline. As long as your life is a process of
imitation there can be no sensitivity, no freedom. It is very
important, while you are here, to sow the seed of freedom,
which is to awaken intelligence; for with that intelligence
you can tackle all the problems of life.

Stop and Think

1. Why do most people find it easier to conform, imitate,
and follow a self-appointed guru?

2. What is the inward struggle that the author refers
to?

Understanding the Text
1. Point out the difference between the slavery of man to Nature

and the unnatural slavery of man to Man.

2. What are the ways in which people are subjected to greater
control in the personal spheres than in the wider political
sphere?

3. List the common misconceptions about ‘freedom’ that Shaw
tries to debunk.

4. Why, according to Krishnamurti, are the concepts of freedom
and discipline contradictory to one another?

5 How does the process of inquiry lead to true freedom?

Talking about the Text
1. According to the author, the masses are prevented from

realising their slavery; the masses are also continually
reminded that they have the right to vote. Do you think this
idea holds good for our country too?

2. ‘Nature may have tricks up her sleeve to check us if the
chemists exploit her too greedily.’ Discuss.

3. Respect for elders is not to be confused with blind obedience.
Discuss.

Reprint 2025-26



132/KALEIDOSCOPE

Appreciation
1. Both the texts are on ‘freedom’. Comment on the difference in

the style of treatment of the topic in them.

2. When Shaw makes a statement he supports it with a number
of examples. Identify two sections in the text which explain a
statement with examples. Write down the main statement and
the examples.

Notice how this contributes to the effectiveness of the writing.

3. Notice the use of personal pronouns in the two texts.  Did this
make you identify yourself  more with the topic than if it had
been written in an impersonal style? As you read the texts,
were you able to relate the writer’s thoughts with the way you
lead your own life?

Language Work

A. Grammar

I. Sentence Types

The smallest meaningful unit in language is the word. Words
combine to form phrases, clauses and sentences.

• a sentence consists of one or more clauses

• a clause consists of one or more phrases

• a phrase consists of one or more words.

Look at these examples

(i) Nature is kind to her slaves.

(ii) As we must eat we must first provide food.

(iii) You are all young, but I don’t think you are too young to be
aware of this.

In example (i) you find only one verb, is. There is only one idea
expressed. It is a single clause sentence known as a simple
sentence.

In example (ii) you find two sets of verbs, must eat and must
provide. It is a two clause sentence.

(a) As we must eat

(b) We must first provide food.

You can see that (b) is complete in its sense. This is the main
clause. The meaning of clause (a) depends on (b). This is the

Reprint 2025-26



133/FREEDOM

subordinate clause. Sentences with a main clause and one or
more subordinate clauses are complex sentences.

In example (iii) you again find two verbs: are and are

(a) You are all young.

(b) But I don’t think you are too young to be aware of this.

In this case (a) and (b) both make sense independent of each
other though there is a link. There are two main clauses joined
by the conjunction but. Sentences with more than one main
clause are called compound sentences.

When sentences are too long and complicated, it is useful to
look for the main clause which carries the main idea and the
subordinate clauses which carry ideas that depend on the idea
expressed in the main clause.

TASK

Split the following sentences into their constituent clauses

• There is no freedom if you are enclosed by self interest or by
various walls of discipline.

• When you see a servant carrying a heavy carpet, do you give
him a helping hand?

• Very young children will eat needles and matches eagerly—but
the diet is not a nourishing one.

• We must sleep or go mad: but then sleep is so pleasant that we
have great difficulty in getting up in the morning.

• Always call freedom by its old English name of leisure, and keep
clamouring for more leisure and more money to enjoy it in return
for an honest share of work.

Sometimes we have long sentences which have one main
clause and several subordinate clauses of the same kind
depending upon the main clause or another subordinate clause
for meaning.

Notice this long sentence from the first section

From our earliest years we are taught that our country
is the land of the free, and that our freedom was won
for us by our forefathers—when they made King John
sign Magna Charta—when they defeated the Spanish
Armada—when they cut off King Charles’s head—
when they made King William accept the Bill of
Rights—when they issued and made good the
American Declaration of Independence—when they

Reprint 2025-26



134/KALEIDOSCOPE

won the battles of Waterloo and Trafalgar on the
playing-fields of Eton—and when, only the other day,
they quite unintentionally changed the German,
Austrian, Russian, and Ottoman empires into
republics.

From our earliest years we are taught is the main clause; taught what?

(i) that our country is the land of the free

(ii) that our freedom was won for us by our forefathers

The succeeding five ‘when’ clauses depend upon clause ii for
their meaning. Try to understand long sentences by splitting
them into constituent clauses. Such sentences are usually
used by authors to add force to their writing by combining ideas
that are connected to one another.

II. Rhetorical Questions

A sentence which has the form of a question need not
necessarily ask a question. Its communicative intention may
actually be a statement.

Look at this example from the second section by J.Krishnamurti

On the road you have often passed villagers carrying
heavy loads, have you not? What is your feeling about
them? Those poor women with torn and dirty clothes,
with insufficient food, working day after day for a
pittance—do you have any feeling for them? Or are
you so frightened, so concerned about yourself, about
your examinations, about your looks, about your
saris, that you never pay any attention to them? Do
you feel you are much better than they, that you
belong to a higher class and therefore need have no
regard for them? When you see them go by, what do
you feel? Don’t you want to help them? No? That
indicates how you are thinking. Are you so dulled by
centuries of tradition, by what your fathers and
mothers say, so conscious of belonging to a certain
class, that you do not even look at the villagers? Are
you actually so blinded that you do not know what is
happening around you?

Such questions are called rhetorical questions which are used
as persuasive devices by public speakers. If the rhetorical
question is positive the implied statement is negative and vice
versa. The implied statement is the mental answer that the
speaker intends the hearer to infer from the rhetorical question.

Reprint 2025-26



135/FREEDOM

TASK

Pick out examples of such rhetorical questions from the text and
understand what the writer/speaker wishes to communicate through
them.

B. Pronunciation

The way that sounds combine to produce syllables, words and
sentences is interesting. Two classes of sound are established

(i) Vowels, or sounds that can occur on their own or are at
the centre of a sequence of sounds (indicated as V)

(ii) Consonants, or sounds that cannot occur on their own or
are at the edge of a sequence (indicated as C).

Examples

Word Sound Sequence

I V

see CV

train CCVC

boat CVC

Notice that the two letters ee correspond to a single vowel sound.
Similarly, the two letters ai in train correspond to a single vowel
sound, as do the two letters oa in boat.

Do not confuse the vowel sounds with the names of letters of
the alphabet that are sometimes called ‘vowels’.

TASK

Write the sound sequences for the following words

sleep thrift snake task

smear facts sweet boasts

strain street strangle strengths

Suggested Reading
Candida by George Bernard Shaw

Arms and the Man by George Bernard Shaw

Life Ahead by J. Krishnamurti

Reprint 2025-26



136/KALEIDOSCOPE
##15##
2
The Mark on the Wall

Virginia Woolf was a novelist and essayist. She grew
up in a literary atmosphere and was educated in her
father’s extensive library. The famous group of
intellectuals which came to be known as the
Bloomsbury Group originated in gatherings of
Cambridge University graduates and their friends in
Virginia’s home. Along with her husband, Virginia
started the Hogarth Press which became a successful
publishing house.
In her novels, Mrs Dalloway and To the Lighthouse,
she experimented with new techniques, particularly
new ways of capturing the flow of time. She believed
that much imaginative literature is false to life because
it relates episodes in a straight line, whereas our
experiences actually flow together like a stream.
This essay records fleeting impressions and delicate Virginia Woolf
shades of mental experience. 1882-1941

Perhaps it was the middle of January in the present year
that I first looked up and saw the mark on the wall. In
order to fix a date it is necessary to remember what one
saw. So now I think of the fire; the steady film of yellow
light upon the page of my book; the three chrysanthemums
in the round glass bowl on the mantelpiece. Yes, it must
have been the winter time, and we had just finished our
tea, for I remember that I was smoking a cigarette when I
looked up and saw the mark on the wall for the first time.
I looked up through the smoke of my cigarette and my eye
lodged for a moment upon the burning coals, and that old
fancy of the crimson flag flapping from the castle  tower
came into my mind, and I thought of the cavalcade of red

Reprint 2025-26



137/THE MARK ON THE WALL

knights riding up the side of the black rock. Rather to my
relief the sight of the mark interrupted the fancy, for it is
an old fancy, an automatic fancy, made as a child perhaps.
The mark was a small round mark, black upon the white
wall, about six or seven inches above the mantelpiece.

How readily our thoughts swarm upon a new object,
lifting it a little way, as ants carry a blade of straw so
feverishly, and then leave it... If that mark was made by a
nail, it can’t have been for a picture; it must have been for a
miniature—the miniature of a lady with white powdered
curls, powder-dusted cheeks, and lips like red carnations.
A fraud of course, for the people who had this house before
us would have chosen pictures in that way—an old picture
for an old room. That is the sort of people they were—very
interesting people, and I think of them so often, in such
queer places, because one will never see them again, never
know what happened next. They wanted to leave this house
because they wanted to change their style of furniture, so
he said, and he was in process of saying that in his opinion
art should have ideas behind it when we were torn asunder,
as one is torn from the old lady about to pour out tea and
the young man about to hit the tennis ball in the back
garden of the suburban villa as one rushes past in the train.

But for that mark, I’m not sure about it; I don’t believe
it was made by a nail after all; it’s too big, too round, for
that. I might get up, but if I got up and looked at it, ten to
one I shouldn’t be able to say for certain; because once a
thing’s done, no one ever knows how it happened. Oh! dear
me, the mystery of life; the inaccuracy of thought! The
ignorance of humanity! To show how very little control of
our possessions we have—what an accidental affair this
living is after all our civilization—let me just count over a
few of the things lost in one lifetime, beginning, for that
seems always the most mysterious of losses—what cat
would gnaw, what rat would nibble—three pale blue
canisters of book-binding tools? Then there were the bird
cages, the iron hoops, the steel skates, the Queen Anne
coal-scuttle, the bagatelle board, the hand organ—all gone,
and jewels, too. Opals and emeralds, they lie about the

Reprint 2025-26



138/KALEIDOSCOPE

roots of turnips. What a scraping paring affair it is to be
sure! The wonder is that I’ve any clothes on my back, that
I sit surrounded by solid furniture at this moment. Why, if
one wants to compare life to anything, one must liken it to
being blown through the Tube at fifty miles an hour—
landing at the other end without a single hairpin in one’s
hair! Shot out at the feet of God entirely naked! Tumbling
head over heels in the asphodel meadows like brown paper
parcels pitched down a shoot in the post office! With one’s
hair flying back like the tail of a race-horse. Yes, that
seems to express the rapidity of life, the perpetual waste
and repair; all so casual, all so haphazard...

But after life. The slow pulling down of thick green
stalks so that the cup of the flower, as it turns over, deluges
one with purple and red light. Why, after all, should one
not be born there as one is born here, helpless, speechless,
unable to focus one’s eyesight, groping at the roots of the
grass, at the toes of the Giants? As for saying which are
trees and which are men and women, or whether there are
such things, that one won’t be in a condition to do for fifty
years or so. There will be nothing but spaces of light and
dark, intersected by thick stalks, and rather higher up
perhaps, rose-shaped blots of an indistinct colour—dim
pinks and blues—which will, as time goes on, become more
definite, become—I don’t know what...

And yet that mark on the wall is not a hole at all. It
may even be caused by some round black substance, such
as a small rose leaf, left over from the summer, and I, not
being a very vigilant housekeeper—look at the dust on the
mantelpiece, for example, the dust which, so they say,
buried Troy three times over, only fragments of pots utterly
refusing annihilation, as one can believe.

The tree outside the window taps very gently on the
pane... I want to think quietly, calmly, spaciously, never
to be interrupted, never to have to rise from my chair, to
slip easily from one thing to another, without any sense of
hostility, or obstacle. I want to sink deeper and deeper,
away from the surface, with its hard separate facts. To
steady myself, let me catch hold of the first idea that

Reprint 2025-26



139/THE MARK ON THE WALL

passes... Shakespeare... Well, he will do as well as another.
A man who sat himself solidly in an armchair, and looked
into the fire, so—a shower of ideas fell perpetually from
some very high Heaven down through his mind. He leant
his forehead on his hand, and people, looking in through
the open door—for this scene is supposed to take place on
a summer’s evening—but how dull this is, this historical
fiction! It doesn’t interest me at all. I wish I could hit upon
a pleasant track of thought, a track indirectly reflecting
credit upon myself, for those are the pleasantest thoughts,
and very frequent even in the minds of modest mouse-
coloured people, who believe genuinely that they dislike to
hear their  own praises. They are not thoughts directly
praising oneself; that is the beauty of them; they are
thoughts like this:

‘And then I came into the room. They were discussing
botany. I said how I’d seen a flower growing on a dust heap
on the site of an old house in Kingsway. The seed, I said,
must have been sown in the reign of Charles the First.
What flowers grew in the reign of Charles the First? I
asked—(but I don’t remember the answer). Tall flowers with
purple tassels to them perhaps. And so it goes on. All the
time I’m dressing up the figure of myself in my own mind,
lovingly, stealthily, not openly adoring it, for if I did that, I
should catch myself out, and stretch my hand at once for
a book in self-protection. Indeed, it is curious how
instinctively one protects the image of oneself from idolatry
or any other handling that could make it ridiculous, or too
unlike the original to be believed in any longer. Or is it not
so very curious after all? It is a matter of great importance.
Suppose the looking glass smashes, the image disappears,
and the romantic figure with the green of forest depths all
about it is there no longer, but only that shell of a person
which is seen by other people—what an airless, shallow,
bald, prominent world it becomes! A world not to be lived
in. As we face each other in omnibuses and underground
railways we are looking into the mirror; that accounts for
the vagueness, the gleam of glassiness, in our eyes. And
the novelists in future will realise more and more the

Reprint 2025-26



140/KALEIDOSCOPE

importance of these reflections, for of course there is not
one reflection but an almost infinite number; those are
the depths they will explore, those the phantoms they will
pursue, leaving the description of reality more and more
out of their stories, taking a knowledge of it for granted, as
the Greeks did and Shakespeare perhaps—but these
generalisations are very worthless. The military sound of
the word is enough. It recalls leading articles, cabinet
ministers—a whole class of things indeed which, as a child,
one thought the thing itself, the standard thing, from which
one could not depart save at the risk of nameless
damnation. Generalisations bring back somehow Sunday
in London, Sunday afternoon walks, Sunday luncheons,
and also ways of speaking of the dead, clothes, and habits—
like the habit of sitting all together in one room until a
certain hour, although nobody liked it. There was a rule
for everything. The rule for tablecloths at that particular
period was that they should be made of tapestry with little
yellow compartments marked upon them, such as you may
see in photographs of the carpets in the corridors of the
royal palaces. Tablecloths of a different kind were not real
tablecloths. How shocking, and yet how wonderful it was
to discover that these real things, Sunday luncheons,
Sunday walks, country houses, and tablecloths were not
entirely real, were indeed half phantoms, and the
damnation which visited the disbeliever in them was only
a sense of illegitimate freedom. What now takes the place
of those things I wonder, those real standard things? Men
perhaps, should you be a woman; the masculine point of
view which governs our lives which sets the standard, which
established Whitaker’s Table of Precedency, which has
become, I suppose, since the war, half a phantom to many
men and women, which soon, one may hope, will be laughed
into the dustbin where the phantoms go, the mahogany
sideboards and the Landseer prints, Gods and Devils, Hell
and so forth, leaving us all with an intoxicating sense of
illegitimate freedom—if freedom exists...

Reprint 2025-26



141/THE MARK ON THE WALL

Stop and Think

1. What is the string of varied thoughts that the mark
on the wall stimulates in the author’s mind?

2. What change in the depiction of reality does the
author foresee for future novelists?

In certain lights that mark on the wall seems actually
to project from the wall. Nor is it entirely circular. I cannot
be sure, but it seems to cast a perceptible shadow,
suggesting that if I ran my finger down that strip of the
wall it would, at a certain point, mount and descend a
small tumulus, a smooth tumulus like those barrows on
the South Downs which are, they say, either tombs or
camps. Of the two I should prefer them to be tombs, desiring
melancholy like most English people, and finding it natural
at the end of a walk to think of the bones stretched beneath
the turf... There must be some book about it. Some antiquary
must have dug up those bones and given them a name...
What sort of a man is an antiquary, I wonder? Retired
Colonels for the most part, I dare say, leading parties of
aged labourers to the top here, examining clods of earth
and stone, and getting into correspondence with the
neighbouring clergy, which, being opened at breakfast time,
gives them a feeling of importance, and the comparison of
arrow-heads necessitates cross-country journeys to the
county towns, an agreeable necessity both to them and to
their elderly wives, who wish to make plum jam or to clean
out the study, and have every reason for keeping that great
question of the camp or the tomb in perpetual suspension,
while the Colonel himself feels agreeably philosophic in
accumulating evidence on both sides of the question. It is
true that he does finally incline to believe in the camp; and,
being opposed, indites a pamphlet which he is about to
read at the quarterly meeting of the local society when a
stroke lays him low, and his last conscious thoughts are
not of wife or child, but of the camp and that arrow-head
there, which is now in the case at the local museum, together
with the foot of a Chinese murderess, a handful of
Elizabethan nails, a great many Tudor clay pipes, a picture

Reprint 2025-26



142/KALEIDOSCOPE

of Roman pottery, and the wineglass that Nelson drank out
of—proving I really don’t know what.

No, no, nothing is proved, nothing is known. And if I
were to get up at this very moment and ascertain that the
mark on the wall is really—what shall we say? the head of
a gigantic old nail, driven in two hundred years ago, which
has now, owing to the patient attrition of many generations
of housemaids, revealed its head above the coat of paint,
and is taking its first view of modern life in the sight of a
white walled fire-lit room, what should I gain?—Knowledge?
Matter for further speculation? I can think sitting still as
well as standing up. And what is knowledge? What are our
learned men save the descendants of witches and hermits
who crouched in caves and in woods brewing herbs,
interrogating shrew-mice and writing down the language
of the stars? And the less we honour them as our
superstitions dwindle and our respect for beauty and
health of mind increases... Yes, one could imagine a very
pleasant world. A quiet, spacious world, with the flowers
so red and blue in the open fields. A world without professors
or specialists or house-keepers with the profiles of
policemen, a world which one could slice with one’s thought
as a fish slices the water with his fin, grazing the stems of
the waterlilies, hanging suspended over nests of white sea
eggs... How peaceful it is down here, rooted in the centre
of the world and gazing up through the grey waters, with
their  sudden gleams of light, and their reflections—if it
were not for Whitaker’s Almanack*—if it were not for the
Table of Precedency!

I must jump up and see for myself what that mark on
the wall really is—a nail, a rose-leaf, a crack in the wood?

Here is Nature once more at her old game of self-
preservation. This train of thought, she perceives, is
threatening mere waste of energy, even some collision with
reality, for who will ever be able to lift a finger against
Whitaker’s Table of Precedency? The Archbishop of
Canterbury is followed by the Lord High Chancellor; the
Lord High Chancellor is followed by the Archbishop of York.
* Whitaker’s Almanack is a reference book, published annually in the United Kingdom. It

consists of articles, lists and tables on a wide range of subjects.

Reprint 2025-26



143/THE MARK ON THE WALL

Everybody follows somebody, such is the philosophy of
Whitaker; and the great thing is to know who follows whom.
Whitaker knows, and let that, so Nature counsels, comfort
you, instead of enraging you; and if you can’t be comforted,
if you must shatter this hour of peace, think of the mark
on the wall.

I understand Nature’s game—her prompting to take
action as a way of ending any thought that threatens to
excite or to pain. Hence, I suppose, comes our slight
contempt for men of action—men, we assume, who don’t
think. Still there’s no harm in putting a full stop to one’s
disagreeable thoughts by looking at a mark on the wall.

Indeed, now that I have fixed my eyes upon it, I feel
that I have grasped a plank in the sea; I feel a satisfying
sense of reality which at once turns the two Archbishops
and the Lord High Chancellor to the shadows of shades.
Here is something definite, something real. Thus, waking
from a midnight dream of horror, one hastily turns on the
light and lies quiescent, worshipping the chest of drawers,
worshipping solidity, worshipping reality, worshipping the
impersonal world which is a proof of some existence other
than ours. That is what one wants to be sure of... Wood is
a pleasant thing to think about. It comes from a tree; and
trees grow, and we don’t know how they grow. For years
and years they grow, without paying any attention to us,
in meadows, in forests, and by the side of rivers—all things
one likes to think about. The cows swish their tails beneath
them on hot afternoons; they paint rivers so green that
when a moorhen dives one expects to see its feathers all
green when it comes up again. I like to think of the fish
balanced against the stream like flags blown out; and of
water beetles slowly raising domes of mud upon the bed of
the river. I like to think of the tree itself: first the close dry
sensation of being wood; then the grinding of the storm;
then the slow, delicious ooze of sap. I like to think of it,
too, on winter’s nights standing in the empty field with all
leaves close-furled, nothing tender exposed to the iron
bullets of the moon, a naked mast upon an earth that goes
tumbling, tumbling all night long. The song of birds must
sound very loud and strange in June; and how cold the

Reprint 2025-26



144/KALEIDOSCOPE

feet of insects must feel upon it, as they make laborious
progresses up the creases of the bark, or sun themselves
upon the thin green awning of the leaves, and look straight
in front of them with diamond-cut red eyes... One by one
the fibres snap beneath the immense cold pressure of the
earth, then the last storm comes and, falling, the highest
branches drive deep into the ground again. Even so, life
isn’t done with; there are a million patient, watchful lives
still for a tree, all over the world, in bedrooms, in ships, on
the pavement, living rooms, where men and women sit
after tea, smoking cigarettes. It is full of peaceful thoughts,
happy thoughts, this tree. I should like to take each one
separately—but something is getting in the way... Where
was I? What has it all been about? A tree? A river? The
Downs? Whitaker’s Almanack? The fields of asphodel? I
can’t remember a thing. Everything’s moving, falling,
slipping, vanishing... There is a vast upheaval of matter.

Stop and Think

1. What is the author’s perception of the limitations of
knowledge and learning?

2. Describe the unbroken flow of thoughts and
perceptions of the narrator’s mind, using the example
of the colonel and the clergy.

Someone is standing over me and saying:
‘I’m going out to buy a newspaper.’
‘Yes?’
‘Though it’s no good buying newspapers... Nothing ever

happens.  Curse this war; God damn this war!... All the
same, I don’t see why we should have a snail on our wall.’

Ah, the mark on the wall! It was a snail...

Understanding the Text
1. An account of reflections is more important than a description

of reality according to the author. Why?

2. Looking back at objects and habits of a bygone era can give
one a feeling of phantom-like unreality. What examples does
the author give to bring out this idea?

Reprint 2025-26



145/THE MARK ON THE WALL

3. How does the imagery of (i) the fish (ii) the tree, used almost
poetically by the author, emphasise the idea of stillness of living,
breathing thought?

4 How does the author pin her reflections on a variety of subjects
on the ‘mark on the wall’? What does this tell us about the way
the human mind functions?

5. Not seeing the obvious could lead a perceptive mind to reflect
upon more philosophical issues. Discuss this with reference
to the ‘snail on the wall’.

Talking about the Text
1. ‘In order to fix a date, it is necessary to remember what one

saw’. Have you experienced this at any time? Describe one such
incident, and the non-chronological details that helped you
remember a particular date.

2. ‘Tablecloths of a different kind were not real tablecloths’. Does
this sentence embody the idea of blind adherence to rules and
tradition? Discuss with reference to ‘Understanding Freedom
and Discipline’ by J. Krishnamurti that you’ve already read.

3. According to the author, nature prompts action as a way of
ending thought. Do we tacitly assume that ‘men of action are
men who don’t think’?

Appreciation
1. Broadly speaking, there are two kinds of narration: one, where

the reader would remain aware of some outside voice telling
him/her what’s going on; two, a narration that seeks to
reproduce, without the narrator’s intervention, the full
spectrum and continuous flow of a character’s mental process.
Which of these is exemplified in this essay? Illustrate.

2. This essay frequently uses the non-periodic or loose sentence
structure: the component members are continuous, but so
loosely joined, that the sentence could have easily been broken
without damage to or break in thought. Locate a few such
sentences, and discuss how they contribute to the relaxed and
conversational effect of the narration.

Reprint 2025-26



146/KALEIDOSCOPE

Language Work

A. Grammar: Content Words and Function Words

A sentence has words in it. What kind of words? It has nouns:

(1a) I looked up and saw the mark on the wall.

and verbs

(1b) I looked up and saw the mark on the wall.

It may have adjectives

(2a) How readily our thoughts swarm upon a new object…

and adverbs

(2b) How readily our thoughts swarm upon a new object…

Such words have a meaning that can be readily explained;
these words can be defined. They also have content. Nouns,
verbs, adjectives and adverbs are content words. But what about
the remaining words in our examples above? Take for example
the word and. What is its ‘meaning’?

(3) I looked up and saw the mark on the wall.

Its meaning is in its function in the sentence. It joins together
two words, phrases or sentences. It is a conjunction.

A conjunction is a function word. Function words are the kind of
words that we leave out when we send telegrams, when we can
guess at the meaning. Look at this example

…saw mark on wall

What words have been left out in this message? Two
occurrences of the word the. We can call the the definite article.
What is its function? In example (1), it shows that a unique
mark on a unique wall is being spoken about. Virginia Woolf
isn’t speaking about ‘a mark on a wall’, that is, any mark on
any wall. She’s speaking about a particular, definite mark on
a particular, definite wall.

(4) I looked up and saw the mark on the wall.

Definite and indefinite articles are function words. What about
the words I and our?

(5a) I looked up and saw the mark on the wall.

(5b) How readily our thoughts swarm upon a new object…

These are pronouns; they occupy the place of a noun. But are
they, therefore, content words, like nouns? We shall argue that
they are not. (Notice that they get left out in telegraphic
language.) We can make up new nouns in a language, but we

Reprint 2025-26



147/THE MARK ON THE WALL

cannot make up new pronouns. Pronouns are a closed set; nouns
are an open set. So, we shall say, pronouns are function words.

The words that remain in our examples are up, on, upon, and
how. The first three are prepositions. Are prepositions content
words or function words?  We can argue that prepositions have
meaning, and treat them as content words. (Notice that they
occur in telegraphic language.) Or we can argue that
prepositions are a closed set of words like pronouns, and treat
them as function words. So this question does not have a single
answer.

Finally, what is the function of how in our example in (2)? How,
we all know, usually asks a question; it is a question word. But
our example in (2) is not a question. It is an exclamation.  How
occurs in the exclamation (2) in place of the intensifying word
so in (6a)

(6a) Our thoughts swarm upon a new object so readily!

(6b) How readily our thoughts swarm upon a new object!

How occurs instead of so in (6b) because the emphasised word
readily has moved to the front of the sentence.

Summing up: Content words are nouns, verbs, adjectives,
adverbs, and perhaps prepositions.

Function words include conjunctions, pronouns, determiners
and demonstratives, quantifiers and intensifiers, question
words, and perhaps prepositions.

TASK

(i) Can you say which words are content words in the examples
below, and which are function words? All the examples are from
the text in this unit.

(ii) Can you name the kind of word (its category as noun, pronoun,
etc.?). A dictionary may help you to do this. You can work in
pairs or groups, discussing the reasons for your analysis.

• Ants carry a blade of straw so feverishly, and then leave it.

• They wanted to leave this house because they wanted to change
their style of furniture.

• I don’t believe it was made by a nail after all; it’s too big, too
round, for that.

• There was a rule for everything.

• The tree outside the window taps very gently on the pane.

Reprint 2025-26



148/KALEIDOSCOPE

B. Pronunciation

We have seen how the segments of spoken language, i.e. vowels
and consonants, combine to produce syllables, words and
sentences. When we articulate these segments, we notice that
there is some variation. That is, in connected speech, we do
not isolate sounds, but several things can happen to the
pronunciation of their individual segments. The speed and
rhythm can cause some segments to have weak forms, some to
drop out, and some put in.

Words, sometimes, have both strong and weak forms, depending
on whether they are pronounced with force. The word ‘is’, for
instance, is pronounced /iz/ when said in isolation, or in
emphasis as in

He is responsible.

[Meaning: He cannot get away from the fact that he is
responsible.]

But in the utterance

He is a doctor

The word ‘is’ has no emphasis, and so it is pronounced as /s/
or /z/.

TASK

(i) Look at the following words

a and had is not

Notice the difference in pronunciation when they are said in
isolation and in normal conversation.

(ii) Find out five more words which have both strong and weak
forms.

Suggested Reading
The Death of the Moth by Virginia Woolf

The Moment by Virginia Woolf.

Reprint 2025-26



149/FILM-MAKING
##16##
3
Film-making

Ingmar Bergman is a well known Swedish director of
films noted for their starkness, their subtle use of black
and white and ‘shades’ of those extremes, the ambiguity
of their content, and a certain brooding presence that
seems to pervade them all. The list of Bergman films is
long; his best known include The Seventh Seal (1957),
Wild Strawberries (1958), The Virgin Spring (1960),
The Silence (1963), Persona (1967), The Passion of
Anna (1970), and Cries and Whispers (1973)—this last
film in colour, though emphasising red in all its shadings.
In the following selection, the Introduction to Four

Ingmar Bergman Screen-plays by Ingmar Bergman (1960), Bergman
1918-2007 discusses how he views the art of film-making.

During the shooting of The Virgin Spring, we were up in the
northern province of Dalarna in May and it was early in
the morning, about half past seven. The landscape there
is rugged, and our company was working by a little lake in
the forest. It was very cold, about 30 degrees, and from
time to time a few snowflakes fell through the grey, rain-
dimmed sky. The company was dressed in a strange variety
of clothing—raincoats, oil slickers, Icelandic sweater
jackets, old blankets, coachmen’s coats, medieval robes.
Our men had laid some ninety feet of rusty, buckling rail
over the difficult terrain, to dolly the camera on. We were
all helping with the equipment—actors, electricians, make-
up men, script girl, sound crew—mainly to keep warm.
Suddenly someone shouted and pointed toward the sky.
Then we saw a crane floating high above the fir trees, and
then another, and then several cranes floating majestically

Reprint 2025-26



150/KALEIDOSCOPE

in a circle above us. We all dropped what we were doing
and ran to the top of a nearby hill to see the cranes better.
We stood there for a long time, until they turned westward
and disappeared over the forest. And suddenly I thought:
this is what it means to make a movie in Sweden. This is
what can happen, this is how we work together with our
old equipment and little money, and this is how we can
suddenly drop everything for the love of four cranes floating
above the tree tops.

Childhood Foretells Future

My association with film goes back to the world of
childhood. My grandmother had a very large old apartment
in Uppsala. I used to sit under the dining-room table there,
‘listening’ to the sunshine which came in through the
gigantic windows. The cathedral bells went ding-dong, and
the sunlight moved about and ‘sounded’ in a special way.
One day, when winter was giving way to spring and I was
five years old, a piano was being played in the next
apartment. It played waltzes, nothing but waltzes. On the
wall hung a large picture of Venice. As the sunlight moved
across the picture the water in the canal began to flow,
the pigeons flew up from the square, people talked and
gesticulated. Bells sounded, not those of Uppsala Cathedral
but from the picture itself. And the piano music also came
from that remarkable picture of Venice.

A child who is born and brought up in a vicarage
acquires an early familiarity with life and death behind
the scenes. Father performed funerals, marriages,
baptisms, gave advice and prepared sermons. The devil
was an early acquaintance, and in the child’s mind there
was a need to personify him. This is where my magic
lantern came in. It consisted of a small metal box with a
carbide lamp—I can still remember the smell of the hot
metal—and coloured glass slides: Red Riding Hood and
the Wolf, and all the others. And the wolf was the Devil,
without horns but with a tail and a gaping red mouth,
strangely real yet incomprehensible, a picture of wickedness
and temptation on the flowered wall of the nursery.

Reprint 2025-26



151/FILM-MAKING

When I was ten years old I received my first, rattling
film projector, with its chimney and lamp. I found it both
mystifying and fascinating. The first film I had was nine
feet long and brown in colour. It showed a girl lying asleep
in a meadow, who woke up and stretched out her arms,
then disappeared to the right. That was all there was to it.
The film was a great success and was projected every night
until it broke and could not be mended any more.

This little rickety machine was my first conjuring set.
And even today I remind myself with childish excitement
that I am really a conjurer, since cinematography is based
on deception of the human eye. I have worked it out that if
I see a film which has a running time of one hour, I sit
through twenty-seven minutes of complete darkness—the
blankness between frames. When I show a film I am guilty
of deceit. I use an apparatus which is constructed to take
advantage of a certain human weakness, an apparatus
with which I can sway my audience in a highly emotional
manner—make them laugh, scream with fright, smile,
believe in fairy stories, become indignant, feel shocked,
charmed, deeply moved or perhaps yawn with boredom.
Thus I am either an impostor or, when the audience is
willing to be taken in, a conjurer. I perform conjuring tricks
with apparatus so expensive and so wonderful that any
entertainer in history would have given anything to have it.

Stop and Think

1. What childhood memories does the author recollect
that had a bearing on his later involvement with film-
making?

2. What connection does the author draw between film-
making and conjuring?

Split Second Impressions

A film for me begins with something very vague—a
chance remark or a bit of conversation, a hazy but agreeable
event unrelated to any particular situation. It can be a few
bars of music, a shaft of light across the street. Sometimes

Reprint 2025-26



152/KALEIDOSCOPE

in my work at the theatre I have envisioned actors made
up for yet unplayed roles.

These are split second impressions that disappear as
quickly as they come, yet leave behind a mood—like
pleasant dreams. It is a mental state, not an actual story,
but one abounding in fertile associations and images. Most
of all, it is a brightly coloured thread sticking out of the
dark sack of the unconscious. If I begin to wind up this
thread, and do it carefully, a complete film will emerge.

This primitive nucleus strives to achieve definite form,
moving in a way that may be lazy and half asleep at first.
Its stirring is accompanied by vibrations and rhythms
which are very special and unique to each film. The picture
sequences then assume a pattern in accordance with these
rhythms, obeying laws born out of and conditioned by my
original stimulus.

If that embryonic substance seems to have enough
strength to be made into a film, I decide to materialise it.
Then comes something very complicated and difficult: the

Reprint 2025-26



153/FILM-MAKING

transformation of rhythms, moods, atmosphere, tensions,
sequences, tones and scents into words and sentences,
into an understandable screenplay.

This is an almost impossible task. The only thing that
can be satisfactorily transferred from that original complex
of rhythms and moods is the dialogue, and even dialogue is
a sensitive substance which may offer resistance. Written
dialogue is like a musical score, almost incomprehensible
to the average person. Its interpretation demands a technical
knack plus a certain kind of imagination and feeling—
qualities which are so often lacking, even among actors.
One can write dialogue, but how it should be delivered, its
rhythm and tempo, what is to take place between lines—all
this must be omitted for practical reasons. Such a detailed
script would be unreadable. I try to squeeze instructions as
to location, characterisation and atmosphere into my
screenplays in understandable terms, but the success of
this depends on my writing ability and the perceptiveness
of the reader, which are not always predictable.

The Rhythm of a Film

Now we come to essentials, by which I mean montage,
rhythm and the relation of one picture to another—the
vital third dimension without which the film is merely a
dead product from a factory. Here I cannot clearly give a
key, as in a musical score, nor a specific idea of the tempo
which determines the relationship of the elements involved.
It is quite impossible for me to indicate the way in which
the film ‘breathes’ and pulsates.

I have often wished for a kind of notation which would
enable me to put on paper all the shades and tones of my
vision, to record distinctly the inner structure of a film.
For when I stand in the artistically devastating atmosphere
of the studio, my hands and head full of all the trivial and
irritating details that go with motion-picture production,
it often takes a tremendous effort to remember how I
originally saw and thought out this or that sequence, or
what was the relation between the scene of four weeks ago
and that of today. If I could express myself clearly, in

Reprint 2025-26



154/KALEIDOSCOPE

explicit symbols, then this problem would be almost
eliminated and I could work with absolute confidence that
whenever I liked I could prove the relationship between
the part and the whole and put my finger on the rhythm,
the continuity of the film.

Thus the script is a very imperfect technical basis for a
film. And there is another important point in this
connection which I should like to mention. Film has nothing
to do with literature; the character and substance of the
two art forms are usually in conflict. This probably has
something to do with the receptive process of the mind.
The written word is read and assimilated by a conscious
act of the will in alliance with the intellect; little by little
it affects the imagination and the emotions. The process is
different with a motion picture. When we experience a film,
we consciously prime ourselves for illusion. Putting aside
will and intellect, we make way for it in our imagination.
The sequence of pictures plays directly on our feelings.

Music works in the same fashion; I would say that
there is no art form that has so much in common with film
as music. Both affect our emotions directly, not via the
intellect. And film is mainly rhythm; it is inhalation and
exhalation in continuous sequence. Ever since childhood,
music has been my great source of recreation and
stimulation, and I often experience a film or play musically.

Stop and Think

1. What is the nature of the first impressions that form
the basis for a film?

2. Which art form is film-making closest to? What is
the reason for the similarity?

Film and Written Literature

It is mainly because of this difference between film
and literature that we should avoid making films out of
books. The irrational dimension of a literary work, the germ
of its existence, is often untranslatable into visual terms—
and it, in turn, destroys the special, irrational dimension
of the film. If, despite this, we wish to translate something

Reprint 2025-26



155/FILM-MAKING

literary into film terms, we must make an infinite number
of complicated adjustments which often bear little or no
fruit in proportion to the effort expended.

I myself have never had any ambition to be an author.
I do not want to write novels, short stories, essays,
biographies, or even plays for the theatre. I only want to
make films—films about conditions, tensions, pictures,
rhythms and characters which are in one way or another
important to me. The motion picture, with its complicated
process of birth, is my method of saying what I want to my
fellow men. I am a film-maker, not an author.

Thus the writing of the script is a difficult period but
a useful one, for it compels me to prove logically the validity
of my ideas. In doing this, I am caught in a conflict—a
conflict between my need to transmit a complicated
situation through visual images, and my desire for absolute
clarity. I do not intend my work to be solely for the benefit
of myself or the few, but for the entertainment of the general
public. The wishes of the public are imperative. But
sometimes I risk following my own impulse, and it has
been shown that the public can respond with surprising
sensitivity to the most unconventional line of development.

When shooting begins, the most important thing is
that those who work with me feel a definite contact, that
all of us somehow cancel out our conflicts through working
together. We must pull in one direction for the sake of the
work at hand. Sometimes this leads to dispute. But the
more definite and clear the ‘marching orders’, the easier it
is to reach the goal which has been set. This is the basis
for my conduct as director, and perhaps the explanation of
much of the nonsense that has been written about me.

While I cannot let myself be concerned with what people
think and say about me personally, I believe that reviewers
and critics have every right to interpret my films as they
like. I refuse to interpret my work to others, and I cannot
tell the critic what to think; each person has the right to
understand a film as he sees it. Either he is attracted or
repelled. A film is made to create reaction. If the audience
does not react one way or another, it is an indifferent work
and worthless.

Reprint 2025-26



156/KALEIDOSCOPE

I do not mean by this that I believe in being ‘different’
at any price. A lot has been said about the value of
originality, and I find this foolish. Either you are original
or you are not. It is completely natural for artists to take
from and give to each other, to borrow from and experience
one another. In my own life, my great literary experience
was Strindberg. There are works of his which can still
make my hair stand on end—The People of Hemso, for
example. And it is my dream to produce Dream Play some
day. Olof Molander’s production of it in 1934 was for me a
fundamental dramatic experience.

Stop and Think

1. Quite often a film made out of a book is not very
successful. Discuss.

2. What, according to Bergman, is the relationship
between a film-maker and his audience?

Significant Persons

On a personal level, there are many people who have
meant a great deal to me. My father and mother were
certainly of vital importance, not only in themselves but
because they created a world for me to revolt against. In
my family there was an atmosphere of hearty
wholesomeness which I, a sensitive young plant, scorned
and rebelled against. But that strict middle-class home
gave me a wall to pound on, something to sharpen myself
against. At the same time they taught me a number of
values—efficiency, punctuality, a sense of financial
responsibility—which may be ‘bourgeois’ but are
nevertheless important to the artist. They are part of the
process of setting oneself severe standards. Today as a
film maker I am conscientious, hard-working and extremely
careful; my films involve good craftsmanship, and my pride
is the pride of a good craftsman.

Among the people who have meant something in my
professional development is Torsten Hammaren of
Gothenburg. I went there from Hälsingborg, where I had
been head of the municipal theatre for two years. I had no

Reprint 2025-26



157/FILM-MAKING

conception of what theatre was; Hammaren taught me
during the four years I stayed in Gothenburg. Then, when
I made my first attempts at film, Alf Sjöberg—who directed
Torment—taught me a great deal. And there was Lorens
Marmstedt, who really taught me filmmaking from scratch
after my first unsuccessful movie. Among other things I
learned from Marmstedt is the one unbreakable rule: you
must look at your own work very coldly and clearly; you
must be a devil to yourself in the screening room when
watching the day’s rushes. Then there is Herbert Grevenius,
one of the few who believed in me as a writer. I had trouble
with script-writing, and was reaching out more and more
to the drama, to dialogue, as a means of expression. He
gave me great encouragement.

Finally, there is Carl Anders Dymling, my producer.
He is crazy enough to place more faith in the sense of
responsibility of a creative artist than in calculations of
profit and loss. I am thus able to work with an integrity
that has become the very air I breathe, and one of the
main reasons I do not want to work outside of Sweden. The
moment I lose this freedom I will cease to be a film-maker,
because I have no skill in the art of compromise. My only
significance in the world of film lies in the freedom of my
creativity.

The Tightrope of Film-making

Today, the ambitious film-maker is obliged to walk a
tightrope without a net. He may be a conjurer, but no one
conjures the producer, the bank director or the theatre
owners when the public refuses to go see a film and lay
down the money by which producer, bank director, theatre
owner and conjurer can live. The conjurer may then be
deprived of his magic wand; I would like to be able to
measure the amount of talent, initiative and creative ability
which has been destroyed by the film industry in its
ruthlessly efficient sausage machine. What was play to me
once has now become a struggle. Failure, criticism, public
indifference all hurt more today than yesterday. The brutality
of the industry is undisguised—yet that can be an advantage.

Reprint 2025-26



158/KALEIDOSCOPE

So much for people and the film business. I have been
asked, as a clergyman’s son, about the role of religion in my
thinking and film-making. To me, religious problems are
continuously alive. I never cease to concern myself with
them; it goes on every hour of every day. Yet this does not
take place on the emotional level, but on an intellectual
one. Religious emotion, religious sentimentality, is
something I got rid of long ago—I hope. The religious problem
is an intellectual one to me: the relationship of my mind to
my intuition. The result of this conflict is usually some
kind of tower of Babel.

Philosophically, there is a book which was a tremendous
experience for me: Eiono Kaila’s Psychology of the Personality.
His thesis that man lives strictly according to his needs—
negative and positive—was shattering to me, but terribly
true. And I built on this ground.

Cathedral-building

People ask what are my  intentions with my  films—my
aims. It is a difficult and dangerous question, and I usually
give an evasive answer: I try to tell the truth about the
human condition, the truth as I see it. This answer seems
to satisfy everyone, but it is not quite correct. I prefer to
describe what I would like my aim to be.

There is an old story of how the cathedral of Chartres
was struck by lightning and burned to the ground. Then
thousands of people came from all points of the compass,
like a giant procession of ants, and together they began to
rebuild the cathedral on its old site. They worked until the
building was completed—master builders, artists, labourers,
clowns, noblemen, priests, burghers. But they all remained
anonymous and no one knows to this day who built the
cathedral of Chartres.

Regardless of my own beliefs and my own doubts, which
are unimportant in this connection, it is my opinion that
art lost its basic creative drive the moment it was separated
from worship. It severed an umbilical cord and now lives its
own sterile life, generating and degenerating itself. In former
days the artist remained unknown and his work was to the

Reprint 2025-26



159/FILM-MAKING

glory of God. He lived and died without being more or less
important than other artisans; ‘eternal values’, ‘immortality’
and ‘masterpiece’ were terms not applicable in his case.
The ability to create was a gift. In such a world flourished
invulnerable assurance and natural humility.

Today the individual has become the highest form and
the greatest bane of artistic creation. The smallest wound
or pain of the ego is examined under a microscope as if it
were of eternal importance. The artist considers his
isolation, his subjectivity, his individualism almost holy.
Thus we finally gather in one large pen, where we stand
and bleat about our loneliness without listening to each
other and without realising that we are smothering each
other to death. The individualists stare into each other’s
eyes and yet deny the existence of each other. We walk in
circles, so limited by our anxieties that we can no longer
distinguish between true and false, between the gangster’s
whim and the purest ideal.

Thus if I am asked what I would like the general
purpose of my films to be, I would reply that I want to be
one of the artists in the cathedral on the great plain. I
want to make a dragon’s head, an angel, a devil—or perhaps
a saint—out of stone. It does not matter which; it is the
sense of satisfaction that counts. Regardless of whether I
believe or not, whether I am a Christian or not, I would
play my part in the collective building of the cathedral.

Stop and Think

1. What is the story of the Cathetdral of Chartres and
how does the author relate it to his profession?

2. What are some of the flaws of the world of film-
making today?

Interview with Umberto Eco
With over 30 honorary doctorates and a string of literary and
academic awards, Umberto Eco has the reputation of being one of
the world’s foremost intellectuals. A professor at the University of
Bologna in Italy, Umberto Eco is known for his ideas on semiotics,
literary interpretation and medieval aesthetics.  He is a
distinguished novelist and writer. His novel, The Name of the

Reprint 2025-26



160/KALEIDOSCOPE

Rose, published in 1980 sold over ten million copies. Here is an
excerpt from an interview with Eco where he expresses his views
on the filming of books.

The Name of the Rose is a very serious novel. It’s a detective
yarn at one level but it also delves into metaphysics,
theology, and medieval history. Yet it enjoyed a huge mass
audience. Were you puzzled at all by this?

No. Journalists are puzzled. And sometimes publishers. And this is
because journalists and publishers believe that people like
trash and don’t like difficult reading experiences. Consider there
are six billion people in this planet. The Name of the Rose sold
between 10 and 15 million copies. So in a way I reached only a
small percentage of readers. But it is exactly these kinds of
readers who don’t want easy experiences. Or at least don’t
always want this. I myself, at 9 pm after dinner, watch television
and want to see either ‘Miami Vice’ or ‘Emergency Room’. I enjoy
it and I need it. But not all day.

Could the huge success of the novel have anything to do with
the fact that it dealt with a period of medieval history that...

That’s possible. But let me tell you another story, because I often
tell stories like a Chinese wise man. My American publisher
said while she loved my book, she didn’t expect to sell more
than 3,000 copies in a country where nobody has seen a
cathedral or studies Latin. So I was given an advance for 3,000
copies, but in the end it sold two or three million in the U.S.

A lot of books have been written about the medieval past far
before mine. I think the success of the book is a mystery. Nobody
can predict it. I think if I had written The Name of the Rose ten
years earlier or ten years later, it wouldn’t have been the same.
Why it worked at that time is a mystery.

What did you think about the film [directed by Jean Jacques
Annaud and starring Sean Connery]? Why weren’t you happy
with it?

I expected the film to be different. My novel is a kind of club
sandwich—lettuce, tomato, cheese...

Different layers of meaning?

Yes. A film cannot select all the layers. It has to make do with jambon
or cheese... I didn’t react like authors who, immediately after
the film is made, say it is not at all like my book. But after that
experience, I asked my publisher not to sell the rights of the
novel to cinema. I did this because I discovered that 80 per
cent of readers read the book after the movie. And that is very
painful for a novelist.

Reprint 2025-26



161/FILM-MAKING

But surely this also means greater success, greater
remuneration?

Yes. But it is embarrassing to know that somebody else has already
told the reader that the novel should be read in a particular
way. That he should imagine the face of a character in a
particular way. The only enviable position is that of Homer’s
who had the film made more than 2000 years after the book
(laughs).

So this is why Stanley Kubrick never got to make Foucault’s
Pendulum?

Since I had laid down a general rule, the publisher said no. Then
Stanley Kubrick died. But it may have been a great movie
(laughs).

Talking about Foucault’s Pendulum, there is a sense in which
you did the Da Vinci Code before Dan Brown did. Of course,
you did it as a myth that takes on a strange reality and he
did it as it was historical truth.

I told Dan Brown’s story. My characters are his. I gave the broad
picture of this kind of literature.

MUKUND PADMANABHAN

Understanding the Text
1. Pick out examples from the text that show Bergman’s sensitivity

to sensory impressions which have made him a great film-
maker.

2. What do you understand of the complexity of the little invisible
steps that go into the making of a good film?

3. What are some of the risks that film-making involves?

4. What misgivings does Bergman have about the contemporary
film industry?

5. Compare Bergman’s views about making films out of books with
that of Umberto Eco’s.

Talking about the Text
1. According to the author, split-second impressions form a

‘mental state, not an actual story, but one abounding in fertile
associations and images’.

Compare this with Virginia Woolf’s experiment with the stream
of consciousness technique in ‘The Mark on the Wall’.

Reprint 2025-26



162/KALEIDOSCOPE

2. Bergman talks about the various influences in his life including
his parents and his religious upbringing.  To what extent are
an individual’s achievements dependent on the kind of
influences he or she has had in life? Discuss.

Appreciation
1. Autobiographical accounts make interesting reading when the

author selects episodes that are connected to the pursuit of
excellence. How does this apply to Ingmar Bergman’s narration
of the details of film-making?

2. Comment on the conversational tone of the narration.  Compare
this with the very informal style adopted by Umberto Eco in
the interview.

Language Work

A. Vocabulary

Find out and write down the definitions of the following terms
used in the film industry

script project montage flashback

stage prop footlights

B. Grammar

We saw in the grammar section of the unit on Freedom that a
sentence can consist of clauses and phrases.

Let us now look at the basic form of a sentence and study its
parts. A sentence consists of a subject and a predicate. Take
the sentence

My grandmother had a very large old apartment in Uppsala.

The sentence here talks about ‘the grandmother’. ‘The
grandmother’ is the subject of the sentence.  What is said about
the subject ‘grandmother’ is the predicate of the sentence. ‘had
a very large old apartment in Uppsala’ is the predicate.

Generally a sentence begins with the subject. The predicate
begins with a verb. ‘had’ is the verb in the example above. The
subject answers the question ‘who’ or ‘what’  before the verb.

Question: ‘Who had?’

Answer: ‘the grandmother had’.

Reprint 2025-26



163/FILM-MAKING

The object of a sentence generally comes after the verb. It
answers the question ‘what’ after the verb. ‘Had what?’  ‘had
an apartment’  is the answer. ‘Apartment’ is the object of the
sentence. The word ‘apartment’ has an article and two
adjectives preceding it.

‘a very large old apartment’; the word ‘very’ is an intensifier for
the adjective ‘large’. We are also given information about the
location of the apartment, ‘in Uppsala’. This is a prepositional
phrase and consists of a preposition and a noun. ‘in Uppsala’
is an adjunct. It gives additional information.

TASK

Analyse the parts of the following sentences according to the pattern
above

• My association with film goes back to the world of childhood.
• This is an almost impossible task.
• Thus the script is a very imperfect technical basis for a film.
• I would play my part in the collective building of the cathedral.
• The ability to create was a gift.

Reprint 2025-26



164/KALEIDOSCOPE

C. Pronunciation

We have seen that it is not necessary, nor desirable, to
pronounce every sound perfectly to be understood. Quite a lot
of sounds that you might expect to hear are not actually
pronounced. In rapid speech, sounds may be left out or elided,
especially when they occur as part of a cluster of consonants.
For example in the phrase ‘next day’, the /t/ is lost

next/ day

TASK

Mark the consonants that are left out or elided in the following utterances

• new textbooks

• written scripts

• he must be ill

• mashed potatoes

Things to do
Think of a particular episode that could be enacted. Now
imagine that you are a scriptwriter and write the screenplay
for the first ten minutes of the episode, in the following format

Title :

Actors :

Scene -1

Description Dialogue

The column ‘Dialogue’ would contain the words to be actually
spoken by the characters. ‘Description’ would include
instructions regarding stage props, position of lights, movement
of actors and so on.

Suggested Reading
Four Screen-plays by Ingmar Bergman.

Reprint 2025-26



165/WHY THE NOVEL MATTERS
##17##
4
Why the Novel Matters

D.H. Lawrence was born in a coal-mining town. He

was the son of an uneducated miner and an

ambitious mother who was a teacher. His wife was

German, and the couple lived, at various times, in

Italy, Germany, Australia, Tahiti and Mexico.

Lawrence’s writings reflect a revolt against

D.H. Lawrence puritanism, mediocrity and the dehumanisation of

1885-1930 an industrial society.

We have curious ideas of ourselves. We think of ourselves
as a body with a spirit in it, or a body with a soul in it, or
a body with a mind in it. Mens sana in corpore sano. The
years drink up the wine, and at last throw the bottle away,
the body, of course, being the bottle.

It is a funny sort of superstition. Why should I look at
my hand, as it so cleverly writes these words, and decide
that it is a mere nothing compared to the mind that directs
it? Is there really any huge difference between my hand
and my brain? Or my mind? My hand is alive, it flickers
with a life of its own. It meets all the strange universe in
touch, and learns a vast number of things, and knows a
vast number of things. My hand, as it writes these words,
slips gaily along, jumps like a grasshopper to dot an i,
feels the table rather cold, gets a little bored if I write too
long, has its own rudiments of thought, and is just as
much me as is my brain, my mind, or my soul. Why should

Reprint 2025-26



166/KALEIDOSCOPE

I imagine that there is a me which is more me than my
hand is? Since my hand is absolutely alive, me alive.

Whereas, of course, as far as I am concerned, my pen
isn’t alive at all. My pen isn’t me alive. Me alive ends at my
fingertips.

Whatever is me alive is me. Every tiny bit of my hands
is alive, every little freckle and hair and fold of skin. And
whatever is me alive is me. Only my finger-nails, those
ten little weapons between me and an inanimate universe,
they cross the mysterious Rubicon between me alive and
things like my pen, which are not alive, in my own sense.

So, seeing my hand is all alive and me alive, wherein
is it just a bottle, or a jug, or a tin can, or a vessel of clay,
or any of the rest of that nonsense? True, if I cut it will
bleed, like a can of cherries. But then the skin that is cut,
and the veins that bleed, and the bones that should never
be seen, they are all just as alive as the blood that flows.
So the tin can business, or vessel of clay, is just bunk.

And that’s what you learn, when you’re a novelist.
And that’s what you are very liable not to know, if you’re a
parson, or a philosopher, or a scientist, or a stupid person.
If you’re a parson, you talk about souls in heaven. If you’re
a novelist, you know that paradise is in the palm of your
hand, and on the end of your nose, because both are alive;
and alive, and man alive, which is more than you can say,
for certain, of paradise. Paradise is after life, and I for one
am not keen on anything that is after life. If you are a
philosopher, you talk about infinity; and the pure spirit
which knows all things. But if you pick up a novel, you
realise immediately that infinity is just a handle to this
self-same jug of a body of mine; while as for knowing, if I
find my finger in the fire, I  know that fire burns with a
knowledge so emphatic and vital, it leaves Nirvana merely
a conjecture. Oh, yes, my body, me alive, knows, and knows
intensely. And as for the sum of all knowledge, it can’t be
anything more than an accumulation of all the things I
know in the body, and you, dear reader, know in the body.

These damned philosophers, they talk as if they
suddenly went off in steam, and were then much more
important than they are when they’re in their shirts. It is

Reprint 2025-26



167/WHY THE NOVEL MATTERS

nonsense. Every man, philosopher included, ends in his
own finger-tips. That’s the end of his man alive. As for the
words and thoughts and sighs and aspirations that fly
from him, they are so many tremulations in the ether, and
not alive at all. But if the tremulations reach another man
alive, he may receive them into his life, and his life may
take on a new colour, like a chameleon creeping from a
brown rock on to a green leaf. All very well and good. It
still doesn’t alter the fact that the so-called spirit, the
message or teaching of the philosopher or the saint, isn’t
alive at all, but just a tremulation upon the ether, like a
radio message. All this spirit stuff is just tremulations
upon the ether. If you, as man alive, quiver from the
tremulation of the other into new life, that is because you
are man alive, and you take sustenance and stimulation
into your alive man in a myriad ways. But to say that the
message, or the spirit which is communicated to you, is
more important than your living body, is nonsense. You
might as well say that the potato at dinner was more
important.

Nothing is important but life. And for myself, I can
absolutely see life nowhere but in the living. Life with a
capital L is only man alive. Even a cabbage in the rain is
cabbage alive. All things that are alive are amazing. And
all things that are dead are subsidiary to the living. Better
a live dog than a dead lion. But better a live lion than a
live dog. C’est la vie!

It seems impossible to get a saint, or a philosopher, or
a scientist, to stick to this simple truth. They are all, in a
sense, renegades. The saint wishes to offer himself up as
spiritual food for the multitude. Even Frances of Assisi
turns himself into a sort of angel-cake, of which anyone
may take a slice. But an angel-cake is rather less than
man alive. And poor St. Francis might well apologise to
his body, when he is dying: ‘Oh, pardon me, my body, the
wrong I did you through the years!’ It was no wafer, for
others to eat.

The philosopher, on the other hand, because he can
think, decides that nothing but thoughts matter. It is as if
a rabbit, because he can make little pills, should decide

Reprint 2025-26



168/KALEIDOSCOPE

that nothing but little pills matter. As for the scientist, he
has absolutely no use for me so long as I am man alive. To
the scientist, I am dead. He puts under the microscope a
bit of dead me, and calls it me. He takes me to pieces, and
says first one piece, and then another piece, is me. My
heart, my liver, my stomach have all been scientifically
me, according to the scientist; and nowadays I am either a
brain, or nerves, or glands, or something more up-to-date
in the tissue line.

Now I absolutely flatly deny that I am a soul, or a
body, or a mind, or an intelligence, or a brain, or a nervous
system, or a bunch of glands, or any of the rest of these
bits of me. The whole is greater than the part. And
therefore, I, who am man alive, am greater than my soul,
or spirit, or body, or mind, or consciousness, or anything
else that is merely a part of me. I am a man, and alive. I
am man alive, and as long as I can, I intend to go on being
man alive.

Stop and Think

1. What are the things that mark animate things from
the inanimate?

2. What is the simple truth that eludes the philosopher
or the scientist?

For this reason I am a novelist. And being a novelist, I
consider myself superior to the saint, the scientist, the
philosopher, and the poet, who are all great masters of
different bits of man alive, but never get the whole hog.

The novel is the one bright book of life. Books are not
life. They are only tremulations on the ether. But the novel
as a tremulation can make the whole man alive tremble.
Which is more than poetry, philosophy, science, or any
other book tremulation can do.

The novel is the book of life. In this sense, the Bible is
a great novel. You may say, it is about God. But it is really
about man alive.

I do hope you begin to get my idea, why the novel is
supremely important, as a tremulation on the ether. Plato

Reprint 2025-26



169/WHY THE NOVEL MATTERS

makes the perfect ideal being tremble in me. But that’s
only a bit of me. Perfection is only a bit, in the strange
make-up of man alive. The Sermon on the Mount makes
the selfless spirit of me quiver. But that, too, is only a bit
of me. The Ten Commandments set the old Adam shivering
in me, warning me that I am a thief and a murderer, unless
I watch it. But even the old Adam is only a bit of me.

I very much like all these bits of me to be set trembling
with life and the wisdom of life. But I do ask that the
whole of me shall tremble in its wholeness, some time or
other.

And this, of course, must happen in me, living.
But as far as it can happen from a communication, it

can only happen when a whole novel communicates itself
to me. The Bible—but all the Bible—and Homer, and
Shakespeare: these are the supreme old novels. These are
all things to all men. Which means that in their wholeness
they affect the whole man alive, which is the man himself,
beyond any part of him. They set the whole tree trembling
with a new access of life, they do not just stimulate growth
in one direction.

I don’t want to grow in any one direction any more.
And, if I can help it, I don’t want to stimulate anybody else
into some particular direction. A particular direction ends
in a cul-de-sac. We’re in a cul-de-sac at present.

I don’t believe in any dazzling revelation, or in any
supreme Word. ‘The grass withereth, the flower fadeth,
but the Word of the Lord shall stand for ever.’ That’s the
kind of stuff we’ve drugged ourselves with. As a matter of
fact, the grass withereth, but comes up all the greener for
that reason, after the rains. The flower fadeth, and therefore
the bud opens. But the Word of the Lord, being man-uttered
and a mere vibration on the ether, becomes staler and
staler, more and more boring, till at last we turn a deaf
ear and it ceases to exist, far more finally than any withered
grass. It is grass that renews its youth like the eagle, not
any Word.

We should ask for no absolutes, or absolute. Once and
for all and for ever, let us have done with the ugly

Reprint 2025-26



170/KALEIDOSCOPE

imperialism of any absolute. There is no absolute good,
there is nothing absolutely right. All things flow and change,
and even change is not absolute. The whole is a strange
assembly of apparently incongruous parts, slipping past
one another.

Me, man alive, I am a very curious assembly of
incongruous parts. My yea! of today is oddly different from
my yea! of yesterday. My tears of tomorrow will have nothing
to do with my tears of a year ago. If the one I love remains
unchanged and unchanging, I shall cease to love her. It is
only because she changes and startles me into change
and defies my inertia, and is herself staggered in her inertia
by my changing, that I can continue to love her. If she
stayed put, I might as well love the pepper-pot.

In all this change, I maintain a certain integrity. But
woe betide me if I try to put my figure on it. If I say of
myself, I am this, I am that—then, if I stick to it, I turn
into a stupid fixed thing like a lamp-post. I shall never
know wherein lies my integrity, my individuality, my me. I
can never know it. It is useless to talk about my ego. That
only means that I have made up an idea of myself, and
that I am trying to cut myself out to pattern. Which is no
good. You can cut your cloth to fit your coat, but you can’t
clip bits off your living body, to trim it down to your idea.
True, you can put yourself into ideal corsets. But even in
ideal corsets, fashions change.

Let us learn from the novel. In the novel, the characters
can do nothing but live. If they keep on being good, according
to pattern, or bad, according to pattern, or even volatile,
according to pattern, they cease to live, and the novel falls
dead. A character in a novel has got to live, or it is nothing.

We, likewise, in life have got to live, or we are nothing.
What we mean by living is, of course, just as

indescribable as what we mean by being. Men get ideas
into their heads, of what they mean by Life, and they
proceed to cut life out to pattern. Sometimes they go into
the desert to seek God, sometimes they go into the desert
to seek cash, sometimes it is wine, woman, and song, and
again it is water, political reform, and votes. You never

Reprint 2025-26



171/WHY THE NOVEL MATTERS

know what it will be next: from killing your neighbour with
hideous bombs and gas that tears the lungs, to supporting
a Foundlings Home and preaching infinite Love, and being
co-respondent in a divorce.

In all this wild welter, we need some sort of guide. It’s
no good inventing Thou Shalt Nots!

What then? Turn truly, honourably to the novel, and
see wherein you are man alive, and wherein you are dead
man in life. You may eat your dinner as man alive, or as
mere masticating corpse. As man alive you may have a
shot at your enemy. But as a ghastly simulacrum of life
you may be firing bombs into men who are neither your
enemies nor your friends, but just things you are dead to.
Which is criminal, when the things happen to be alive.

To be alive, to be man alive, to be whole man alive:
that is the point. And at its best, the novel, and the novel
supremely, can help you. It can help you not to be dead
man in life. So much of a man walks about dead and a
carcass in the street and house, today: so much of women
is merely dead. Like a pianoforte with half the notes mute.

Stop and Think

How does Lawrence reconcile inconsistency of
behaviour with integrity?

But in the novel you can see, plainly, when the man
goes dead, the woman goes inert. You can develop an
instinct for life, if you will, instead of a theory of right and
wrong, good and bad.

In life, there is right and wrong, good and bad, all the
time. But what is right in one case is wrong in another. And
in the novel you see one man becoming a corpse, because of
his so-called goodness; another going dead because of his
so-called wickedness. Right and wrong is an instinct: but
an instinct of the whole consciousness in a man, bodily,
mental, spiritual at once. And only in the novel are all things
given full play, or at least, they may be given full play, when
we realise that life itself, and not inert safety, is the reason
for living. For out of the full play of all things emerges the

Reprint 2025-26



172/KALEIDOSCOPE

only thing that is anything, the wholeness of a man, the
wholeness of a woman, man alive, and live woman.

Understanding the Text
1. How does the novel reflect the wholeness of a human being?

2. Why does the author consider the novel superior to philosophy,
science or even poetry?

3. What does the author mean by ‘tremulations on ether’ and
‘the novel as a tremulation’?

4. What are the arguments presented in the essay against the
denial of the body by spiritual thinkers?

Talking about the Text
Discuss in pairs

1. The interest in a novel springs from the reactions of characters
to  circumstances. It is more important for characters to be
true to themselves (integrity) than to what is expected of them
(consistency). (A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little
minds—Emerson.)

2. ‘The novel is the one bright book of life’. ‘Books are not life’.
Discuss the distinction between the two statements. Recall
Ruskin’s  definition of ‘What is a Good Book?’ in Woven Words
Class XI.

Appreciation
1. Certain catch phrases are recurrently used as pegs to hang

the author’s thoughts throughout the essay. List these and
discuss how they serve to achieve the argumentative force of
the essay.

2. The language of argument is intense and succeeds in
convincing the reader through rhetorical devices. Identify the
devices used by the author to achieve this force.

Language Work

A. Vocabulary

1. There are a few non-English expressions in the essay. Identify
them and mention the language they belong to. Can you guess
the meaning of the expressions from the context?

Reprint 2025-26



173/WHY THE NOVEL MATTERS

2. Given below are a few roots from Latin. Make a list of the words
that can be derived from them

            mens (mind) corpus(body)         sanare (to heal)

B. Grammar: Some Verb Classes

A sentence consists of a noun phrase and a verb phrase. The
verb phrase is built around a verb. There are different kinds of
verbs. Some take only a subject. They are intransitive verbs.

Look at these examples from the text in this unit

(1a) The grass withers.

(1b) The chameleon creeps from a brown rock on to a green
leaf.

Notice that an intransitive verb can be followed by prepositional
phrases that have an adverbial function, as in (1b). Such
phrases that follow an intransitive verb are called its
complements.

A kind of intransitive verb that links its subject to a complement
is called a ‘linking verb’ or a copula. The most common copulas
in English are be, become and seem.

The copula be occurs very often in the text in this unit. Its
complement may be a noun phrase or an adjective phrase.
Here are a few examples

• My hand is alive. (be+adjective)

• The novel is supremely important. (be+adjective phrase)

• You’re a novelist. (be+noun phrase)

• The novel is the book of life. (be+noun phrase)

Other examples of copulas from the text are given below

• It seems important.

• The Word becomes more and more boring.

Can you say what the category of the complement is, in the
examples above?

TASK

1. Identify the intransitive verbs and the copulas in the examples
below, from the text in this unit. Say what the category of the
complement is. You can work in pairs or groups and discuss
the reasons for your analysis.

• I am a thief and a murderer.

• Right and wrong is an instinct.

Reprint 2025-26



174/KALEIDOSCOPE

• The flower fades.

• I am a very curious assembly of incongruous parts.

• The bud opens.

• The Word shall stand forever.

• It is a funny sort of superstition.

• You’re a philosopher.

• Nothing is important.

• The whole is greater than the part.

• I am a man, and alive.

• I am greater than anything that is merely a part of me.

• The novel is the book of life.

2. Identify other sentences from the text with intransitive verbs
and copulas.

C. Spelling and Pronunciation

Let us look at the following letter combinations and the sounds
they represent

• ch

• gh

ch is used for the sounds /k/ as in ‘character’, / / as in ‘chart’,

or/ / as in ‘champagne’.

Word initial position

Ch/k/character Ch/ /church Ch/ /champagne

chameleon char chiffon
chord chase chateau
chemical chin chef
charisma chalk chauffeur
chorus chore chandelier

While ‘ch’ is pronounced  / / in most words, it is pronounced

/k/ in many  others. Generally words with Latin or Greek

origins are pronounced/k/. Words of French origin are

pronounced / /. Words beginning with ‘ch’, followed by a

consonant, are always pronounced /k/, for example chlorine,

chrysanthemum, Christian, etc.

Reprint 2025-26



175/WHY THE NOVEL MATTERS

Word medial position

/k/ archive / / mischief / / sachet

ochre achieve  crochet
mechanic hatchet machine
lichen ketchup parachute
bronchitis eschew Michigan
architecture penchant schedule

Word final position

/k/ / / / /

Hi-tech catch cache
Bach spinach papier mache
loch (lake) preach niche

stitch pastiche
march panache

‘Ch’ is not pronounced in ‘schism’ but pronounced as /k/ in
‘schizophrenia’. gh is pronounced /g/ as well as /f/ and
sometimes not pronounced at all. In the initial position it is
always pronounced /g/. In the medial and final positions it
may be /f/ or silent.

/g/ ghost /f/ rough Silent

ghoul cough taught

ghastly laughter plough

ghetto tough borough

ghat draught drought

ghee slough

Look for other words with ‘ch’, ‘gh’ letter combinations and
guess how they are pronounced.

Suggested Reading
‘Two Blue Birds’ by D.H. Lawrence

Rhetoric as Idea by D.H. Lawrence.

Reprint 2025-26



176/KALEIDOSCOPE
##18##
5
The Argumentative Indian

Amartya Sen was awarded the Nobel Prize in
Economics in 1998 for his contribution in the
field of welfare economics. He is Lamont
Professor at Harvard.
This text forms the opening sections of the first
essay in Sen’s book of the same title published
in 2005. The sub-title of the book is ‘Writings
on Indian Culture, History and Identity’. Sen
argues in this essay that in India there has

Amartya Sen been a long tradition of questioning the truth of
Born 1933 ideas through discussion and dialogue.

Prolixity is not alien to us in India. We are able to talk at
some length. Krishna Menon’s* record of the longest speech
ever delivered at the United Nations (nine hours non-stop),
established half a century ago (when Menon was leading
the Indian delegation), has not been equalled by anyone
from anywhere. Other peaks of loquaciousness have been
scaled by other Indians. We do like to speak.

This is not a new habit. The ancient Sanskrit epics,
the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, which are frequently

.

compared with the Iliad and the Odyssey, are colossally
longer than the works that the modest Homer could
manage. Indeed, the Mahabharata alone is about seven
times as long as the Iliad and the Odyssey put together.
The Ramayana and the Mahabharata are certainly great

.

* Krishna Menon was India’s Defence Minister from 1957 to 1962. He led the Indian delegation
to the United Nations, and on 23 January 1957 delivered an unprecedented 9-hour speech
defending India’s stand on Kashmir.

Reprint 2025-26



177/THE ARGUMENTATIVE INDIAN

epics: I recall with much joy how my own life was vastly
enriched when I encountered them first as a restless
youngster looking for intellectual stimulation as well as
sheer entertainment. But they proceed from stories to
stories woven around their principal tales, and are
engagingly full of dialogues, dilemmas and alternative
perspectives. And we encounter masses of arguments and
counterarguments spread over incessant debates and
disputations.

Dialogue and Significance

The arguments are also, often enough, quite
substantive. For example, the famous Bhagavad Gita, which
is one small section of the Mahabharata, presents a tussle
between two contrary moral positions —Krishna’s emphasis
on doing one’s duty, on one side, and Arjuna’s focus on
avoiding bad consequences (and generating good ones), on
the other. The debate occurs on the eve of the great war
that is a central event in the Mahabharata. Watching the
two armies readying for war, profound doubts about the
correctness of what they are doing are raised by Arjuna,
the peerless and invincible warrior in the army of the just
and honourable royal family (the Pan. d.avas) who are about
to fight the unjust usurpers (the Kauravas).

Arjuna questions whether it is right to be concerned
only with one’s duty to promote a just cause and be
indifferent to the misery and the slaughter—even of one’s
kin—that the war itself would undoubtedly cause. Krishna,
a divine incarnation in the form of human being (in fact,
he is also Arjuna’s charioteer), argues against Arjuna. His
response takes the form of articulating principles of action—
based on the priority of doing one’s duty—which have been
repeated again and again in Indian philosophy. Krishna
insists on Arjuna’s duty to fight, irrespective of his
evaluation of the consequences. It is a just cause, and, as
a warrior and a general on whom his side must rely, Arjuna
cannot waver from his obligations, no matter what the
consequences are.

Reprint 2025-26



178/KALEIDOSCOPE

Krishna’s hallowing of the demands of duty wins the
argument, at least as seen in the religious perspective.
Indeed, Krishna’s conversations with Arjuna, the Bhagavad
Gita, became a treatise of great theological importance in
Hindu philosophy, focusing particularly on the ‘removal’ of
Arjuna’s doubts. Krishna’s moral position has also been
eloquently endorsed by many philosophical and literary
commentators across the world, such as Christopher
Isherwood and T. S. Eliot. Isherwood in fact translated the
Bhagavad Gita into English. This admiration for the Gita,
and for Krishna’s arguments in particular, has been a
lasting phenomenon in parts of European culture. It was
spectacularly praised in the early nineteenth century by
Wilhelm von Humboldt as ‘the most beautiful, perhaps the
only true philosophical song existing in any known tongue’.
In a poem in Four Quartets, Eliot summarises Krishna’s
view in the form of an admonishment: ‘And do not think of
the fruit of action! Fare forward’. Eliot explains: ‘Not fare
well/But fare forward, voyagers’.

And yet, as a debate in which there are two reasonable
sides, the epic Mahabharata itself presents, sequentially,
each of the two contrary arguments with much care and
sympathy. Indeed, the tragic desolation that the post-
combat and post-carnage land—largely the Indo-Gangetic
plain—seems to face towards the end of the Mahabharata
can even be seen as something of a vindication of Arjuna’s
profound doubts. Arjuna’s contrary arguments are not really
vanquished, no matter what the ‘message’ of the Bhagavad
Gita is meant to be. There remains a powerful case for
‘faring well’, and not just ‘forward’.*

J. Robert Oppenheimer, the leader of the American
team that developed the ultimate ‘weapon of mass
destruction’ during the Second World War, was moved to
quote Krishna’s words (‘I am become death, the destroyer
of worlds’) as he watched, on 16 July 1945, the awesome

* As a high-school student, when I asked my Sanskrit teacher whether it would be permissible
to say that the divine Krishna got away with an incomplete and unconvincing argument, he
replied: ‘Maybe you could say that, but you must say it with adequate respect.’ I have
presented elsewhere a critique—I hope with adequate respect—of Krishna’s deontology,
alongwith a defence of Arjuna’s consequential perspective, in ‘Consequential Evaluation
and Practical Reason’, Journal of Philosophy 97 (Sept. 2000).

Reprint 2025-26



179/THE ARGUMENTATIVE INDIAN

force of the first nuclear explosion devised by man. Like
the advice that Arjuna had received about his duty as a
warrior fighting for a just cause, Oppenheimer, the
physicist, could well find justification in his technical
commitment to develop a bomb for what was clearly the
right side. Scrutinizing—indeed criticising—his own
actions, Oppenheimer said later on: ‘When you see
something that is technically sweet, you go ahead and do
it and you argue about what to do about it only after you
have had your technical success.’ Despite that compulsion
to ‘fare forward’, there was reason also for reflecting on
Arjuna’s concerns: How can good come from killing so many
people? And why should I seek victory, kingdom or
happiness for my own side?

These arguments remain thoroughly relevant in the
contemporary world. The case for doing what one sees as
one’s duty must be strong, but how can we be indifferent
to the consequences that may follow from our doing what
we take to be our just duty? As we reflect on the manifest
problems of our global world (from terrorism, wars and
violence to epidemics, insecurity and gruelling poverty), or
on India’s special concerns (such as economic development,
nuclear confrontation or regional peace), it is important to
take on board Arjuna’s consequential analysis, in addition
to considering Krishna’s arguments for doing one’s duty.
The univocal ‘message of the Gita’ requires supplementation
by the broader argumentative wisdom of the Mahabharata,
of which the Gita is only one small part.

Stop and Think

1. Sen quotes Eliot’s lines: ‘Not fare well/But fare forward
voyagers’. Distinguish between ‘faring forward’
(Krishna’s position in the Gita) and ‘faring well’ (the
position that Sen advocates).

2. Sen draws a parallel between the moral dilemma in
the Krishna-Arjuna dialogue and J. R. Oppenheimer’s
response to the nuclear explosion in 1945. What is
the basis for this?

Reprint 2025-26



180/KALEIDOSCOPE

Gender, Caste and Voice

There is, however, a serious question to be asked as to
whether the tradition of arguments and disputations has
been confined to an exclusive part of the Indian
population—perhaps just to the members of the male elite.
It would, of course, be hard to expect that argumentational
participation would be uniformly distributed over all
segments of the population, but India has had deep
inequalities along the lines of gender, class, caste and
community (on which more presently). The social relevance
of the argumentative tradition would be severely limited if
disadvantaged sections were effectively barred from
participation. The story here is, however, much more
complex than a simple generalisation can capture.

I begin with gender. There can be little doubt that men
have tended, by and large, to rule the roost in argumentative
moves in India. But despite that, the participation of women
in both political leadership and intellectual pursuits has
not been at all negligible. This is obvious enough today,
particularly in politics. Indeed, many of the dominant
political parties in India—national as well as regional—are
currently led by women and have been so led in the past.
But even in the national movement for Indian independence,
led by the Congress Party, there were many more women in
positions of importance than in the Russian and Chinese
revolutionary movements put together. It is also perhaps
worth noting that Sarojini Naidu, the first woman President
of the Indian National Congress, was elected in 1925, fifty
years earlier than the election of the first woman leader of
a major British political party (Margaret Thatcher in 1975).*
The second woman head of the Indian National Congress,
Nellie Sengupta, was elected in 1933.

* The Presidentship of the Congress Party was not by any means a formal position only.
Indeed, the election of Subhas Chandra Bose (the fiery spokesman of the increasing—and
increasingly forceful—resistance to the British Raj) as the President of Congress in 1938
and in 1939 led to a great inner-party tussle, with Mohandas Gandhi working tirelessly to
oust Bose. This was secured—not entirely with propriety or elegance—shortly after Bose’s
Presidential Address proposing a strict ‘time limit’ for the British to quit India or to face a less
nonviolent opposition. The role of the Congress President in directing the Party has remained
important. In the general elections in 2004, when Sonia Gandhi emerged victorious as the
President of Congress, she chose to remain in that position, rather than take up the role of
Prime Minister.

Reprint 2025-26



181/THE ARGUMENTATIVE INDIAN

Earlier or later, these developments are products of
relatively recent times. But what about the distant past?
Women’s traditional role in debates and discussions has
certainly been much less pronounced than that of men in
India (as would also be true of most countries in the world).
But it would be a mistake to think that vocal leadership by
women is completely out of line with anything that has
happened in India’s past. Indeed, even if we go back all the
way to ancient India, some of the most celebrated dialogues
have involved women, with the sharpest questionings often
coming from women interlocutors. This can be traced back
even to the Upanis.ads—the dialectical treatises that were
composed from about the eighth century BCE and which
are often taken to be foundations of Hindu philosophy.

For example, in the Brihadaranyaka Upanis.ad we are
told about the famous ‘arguing combat’ in which
Yajn~avalkya, the outstanding scholar and teacher, has to
face questions from the assembled gathering of pundits,
and here it is a woman scholar, Gargi, who provides the
sharpest edge to the intellectual interrogation. She enters
the fray without any special modesty: ‘Venerable Brahmins,
with your permission I shall ask him two questions only. If
he is able to answer those questions of mine, then none of
you can ever defeat him in expounding the nature of God.’

Even though Gargi, as an intellectual and pedagogue,
is no military leader (in the mode, for example, of the Rani
of Jhansi—another feminine hero—who fought valiantly
along with the ‘mutineers’ in the middle of the nineteenth
century against British rule—one of the great ‘warrior-
queens’ of the world, as Antonia Fraser describes her), her
use of imagery is strikingly militant: ‘Yajn~avalkya, I have
two questions for you. Like the ruler of Videha or Kasi
[Benares], coming from a heroic line, who strings his
unstrung bow, takes in hand two penetrating arrows and
approaches the enemy, so do I approach you with two

~
questions, which you have to answer.’ Yajnavalkya does,
however, manage to satisfy Gargi with his answers (I am
not competent to examine the theological merits of this
interchange and will refrain from commenting on the

Reprint 2025-26



182/KALEIDOSCOPE

substantive content of their discussion). Gargi
acknowledges this handsomely, but again without undue
modesty: ‘Venerable Brahmins, you should consider it an
achievement if you can get away after bowing to him.
Certainly, none of you can ever defeat him in expounding
the nature of God.’

Interestingly, Yajn~ avalkya’s wife Maitreyi raises a
profoundly important motivational question when the two
discuss the reach of wealth in the context of the problems
and predicaments of human life, in particular what wealth
can or cannot do for us. Maitreyi wonders whether it could
be the case that if ‘the whole earth, full of wealth’ were to
belong just to her, she could achieve immortality through
it. ‘No’, responds Yajn~avalkya, ‘like the life of rich people
will be your life. But there is no hope of immortality by
wealth’. Maitreyi remarks: ‘What should I do with that by
which I do not become immortal?’

Maitreyi’s rhetorical question has been repeatedly cited
in Indian religious philosophy to illustrate both the nature
of the human predicament and the limitations of the
material world. But there is another aspect of this exchange
that has, in some ways, more immediate interest. This
concerns the relation—and the distance—between income
and achievement, between the commodities we can buy
and the actual capabilities we can enjoy, between our
economic wealth and our ability to live as we would like.*
While there is a connection between opulence and our
ability to achieve what we value, the linkage may or may
not be very close. Maitreyi’s worldly worries might well
have some transcendental relevance (as Indian religious
commentators have discussed over many centuries), but
they certainly have worldly interest as well. If we are
concerned with the freedom to live long and live well, our
focus has to be directly on life and death, and not just on
wealth and economic opulence.

The arguments presented by women speakers in epics
and classical tales, or in recorded history, do not always
* Maitreyi’s central question (‘what should I do with that by which I do not become immortal?’)

was useful for me to motivate and explain an understanding of development that is not
parasitic on judging development by the growth of GNP or GDP; see my Development as
Freedom ( New York: Knopf, and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), p. I.

Reprint 2025-26



183/THE ARGUMENTATIVE INDIAN

conform to the tender and peace-loving image that is often
assigned to women. In the epic story of the Mahabharata,
the good King Yudhis.thira, reluctant to engage in a bloody
battle, is encouraged to fight the usurpers of his throne
with ‘appropriate anger’, and the most eloquent instigator
is his wife, Draupadi.

In the sixth-century version of this dialogue, presented
in the Kiratarjuniya by Bharavi, Draupadi speaks thus—

For a woman to advise men like you
is almost an insult.
And yet, my deep troubles compel me
to overstep the limits of womanly conduct,
make me speak up.

The kings of your race, brave as Indra,
have for a long time ruled the earth without a break.
But now with your own hand
you have thrown it away,
like a rutting elephant tearing off
his garland with his trunk...

If you choose to reject heroic action
and see forbearance as the road to future happiness,
then throw away your bow, the symbol of royalty,
wear your hair matted in knots,
stay here and make offerings in the sacred fire!

It is not hard to see which side Draupadi was on in
the Arjuna-Krishna debate, which deals with a later stage
of the same sequence of events, by which time Yudhis.thira
had made his choice to fight (rather than embrace the life
of a local hermit, mockingly assigned to him by his wife,
with unconcealed derision).

If it is important not to see the Indian argumentative
tradition as the exclusive preserve of men, it is also
necessary to understand that the use of argumentative
encounters has frequently crossed the barriers of class
and caste. Indeed, the challenge to religious orthodoxy has

Reprint 2025-26



184/KALEIDOSCOPE

often come from spokesmen of socially disadvantaged
groups. Disadvantage is, of course, a comparative concept.
When Brahminical orthodoxy was disputed in ancient India
by members of other groups (including merchants and
craftsmen), the fact that the protesters were often quite
affluent should not distract attention from the fact that,
in the context of Brahmin-dominated orthodoxy, they were
indeed distinctly underprivileged. This may be particularly
significant in understanding the class basis of the rapid
spread of Buddhism, in particular, in India. The
undermining of the superiority of the priestly caste played
quite a big part in these initially rebellious religious
movements, which include Jainism as well as Buddhism.
It included a ‘levelling’ feature that is not only reflected in
the message of human equality for which these movements
stood, but is also captured in the nature of the arguments
used to undermine the claim to superiority of those
occupying exalted positions. Substantial parts of early
Buddhist and Jain literatures contain expositions of protest
and resistance.

Movements against caste divisions that have figured
repeatedly in Indian history, with varying degrees of
success, have made good use of engaging arguments to
question orthodox beliefs. Many of these counterarguments
are recorded in the epics, indicating that opposition to
hierarchy was not absent even in the early days of caste
arrangements. We do not know whether the authors to
whom the sceptical arguments are attributed were the real
originators of the doubts expressed, or mere vehicles of
exposition of already established questioning, but the
prominent presence of these anti-inequality arguments in
the epics as well as in other classical documents gives us
a fuller insight into the reach of the argumentative tradition
than a monolithic exposition of the so-called, ‘Hindu point
of view’ can possibly provide.

For example, when, in the Mahabharata, Bhrigu tells
Bharadvaja that caste divisions relate to differences in
physical attributes of different human beings, reflected in
skin colour, Bharadvaja responds not only by pointing to

Reprint 2025-26



185/THE ARGUMENTATIVE INDIAN

the considerable variations in skin colour within every caste
(‘if different colours indicate different castes, then all castes
are mixed castes’), but also by the more profound question:
‘We all seem to be affected by desire, anger, fear, sorrow,
worry, hunger, and labour; how do we have caste differences
then?’ There is also a genealogical scepticism expressed in
another ancient document, the Bhavis.ya Puran. a: ‘Since
members of all the four castes are children of God, they all
belong to the same caste. All human beings have the same
father, and children of the same father cannot have different
castes.’ These doubts do not win the day, but nor are their
expressions obliterated in the classical account of the
debates between different points of view.

To look at a much later period, the tradition of ‘medieval
mystical poets’, well established by the fifteenth century,
included exponents who were influenced both by the
egalitarianism of the Hindu Bhakti movement and by that
of the Muslim Sufis, and their far-reaching rejection of
social barriers brings out sharply the reach of arguments
across the divisions of caste and class. Many of these poets
came from economically and socially humble backgrounds,
and their questioning of social divisions as well as of the
barriers of disparate religions reflected a profound attempt
to deny the relevance of these artificial restrictions. It is
remarkable how many of the exponents of these heretical
points of views came from the working class: Kabir, perhaps
the greatest poet of them all, was a weaver, Dadu a cotton-
carder, Ravi-das a shoe-maker, Sena a barber, and so on.*
Also, many leading figures in these movements were
women, including of course the famous Mira Bai (whose
songs are still very popular, after four hundred years), but
also Andal, Daya-bai, Sahajo-bai and Ksema, among
others.

In dealing with issues of contemporary inequality, the
relevance and reach of the argumentative tradition must
be examined in terms of the contribution it can make today
in resisting and undermining these inequities which
characterise so much of contemporary Indian society. It

* On this, see Kshiti Mohan Sen, Medieval Mysticism of India, with a Foreword by Rabindranath
Tagore, trans. from Bengali by Manomohan Ghosh (London: Luzac, I930).

Reprint 2025-26



186/KALEIDOSCOPE

would be a great mistake in that context to assume that
because of the possible effectiveness of well-tutored and
disciplined arguments, the argumentative tradition must,
in general, favour the privileged and the well educated,
rather than the dispossessed and the deprived. Some of
the most powerful arguments in Indian intellectual history
have, in fact, been about the lives of the least privileged
groups, which have drawn on the substantive force of these
claims, rather than on the cultivated brilliance of well-
trained dialectics.

Stop and Think

1. Maitreyi’s remark—‘what should I do with that by
which I do not become immortal’—is a rhetorical
question cited to illustrate both the nature of the
human predicament and the limitations of the material
world. What is the connection that Sen draws between
this and his concept of economic development?

2. It is important to see that the Indian argumentative
tradition has frequently crossed the barriers of
gender, caste, class and community. List the examples
cited by Sen to highlight this.

Democracy as Public Reasoning

Does the richness of the tradition of argument make
much difference to subcontinental lives today? I would argue
it does, and in a great many different ways. It shapes our
social world and the nature of our culture. It has helped to
make heterodoxy the natural state of affairs in India;
persistent arguments are an important part of our public
life. It deeply influences Indian politics, and is particularly
relevant, I would argue, to the development of democracy
in India and the emergence of its secular priorities.

The historical roots of democracy in India are well worth
considering, if only because the connection with public
argument is often missed, through the temptation to
attribute the Indian commitment to democracy simply to
the impact of British influence (despite the fact that such
an influence should have worked similarly for a hundred

Reprint 2025-26



187/THE ARGUMENTATIVE INDIAN

other countries that emerged from an empire on which the
sun used not to set). The point at issue, however, is not
specific to India only: in general, the tradition of public
reasoning is closely related to the roots of democracy across
the globe. But since India has been especially fortunate in
having a long tradition of public arguments, with toleration
of intellectual heterodoxy, this general connection has been
particularly effective in India. When, more than half a
century ago, independent India became the first country in
the non-Western world to choose a resolutely democratic
constitution, it not only used what it had learned from the
institutional experiences in Europe and America
(particularly Great Britain), it also drew on its own tradition
of public reasoning and argumentative heterodoxy.

It is very important to avoid the twin pitfalls of (1)
taking democracy to be just a gift of the Western world
that India simply accepted when it became independent,
and (2) assuming that there is something unique in Indian
history that makes the country singularly suited to
democracy. The point, rather, is that democracy is
intimately connected with public discussion and interactive
reasoning. Traditions of public discussion exist across the
world, not just in the West. And to the extent that such a
tradition can be drawn on, democracy becomes easier to
institute and also to preserve.

Understanding the Text
1. What is Sen’s interpretation of the positions taken by Krishna

and Arjuna in the debate between them?

[Note Sen’s comment: ‘Arjuna’s contrary arguments are not
really vanquished... There remains a powerful case for ‘faring
well’ and not just ‘faring forward’.]

2. What are the three major issues Sen discusses here in relation
to India’s dialogic tradition?

3. Sen has sought here to dispel some misconceptions about
democracy in India. What are these misconceptions?

Reprint 2025-26



188/KALEIDOSCOPE

4. How, according to Sen, has the tradition of public discussion
and interactive reasoning helped the success of democracy in
India?

Talking about the Text
1. Does Amartya Sen see argumentation as a positive or a negative

value?

2. How is the message of the Gita generally understood and
portrayed? What change in interpretation does Sen suggest?

Appreciation

This essay is an example of argumentative writing. Supporting
statements with evidence is a feature of this kind of writing.
For each of the statements given below state the supportive
evidence provided in the essay

(i) Prolixity is not alien to India.

(ii) The arguments are also, often enough, substantive.

(iii) This admiration for the Gita, and Krishna’s arguments in
particular, has been a lasting phenomenon in parts of
European culture.

(iv) There remains a powerful case for ‘faring well’, and not
just ‘forward’.

Language Work
I. (a) The opening two paragraphs have many words related to

the basic idea of using words (particularly in speech) like
‘prolixity’. List them. You may look for more such words in
the rest of the essay.

(b) Most of the statements Sen makes are tempered with due
qualification, e.g., ‘The arguments are also, often enough,
quite substantive’. Pick out other instances of qualification
from the text.

II. A noun can be the subject or object of a sentence. Notice this
sentence

Democracy is a Western idea.

In this sentence democracy and idea are nouns. (they are
abstract nouns)

Reprint 2025-26



189/THE ARGUMENTATIVE INDIAN

A noun is the simplest form of a noun phrase. A noun can be
preceded by

(i) an article or demonstrative: an idea, the idea, this idea;
and/or

(ii) an adjective: a Western idea

[There can be more than one adjective, or an adverb and
an adjective]: a quintessentially Western idea.

(iii) and/or numerals and quantifying phrases: three very
influential Western ideas; such a tradition. (quantifying
phrases such as a few/some/one of the many)

A noun can be followed by prepositional phrases and relative
or  complement clauses. There will be nouns and noun phrases
within the prepositional phrase as in ‘traditions of public
discussion’.

III. Noun phrases can also have phrases in apposition following
the main noun.

Notice the following sentence

The ancient Sanskrit epics, the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata, are colossally longer than the works
that the modest Homer could manage.

The Ramayana and the Mahabharata add to the meaning of the
main noun (epics)and are placed next to it. They are separated
from the main sentence by commas. Notice the expansion here:

The ancient Sanskrit epics, the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata,  which are frequently compared with
the Iliad and the Odyssey, are colossally longer than
the works that the modest Homer could manage.

The relative clause—which are frequently compared with the
Iliad and the Odyssey— that follows, adds more information to
the epics.

IV. Parenthetical phrases or clauses may also follow the noun
phrase.

(i) This can be traced back even to the Upanis.ads—the dialectical
treatises that were composed from about the eighth century
BCE and which are often taken to be foundations of Hindu
philosophy.

The clause italicised here gives additional information about
the noun ‘Upanis.ads’.

Reprint 2025-26



190/KALEIDOSCOPE

TASK

Examine the noun phrases in these sentences from the text

• The second woman head of the Indian National Congress, Nellie
Sengupta, was elected in 1933.

• This concerns the relation—and the distance—between income
and achievement.

• This may be particularly significant in understanding the class
basis of the rapid spread of Buddhism, in particular, in India.

Suggested Reading

Development as Freedom by Amartya Sen.

Reprint 2025-26



191/ON SCIENCE FICTION
##19##
6
On Science Fiction

Isaac Asimov was a Russian born American author
and biochemist. He was a highly successful and
exceptionally prolific writer best known for his
works on science fiction and for his popular
science books.
Most of Asimov’s popularised science books
explain science concepts in a historical way,
going back as far as possible to a time when
the science in question was at its simplest

Isaac Asimov stage. He also lent his name to the magazine,
1920-1992 Asimov’s Science Fiction.

I

The Prescientific Universe

Foreword

To every history there is a prehistoric period. In the
case of science fiction, the prehistory lingers on even
today in some of the aspects of the field.

But what of that? Just as Ice Age art can hold up its
head with any form of art produced by sophisticated
modern man, so can the prehistoric aspects of
science fiction prove an accomplished literary form.

I have often made the point that true science fiction is a
creature of the last two centuries. Science fiction cannot
exist as a picture of the future unless, and until, people
get the idea that it is science and technology that produce
the future; that it is advances in science and technology

Reprint 2025-26



192/KALEIDOSCOPE

(or, at the very least, changes in them) that are bound to
make the future different from the present and the past,
and that thereby hangs a tale.

Naturally, no one could possibly get that idea until
the rate of scientific and technological change became great
enough to be noticed by people in the course of their
lifetime. That came about with the Industrial Revolution
say, by 1800—and it was only thereafter that science fiction
could be written.

And yet there must have been something that came
before science fiction, something that was not science fiction
and yet filled the same emotional needs. There must have
been tales of the strange and different, of life not as we
know it, and of powers transcending our own.

Let’s consider—
The respect that people have for science and for

scientists (or the fear that people have or a combination of
both) rests on the certain belief that science is the key to
the understanding of the Universe and that scientists can
use science to manipulate that key. Through science, people
can make use of the laws of nature to control the
environment and enhance human powers. By the steadily
increasing understanding of the details of those laws,
human powers will be greater in the future than in the
past. If we can imagine the different ways in which they
will be greater, we can write our stories.

In previous centuries, however, most men had but a
dim understanding, if any at all, of such things as laws of
nature. They did not know of rules that were unbreakable;
of things-as-they-must-be that could serve neither to help
us nor to thwart us but that might allow themselves to be
ridden to glory, if we but knew how.

Instead, there was the notion that the Universe was
the plaything of life and the will; that if there were events
that seemed analogous to human deeds but that were far
greater in magnitude, they were carried through by life-
form’s resembling those we know but greater in size and
power.

Reprint 2025-26



193/ON SCIENCE FICTION

The beings who controlled natural phenomena were
therefore pictured in human form, but of superhuman
strength, size, abilities, and length of life. Sometimes they
were pictured as superanimal, or as supercombinations of
animals. (The constant reference to the ordinary in the
invention of the unusual is only to be expected, for
imaginations are sharply limited, even among the best of
us, and it is hard to think of anything really new or
unusual—as Hollywood ‘Sci-fi’ constantly demonstrates.)

Since the phenomena of the Universe don’t often make
sense, the gods are usually pictured as whimsical and
unpredictable; frequently little better than childish. Since
natural events are often disastrous, the gods must be easily
offended. Since natural events are often helpful, the gods
are basically kindly, provided they are well-treated and
that their anger is not roused.

It is only too reasonable to suppose that people would
invent formulas for placating the gods and persuading them
to do the right thing. Nor can the validity of these formulas
be generally disproven by events. If the formulas don’t work,
then undoubtedly someone has done something to offend
the gods. Those who had invented or utilised the formulas
had no problems in finding guilty parties on whom to blame
the failure of the formula in specific instances, so that
faith in the formulas themselves never wavered. (We needn’t
sneer. By the same principle, we continue to have faith in
economists, sociologists, and meteorologists today, even
though their statements seem to match reality only
erratically at best.)

In prescientific times, then, it was the priest,
magician, wizard, shaman (again the name doesn’t matter)
who filled the function of the scientist today. It was the
priest, etc., who was perceived as having the secret of
controlling the Universe, and it was advances in the
knowledge of magical formulas that could enhance power.

The ancient myths and legends are full of stories of
human beings with supernormal powers. There are the
legendary heroes, for instance, who learn to control winged
horses or flying carpets. Those ancient pieces of magic

Reprint 2025-26



194/KALEIDOSCOPE

still fascinate us today, and I imagine a youngster could
thrill to such mystical methods of aeronavigation and long
for the chance to partake in it, even if he were reading the
tales while on a jet plane.

Think of the crystal ball, into which one can see things
that are happening many miles away, and magic shells
that can allow us to hear the whisperings of humans many
miles away. How much more wonderful than the television
sets and the telephones of today!

Consider the doors that open with ‘Open sesame’ rather
than by the click of a remote-control device. Consider the
seven-league boots that can transport you across the
countryside almost as quickly as an automobile can.

Or, for that matter, think of the monsters of legend,
the powerful travesties of life invented by combining animal
characteristics: the man-horse Centaur, the man-goat
Satyr, the woman-lion Sphinx, the woman-hawk Harpy,
the eagle-lion Gryphon, the snake-woman Gorgon, and so
on. In science fiction we have extraterrestrials that are
often built up on the same principle.

The goals of these ancient stories are the same as
those of modern science fiction—the depiction of life as we
don’t know it.

The emotional needs that are fulfilled are the same—
the satisfaction of the longing for wonder.

The difference is that the ancient myths and legends
fulfil those needs and meet those goals against the
background of a Universe that is controlled by gods and
demons who can, in turn, be controlled by magical formulas
either in the form of enchantments to coerce, or prayers to
cajole. Science fiction, on the other hand, fulfils those needs
against the background of a Universe that is controlled by
impersonal and unswervable laws of nature, which can,
in turn, be controlled by an understanding of their nature.

In a narrow sense, only science fiction is valid for
today since, as far as we can tell, the Universe does follow
the dictates of the laws of nature and is not at the mercy of
gods and demons.

Reprint 2025-26



195/ON SCIENCE FICTION

Nevertheless, there are times when we shouldn’t be
two narrow or haughty in our definitions. It would be wrong
to throw out a style of literature that has tickled the human
fancy for thousands of years for the trivial reason that it is
not in accord with reality. Reality isn’t all there is, after all.

Shall we no longer thrill to the climactic duel of Achilles
and Hector because people no longer fight with spears and
shields? Shall we no longer feel the excitement of the naval
battles of the War of 1812 and of the Napoleonic Wars
because our warships are no longer made of wood and are
no longer equipped with sails?

Never!
Why, then, shouldn’t people who enjoy an exciting

science fiction adventure story not enjoy a rousing
mythological fiction adventure story? The two are set in
different kinds of Universes but follow analogous paths.

So though I am sufficiently stick-in-the-muddish to be
narrow in my definition of science fiction and would not be
willing to consider sword-and-sorcery examples of science
fiction, I am willing to consider it the equivalent of science
fiction set in another kind of Universe—a prescientific
Universe.

I don’t even ask that they be wrenched out of context
and somehow be made to fit the universe of reality by being
given a scientific or pseudoscientific gloss. I ask only that
they be self-consistent in their prescientific Universe—
and that they be well-written and exciting stories.

Stop and Think

1. What is the parallel drawn between myths and legends
of the past and science fiction?

2.   What gives science fiction its validity?
3. Which literary works does the author have in mind

when he refers to ‘Open Sesame’ or the concept of
winged horses or flying carpets?

Reprint 2025-26



196/KALEIDOSCOPE

II
The Universe of Science Fiction

Foreword

Of late I have taken to the preparation of science
fiction anthologies, which is perhaps a sign of literary
senescence, though I like to think of it, rather, as
putting my mature wisdom and expertise at the
service of the science fiction reading public. After all,
I am by no means ceasing, or even slowing, my own
proper output. Besides, I must admit I generally make
use of coeditors, and sweet-talk them into taking care
of the more turgid aspects of the job—correspondence,
bookkeeping, and so on.

One of these recent anthologies was The 13 Crimes
of Science Fiction (Doubleday, 1979) in which my
coeditors were Martin Harry Greenberg and Charles
G. Waugh. For the anthology, I wrote an introduction
relating science fiction to other specialised fields of
writing, especially mysteries, and here it is.

Science fiction is a literary universe of no mean size because
science fiction is what it is, not through its content but
through its background. Let me explain the difference that
makes.

A ‘sports story’ must have, as part of its content, some
competitive activity, generally of an athletic nature. A
‘Western story’ must have, as part of its content, the
nomadic life of the cowboy of the American West in the
latter half of the nineteenth century. The ‘jungle story’
must have, as part of its content, the dangers implicit in a
forested tropical wilderness.

Take the content of any of these and place it against a
background that involves a society significantly different
from our own and you have not changed the nature of the
story—you have merely added to it.

A story may involve, not the clash of baseball and bat,
or of hockeystick and puck, but of gas gun and sphere in
an atmosphere enclosed on a space station under zero
gravity. It is still a sports story by the strictest definition
you care to make, but it is science fiction also.

Reprint 2025-26



197/ON SCIENCE FICTION

In place of the nomadic life of a cowboy and his horse
herding cattle, you might have the nomadic life of a fishboy
and his dolphin, herding his schools of mackerel and cod.
It could still have the soul of a Western story and be science
fiction also.

In place of the Matto Grosso, you can have the jungle
on a distant planet, different in key factors of the
environment, with exotic dangers in atmosphere, in
vegetation, in planetary characteristics never encountered
on Earth. It would still be a jungle story and be science
fiction also.

For that matter, you needn’t confine yourself to
category fiction. Take the deepest novel you can imagine,
one that most amply plumbs the secret recesses of the
soul and holds up a picture that illuminates nature and
the human condition, and place it in a society in which
interplanetary travel is common, and give it a plot which
involves such travel and it is not only great literature—it
is science fiction also.

John W. Campbell, the late great science fiction editor,
used to say that science fiction took as its domain, all
conceivable societies, past and future, probable or
improbable, realistic or fantastic, and dealt with all events
and complications that were possible in all those societies.
As for ‘mainstream fiction’ which deals with the here and
now and introduces only the small novelty of make believe
events and characters, that forms only an inconsiderable
fraction of the whole.

And I agree with him.
In only one respect did John retreat from this grand

vision of the limitless boundaries of science fiction. In a
moment of failure of nerve, he maintained that it was
impossible to write a science fiction mystery. The
opportunities in science fiction were so broad, he said,
that the strict rules that made the classical mystery story
fair to the reader could not be upheld.

I imagine that what he expected was the sudden change
of rules without warning in the midst of the story.
Something like this, I suppose—

Reprint 2025-26



198/KALEIDOSCOPE

‘Ah, Watson, what that scoundrel did not count on
was that with this pocket-frannistan which I have
in my pocket-frannistan Container I can see
through the lead lining and tell what is inside the
casket.’
‘Amazing, Holmes, but how does it work?’
‘By the use of Q-rays, a little discovery of my own
which I have never revealed to the world.’

Naturally, there is the temptation to do this. Even in
the classical mystery story that is not science fiction there
is the temptation to give the detective extraordinary
abilities in order to advance the plot. Sherlock Holmes’s
ability to distinguish, at sight, the ashes of hundreds of
different kinds of tobacco, while not perhaps in the same
class as the invention of a Q-ray at a moment’s notice, is
certainly a step in the direction of the unfair.

Then, too, there is nothing to prevent even the strictest
of strict mystery writers from using actual science, even
using the latest available findings of science, which the
reader may not have heard of. That is still considered fair.

There are dangers to that, however, since many
mystery writers know no science and cannot prevent
themselves from making bloopers. John Dickson Carr, in
one book, revealed that he didn’t know the difference
between the element, antimony, and the compound,
antimony potassium tartrate. That was only irritating, but
in another book, he demonstrated that he couldn’t tell the
difference between carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide
and reduced the plot to a shambles. One of Dorothy Sayers’
more grisly short stories involved the effect of thyroid
hormones and, though she had the right idea, she made
the effects impossibly rapid and extreme.

Writing a scientific mystery, then, has its extraordinary
pitfalls and difficulties; how much more so the writing of a
science fiction mystery. In science fiction, you not only
must know your science, but you must also have a rational
notion as to how to modify or extrapolate that science.

Reprint 2025-26



199/ON SCIENCE FICTION

That, however, only means that writing a science fiction
mystery is difficult; it does not mean that it is conceptually
impossible as John Campbell thought.

After all, it is as perfectly possible to cling to the rules
of the game in science fiction mysteries as in ordinary
ones.

The science fiction mystery may be set in the future
and in the midst of a society far different from ours; one in
which human beings have developed telepathy, for
instance, or in which light-speed mass transport is
possible, or in which all human knowledge is computerized
for instant retrieval—but the rules still hold.

The writer must carefully explain to the reader all
their boundary conditions of the imaginary society. It must
be perfectly clear what can be done and what can’t be
done and with those boundaries fixed, the reader must
then see and hear everything the investigator sees and
hears, and he must be aware of every clue the investigator
comes across.

There may be misdirection and red herrings to obscure
and confuse, but it must remain possible for the reader to
introduce the investigator, however outré the society.

Can it be done? You bet! Modestly, I refer you to my
own science fiction mysteries, The Caves of Steel and The
Naked Sun which I wrote, back in the 1950s, in order to
show John that he was being too modest about science
fiction.

Understanding the Text
1. What makes for the distinction between the various genres of

fiction—‘a sports story’, ‘a Western story’, ‘a jungle story’ and
science fiction?

2. How does Asimov establish that John Campbell was wrong in
his opinion that it is not possible for a science fiction mystery
to be fair to a reader in the same way as a classical mystery is?

3. What are the pitfalls that the writer of science fiction mystery
must guard against?

Reprint 2025-26



200/KALEIDOSCOPE

Talking about the Text
Discuss in small groups

1. Imagination and fantasy help human beings to speculate upon
the possible explanations for the complexity and
unpredictability of the phenomena in the universe.

2. The difference that science and technology have made to everyday
life today was visualised in science fiction fifty years ago.

Appreciation
1. Discuss the author’s attitude towards the pre-scientific

imagination and the tone he adopts while talking about it.

2. Observe how the paragraph, as a form, has been used in the
essay. Some paragraphs consist of just one sentence. What
purpose do you think the author had in putting them in this
manner?

3. Mark the linkers used by the author to connect the point he
makes in one paragraph with that in the next. For example,
Let me explain the difference that makes in the last line of para
1 of Section II. These are called discourse markers or discourse
signalers.

Language Work

A. Literary Allusions

(i) Look up a literary dictionary or encyclopedia or the internet
to understand the references to the following mythical
creatures

Centaur Satyr Sphinx Harpy
Gryphon Gorgon  Pegasus

Find out parallel creatures in Indian mythology.

(ii) Find out about the story of Achilles and Hector.

B. Pronunciation

Languages vary greatly in the way in which they use rhythm
in fluent speech. English rhythm is based not only on word
stress (i.e. the stress on a certain syllable or syllables in a
word) but also on sentence stress (i.e. the basic emphasis
pattern of a sentence). Both of these elements are important
for intelligibility.

Reprint 2025-26



201/ON SCIENCE FICTION

Look at the following sentences

(i) Delhi is a big city.

(ii) He asked me how I felt in a big city like Delhi.

You will notice that the first sentence can be said in one breath,
but you may like to pause while saying the second sentence.
Pauses can be indicated by the mark (/). Each pause marks
the end of a ‘breath’ or tone group. Because tone groups are
said in a single breath, they are limited in length and average
about two seconds, or five words.

We break up spoken language into tone groups because we need
to breathe, so there is a physical reason for the structure. But
there is also the need to think. Thus the pace of the tone groups,
and the information they convey, matches the speakers’
thoughts. Tone groups can contain only one word or as many as
seven or eight, as you can see in the example given below

No,/I really can’t put up with it any more/good bye./

TASK

Mark the pauses in the following dialogue.

A: Good morning, this is Ten-2-Ten supermarket. Can I help you?
B: Good morning, I’d like to speak to the person in charge of your

After Sales Service, please.
A: That’s Mr Patel.
B: Could you put me through to him, please?

A: Who’s speaking, please?
B: My name’s Karandikar.
A: Just a moment, Mr Karandikar... I am sorry, Mr Patel’s line

seems to be busy.
B: Well, is there someone else who could help me?
A: There’s Mrs Paul. She’s the assistant manager, but she’s out

at the moment.
B: Look, this is quite important!
A: I’ll try Mr Patel’s line again for you,... trying to connect you.
B: Ah! finally, ... is that Mr Patel? Good morning, this is... Hello?...

oh no! I’m cut off.

C. Grammar: Some More Verb Classes

The verb have is followed by a noun phrase. Find the noun
phrases that follow have in the paragraph of the text that begins
“A ‘sports story must have…some competitive activity…” (In

Reprint 2025-26



202/KALEIDOSCOPE

this example, have is followed by the noun phrase some
competitive activity.)

Sentences with have do not usually have a passive form. But
in general, verbs which take a noun phrase after them are
transitive, and they have a passive form. Look at the verbs in
the paragraph following the paragraph you have just worked
with. Find the noun phrases that follow the verbs take, place,
involve, change and add.

Notice that these verbs can all be passivized, and their objects
can become subjects (these have been set in bold below). So
that we can say

Let the contents of any of these be taken and be placed against
a background where a society significantly different from
our own is involved and the nature of the story has not been
changed—it has merely been added to.

TASK

1. Here are a few sentences with transitive verbs, adapted from
the text. Identify the noun phrases that are the verbs’ objects,
and underline them. Then turn these sentences into a passive
form.

• He expected a sudden change of rules.

• Nothing prevents writers from using actual science.

• He revealed that he didn’t know the difference between the
element and the compound.

• He demonstrated that he couldn’t tell the difference between
carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide and reduced the plot to a
shambles.

• The writer must carefully explain to the reader all the boundary
conditions of the imaginary society.

2. Some verbs take a that-clause after them. Find the verb ask in
the last paragraph of the first part of this text (which begins ‘I
don’t even ask that…’) and note how it is followed by that-
clauses. Look for other verbs, in this text as well as in the
earlier ones, that are followed by a that-clause (verbs such as
believe, know, realise, promise…).

Suggested Reading
Foundation by Isaac Asimov
Chronology of Science and Discovery by Isaac Asimov.

Reprint 2025-26

##20##

203/CHANDALIKA

Drama

INTRODUCTION

A drama is a composition in prose or verse
presenting in dialogue a story of life or character,
especially one intended to be acted on the stage.
The essence of drama is the make-believe by which
an actor impersonates a character of the play. The
element of make-believe in drama is much greater
than the average play-goer realises. For instance,
we must regard it as entirely natural that rooms
and houses have one wall ‘missing’ that enables
the audience to witness the action.

Drama is usually divided into tragedy and comedy,
but within this general framework a number of
types and subtypes have been developed. The
tragicomedy, for instance, mixes elements of both
tragedy and comedy; the modern ‘problem-play’
deals with neither of these but with middle class
life and problems.

Furthermore, drama is the literary form most
viable with the modern mass media; and film, radio
and television are producing a vast quantity of it,
ranging from ‘soap opera’ and farce to serious new
works and fine productions of old ones.

Two plays find a place in the section: Chandalika
by Tagore which describes the angst of an
untouchable woman; and an excerpt from Broken
Images by Girish Karnad, which is a monologue
by a celebrity writer that plumbs the depths of her
psyche and recreates her life for the TV viewer.

Reprint 2025-26



204/KALEIDOSCOPE

1
Chandalika

Rabindranath Tagore was a poet, novelist, short-
story writer and dramatist. He was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Literature in 1913. Tagore’s interest
in drama was fostered while he was a boy, for
his family enjoyed writing and staging plays. The
music in his plays is instrumental in bringing out
the delicate display of emotion around an idea.
The central interest in his plays is the unfolding

Rabindranath Tagore of character; of the opening up of the soul to
1861-1941 enlightenment of some sort.

INTRODUCTION

This short drama is based on the following Buddhist legend.
Ananda, the famous disciple of the Buddha, was one day
returning from a visit when he felt thirsty and, approaching
a well on the way, asked for water from a chandalika, a
girl belonging to the lowest untouchable caste. The girl
gave him water and fell in love with the beautiful monk.
Unable to restrain herself, she made her mother, who knew
the art of magic, work her spell on him. The spell proved
stronger than Ananda’s will and the spell-bound monk
presented himself at their house at night; but, as he saw
the girl spread the couch for him, he was overcome with
shame and remorse and prayed inwardly to his master to
save him. The Buddha heard the prayer and broke the
magic spell and Ananda went away, as pure as he came.

This crude plot of the popular tale, showing how the
psychic power of the Buddha saves his devotee from the
lust of a chandal girl, has been transformed by the poet

Reprint 2025-26



205/CHANDALIKA

into a psychological drama of intense spiritual conflict. It
is not the story of a wicked girl roused to lust by the physical
beauty of the monk, but of a very sensitive girl, condemned
by her birth to a despised caste, who is suddenly awakened
to a consciousness of her full rights as a woman by the
humanity of a follower of the Buddha, who accepts water
from her hand and teaches her to judge herself not by the
artificial values that society attaches to the accidents of
birth, but by her capacity for love and service.

This is a great revelation for her, which she calls a
new birth; for she is washed clean of her self-degradation
and rises up a full human being with her right to love and
to give. And since her own self is the most she can give,
and since none is more worthy of the gift of her surrender
than the bhikshu who has redeemed, or, as she puts it,
created her, she yearns to offer herself to him. But Ananda,
detached from all earthly cares and immersed in his inner
self, knows nothing of all this and passes by without
recognising her.

She is humiliated, wounded in her newly awakened
sensibility, and determines to drag the monk from his pride
of renunciation to the abjectness of desire for her. She has
lost all religious scruple or fear, for she owed nothing to
religion save her humiliation.

‘A religion that insults is a false religion. Everyone
united to make me conform to a creed that blinds and
gags. But since that day something forbids me to conform
any longer. I’m afraid of nothing now.’

She forces her mother to exercise her art of magic on
Ananda. She refers to it as the primeval spell, the spell of
the earth, which is far more potent than the immature
sadhana of the monks. The ‘spell of the earth’ proves its
force and Ananda is dragged to their door, his face distorted
with agony and shame. Seeing her redeemer, so noble and
resplendent before, thus cruelly transformed and degraded,
she is horrified at the selfish and destructive nature of
her desire. The hero to whom she yearned to dedicate
herself was not this creature, blinded by lust and darkened
with shame, but Ananda of the radiant form, who had

Reprint 2025-26



206/KALEIDOSCOPE

given her the gift of a new birth and had revealed her own
true humanity. In remorse she curses herself and falls at
his feet, begging for forgiveness. The mother revokes the
spell and willingly pays the price of such revocation, which
is death. The chandalika is thus redeemed for the second
time, purged of the pride and egoism that had made her
forget that love does not claim possession, but gives
freedom.

Chandalika is a tragedy of self-consciousness over-
reaching its limit. Self-consciousness, up to a point, is
necessary to self-development; for, without an awareness of
the dignity of one’s own role or function, one cannot give
one’s best to the world. Without rights there can be no
obligations, and service and virtue when forced become marks
of slavery. But self-consciousness, like good wine, easily
intoxicates, and it is difficult to control the dose and have
just enough of it. Vanity and pride get the upper hand and he
who clings to his rights very often trespasses on those of
others. This is what happened to the heroine. Prakriti, in her
eagerness to give, forgot that Ananda need not take; her
devotion grew so passionate that she could not make her
surrender without first possessing. Yet it was inevitable that
it should be so; for a new consciousness, after ages of
suppression, is overpowering and one learns restraint only
after suffering. Hence the tragedy. The good mother who, so
unwillingly, worked the spell to please her importunate
daughter, and who so willingly revoked it to save Ananda,
dies in the process. The daughter, though chastened and
made wise by suffering, has paid a heavy price; for wisdom is
not happiness and renunciation is not fulfilment.

ACT I

Read and find out

How does Prakriti’s mother react when she hears of
Prakriti’s encounter with the monk?

MOTHER. Prakriti! Prakriti! Where has she gone? What
ails the girl, I wonder? She’s never to be found in the
house.

Reprint 2025-26



207/CHANDALIKA

PRAKRITI. Here, mother, here I am.
MOTHER. Where?
PRAKRITI. Here, by the well.
MOTHER. Whatever will you do next? Past noon, and a

blistering sun, and the earth too hot for the feet! The
morning’s water was drawn long ago, and the other
girls in the village have all taken their pots home.
Why, the very crows on the amloki branches are
gasping for heat. Yet you sit and roast in the Vaisakh
sun for no reason at all! There’s a story in the Purana
about how Uma left home and did penance in the
burning sun—is that what you are about?

PRAKRITI. Yes, mother, that’s it—I’m doing penance.
MOTHER. Good heavens! And for whom?
PRAKRITI. For someone whose call has come to me.
MOTHER. What call is that?
PRAKRITI. ‘Give me water.’ He set the words echoing in my

heart.
MOTHER. Heaven defend us! He said to you ‘Give me

water’? Who was it? Someone of our own caste?
PRAKRITI. That’s what he said—that he belonged to our

kind.
MOTHER. You didn’t hide your caste? Did you tell him

that you are a chandalini?
PRAKRITI. I told him, yes. He said it wasn’t true. If the

black clouds of Sravana are dubbed chandal, he said,
what of it? It doesn’t change their nature, or destroy
the virtue of their water. Don’t humiliate yourself, he
said; self-humiliation is a sin, worse than self-murder.

MOTHER. What words are these from you? Have you
remembered some tale of a former birth?

PRAKRITI. No, this is a tale of my new birth.
MOTHER. You make me laugh. New birth, indeed! Since

when, pray?
PRAKRITI. It was the other day. The palace gong had just

struck noon and it was blazing hot. I was washing
that calf at the well—the one whose mother died. Then

In the original, this play, unlike the others, is not divided into acts. There is no lapse of time
in the action. The divisions here suggested indicate the intervals which would be found
desirable in stage production.

Reprint 2025-26



208/KALEIDOSCOPE

a Buddhist monk came and stood before me, in his
yellow robes, and said, ‘Give me water’. My heart
leaped with wonder. I started up trembling and bowed
before his feet, without touching them. His form was
radiant as with the light of dawn. I said, ‘I am a
chandalini, and the well-water is unclean’. He said,
‘As I am a human being, so also are you, and all water
is clean and holy that cools our heat and satisfies our
thirst’. For the first time in my life I heard such words,
for the first time I poured water into his cupped
hands—the hands of a man the very dust of whose
feet I would never have dared to touch.

MOTHER. O, you stupid girl, how could you be so reckless?
There will be a price to pay for this madness! Don’t
you know what caste you were born in?

PRAKRITI. Only once did he cup his hands, to take the
water from mine. Such a little water, yet that water
grew to a fathomless, boundless sea. In it flowed all
the seven seas in one, and my caste was drowned,
and my birth washed clean.

MOTHER. Why, even the way you speak is changed. He
has laid your tongue under a spell. Do you understand
yourself what you are saying?

PRAKRITI. Was there no other water, mother, in all Sravasti
city? Why did he come to this well of all wells? I may
truly call it my new birth! He came to give me the
honour of quenching Man’s thirst. That was the mighty
act of merit which he sought. Nowhere else could he
have found the water which could fulfill his holy vow—
no, not in any sacred stream. He said that Janaki
bathed in such water as this, at the beginning of her
forest exile, and that Guhak, the chandal, drew it for
her. My heart has been dancing ever since, and night
and day I hear those solemn tones— ‘Give me water,
give me water’.

MOTHER. I don’t know what to make of it, child; I don’t
like it. I don’t understand the magic of their spells.
Today I don’t recognise your speech; tomorrow,
perhaps, I shall not even recognise your face. Their
spells can make a changeling of the very soul itself.

Reprint 2025-26



209/CHANDALIKA

PRAKRITI. All these days you have never really known me,
mother. He who has recognised me will reveal me.
And so I wait and watch. The midday gong booms
from the palace, the girls take up their water-pots
and go home, the kite soars alone into the far sky,
and I bring my pitcher and sit here at the well by the
wayside.

MOTHER. For whom do you wait?
PRAKRITI. For the wayfarer.
MOTHER. What wayfarer will come to you, you crazy girl?
PRAKRITI. That one wayfarer, mother, the one and only. In

him are all who fare along the ways of all the world.
Day after day goes by, yet he does not come. Though
he spoke no word, his word was given—why does he
not keep his word? For my heart is become like a
waterless waste, where the heat-haze quivers all day
long. Its water cannot be given, for no one comes to
seek it.

MOTHER. I can make nothing of your talk today; it’s as
though you were intoxicated. Tell me plainly, what do
you want?

PRAKRITI. I want him. All unlooked for—he came, and
taught me this marvellous truth, that even my service
will count with the God who guides the world. O words
of great wonder! That I may serve, I, a flower sprung
from a poison-plant! Let him raise that truth, that
flower from the dust, and take it to his bosom.

MOTHER. Be warned, Prakriti, these men’s words are meant
only to be heard, not to be practised. The filth into
which an evil fate has cast you is a wall of mud that
no spade in the world can break through. You are
unclean; beware of tainting the outside world with
your unclean presence. See that you keep to your own
place, narrow as it is. To stray anywhere beyond its
limits is to trespass.

Reprint 2025-26



210/KALEIDOSCOPE

PRAKRITI [sings].

Blessed am I, says the flower, who belong to the
earth.

For I serve you, my God, in this my lowly home.
Make me forget that I am born of dust,

For my spirit is free from it.
When you bend your eyes upon me my petals

tremble in joy;
Give me a touch of your feet and make me heavenly,

For the earth must offer its worship through me.

MOTHER. Child, I’m beginning to understand something
of what you say. You are a woman; by serving you
must worship, and by serving you must rule. Women
alone can in a moment overstep the bounds of caste;
when once the curtains of destiny are drawn aside,
they all stand revealed in their queenliness. You had
a good chance, you know, when the king’s son was
deer-hunting and came to this very well of yours. You
remember, don’t you?

PRAKRITI. Yes, I remember.
MOTHER. Why didn’t you go to the king’s house? He had

forgotten everything in your beauty.
PRAKRITI. Yes, he had forgotten everything—forgotten that

I was a human being. He had gone out hunting beasts;
he saw nothing but the beast whom he wanted to
bind in chains of gold.

MOTHER. At least he noticed your beauty, if only as game
to be hunted. As for the Bhikshu, does he see the
woman in you?

PRAKRITI. You won’t understand, mother, you won’t! I feel
that in all these days he is the first who ever really
recognised me. That is a marvellous thing. I want
him, mother, I want him beyond all measure. I want
to take this life of mine and lay it like a basket of
flowers at his feet. It will not defile them. Let everyone
marvel at my daring! I shall glory in my claim. ‘I am
your handmaid,’ I shall declare—for otherwise I must
lie bound for ever at the whole world’s feet, a slave!

Reprint 2025-26



211/CHANDALIKA

MOTHER. Why do you get so excited, child? You were born
a slave. It’s the writ of Destiny, who can undo it?

PRAKRITI. Fie, fie, Mother, I tell you again, don’t delude
yourself with this self-humiliation—it is false, and a
sin. Plenty of slaves are born of royal blood, but I am
no slave; plenty of chandals are born of Brahmin
families, but I am no chandal.

MOTHER. I don’t know how to answer you, child. Very
good. I’ll go to him myself, and cling to his feet. ‘You
accept food from every home’, I’ll say. ‘Come to our
house too, and accept from our hands at least a bowl
of water.’

PRAKRITI. No, no, I’ll not call him in that way, from outside.
I’ll send my call into his soul, for him to hear. I am
longing to give myself; it is like a pain at my heart.
Who is going to accept the gift? Who will join with me
in give-and-take? Will he not mingle his longings with
mine, as the Ganges mingles with the black waters of
the Jumna? For music springs up of itself, and he
who came unbidden has left behind him a word of
hope. What is the use of one pitcher of water when
the earth is cracked with drought? Will not the clouds
come of themselves to fill the whole sky, the rain seek
the soil by its own weight?

MOTHER. What is the use of such talk? If the clouds come,
they come: if they don’t, they don’t; if the crops wither,
it’s no concern of theirs! What more can we do than
sit and watch the sky?

PRAKRITI. That won’t do for me; I won’t simply sit and
watch. You know how to work spells; let those spells
be the clasp of my arms, let them drag him here.

MOTHER. What are you saying, wretched girl? Is there no
limit to your recklessness? It would be playing with
fire! Are these bhikshus like ordinary folk? How am I
to work spells on them? I shudder even to think of it.

PRAKRITI. You would have worked them boldly enough on
the king’s son.

MOTHER. I’m not afraid of the king; he might have had me
impaled, perhaps. But these men—they do nothing.

Reprint 2025-26



212/KALEIDOSCOPE

PRAKRITI. I fear nothing any longer, except to sink back
again, to forget myself again, to enter again the house
of darkness. That would be worse than death! Bring
him here you must! I speak so boldly, of such great
matters—isn’t that in itself a wonder? Who worked
the wonder but he? Shall there not be further wonders?
Shall he not come to my side, and sit with me on the
corner of my cloth?

MOTHER. Suppose I can bring him, are you ready to pay
the price? Nothing will be left to you.

PRAKRITI. No, nothing will be left. The burden and heritage
of birth after birth—nothing will remain. Only let me
bring it all to an end, then I shall live indeed. That’s
why I need him. Nothing will be left me. I have waited
for age after age, and now in this birth my life shall
be fulfilled. My mind is saying it over and over again—
fulfilled! It was for this that I heard those wonderful
words, ‘Give me water’. Today I know that even I can
give. Everyone else had hidden the truth from me. I
sit and watch for his coming today to give, to give, to
give everything I have.

MOTHER. Have you no respect for religion?
PRAKRITI. How can I say? I respect him who respects me.

A religion that insults is a false religion. Everyone
united to make me conform to a creed that blinds and
gags. But since that day something forbids me to
conform any longer. I’m afraid of nothing now. Chant
your spells, bring the Bhikshu to the side of the
chandalini. I myself shall do him honour—no one else
can honour him so well.

MOTHER. Aren’t you afraid of bringing a curse upon
yourself?

PRAKRITI. There has been a curse upon me all my life.
Poison kills poison, they say—so one curse another.
Not another word, mother, not another word. Begin
your spells, I cannot bear any more delay.

MOTHER. Very well, then. What is his name?
PRAKRITI. His name is Ananda.
MOTHER. Ananda? The disciple of the Lord Buddha?
PRAKRITI. Yes, it is he.

Reprint 2025-26



213/CHANDALIKA

MOTHER. O my heart’s treasure, you are the apple of my
eye—but it’s a great wrong I’m putting my hand to at
your bidding!

PRAKRITI. What wrong? I will bring to my side the one who
brings all near. What crime is there in that?

MOTHER. They draw men by the strength of their virtue.
We drag them with spells, as beasts are dragged in a
noose. We only churn up the mud.

PRAKRITI. So much the better. Without the churning, how
can the well be cleansed?

MOTHER (apostrophising Ananda].
O thou exalted one, thy power to forgive is greater far
than my power to offend. I am about to do thee
dishonour, yet I bow before thee: accept my obeisance,
Lord.

PRAKRITI. What are you afraid of, mother? Yours are the
lips I use, but it’s I who chant the spells. If my longing
can draw him here, and if that is a crime, then I will
commit the crime. I care nothing for a code which
holds only punishment, and no comfort.

MOTHER. You are immensely daring, Prakriti.
PRAKRITI. You call me daring? Think of the might of his

daring! How simply he spoke the words which no one
had ever dared to say to me before! ‘Give me water.’
Such little words, yet as mighty as flame—they filled
all my days with light, they rolled away the black
stone whose weight so long had stopped the fountains
of my heart, and the joy bubbled forth. Your fear is an
illusion, for you did not see him. All morning he had
begged alms in Sravasti city; when his task was done
he came, across the common, past the burning-ground,
along the river bank, with the hot sun on his head—
and all for what? To say that one word, ‘Give me water’,
even to a girl like me. O, it is too wonderful! Whence
did such grace, such love, come down—upon a wretch
unworthy beyond all others? What can I fear now?
‘Give me water’—yes, the water which has filled all
my days to overflowing, which I must needs give or
die! ‘Give me water.’ In a moment I knew that I had

Reprint 2025-26



214/KALEIDOSCOPE

water, inexhaustible water; to whom should I tell my
joy? And so I call him night and day. If he does not
hear, fear not; chant your spell, he will be able to
bear it.

MOTHER. Look, Prakriti, some men in yellow robes are
going by the road across the common.

PRAKRITI. So they are; all the monks of the sangha, I see.
Don’t you hear them chanting?

[The chant is heard in the distance.]

To the most pure Buddha, mighty ocean of mercy,
Seer of knowledge absolute, pure, supreme,

Of the world’s sin and suffering the Destroyer—
Solemnly to the Buddha I bow in homage.

PRAKRITI. O Mother, see, he is going, there ahead of them
all. He never turned his head or looked towards this
well. He could so easily have said ‘Give me water’
once more before he went. I thought he would never
be able to cast me aside—me, his own handiwork, his
new creation. [She flings herself down and beats her
head on the ground.] This dust, this dust is your place!
O wretched woman, who raised you to bloom for a
moment in the light? Fallen in the end into this same
dust, you must mingle for all time with this same
dust, trampled underfoot by all who travel the road.

MOTHER. Child, dear child, forget it, forget it all. They
have broken your momentary dream, and they are
going away—let them go, let them go. When a thing is
not meant to last, the quicker it goes the better.

Read and find out

Will Prakriti resign herself to her lot?

PRAKRITI. Day after day this cry of desire, moment by
moment this burden of shame; this prisoned bird in
my breast, that beats its wings unto death—do you
call it a dream? A dream, is it, that sinks its sharp

Reprint 2025-26



215/CHANDALIKA

teeth into the fibres of my heart, and will not loosen
its grip? And they, who have no ties, no joy or sorrow,
no earthly burden, who float along like the clouds in
autumn—are only they awake, are only they real?

MOTHER. O Prakriti, I cannot bear to see you suffer so.
Come, get up, I will chant the spells, I will bring
him. All along the dusty road I will bring him. ‘I
want nothing,’ he says in his pride. I’ll break that
pride and make him come, running and crying ‘I
want, I want’.

PRAKRITI. Mother, yours is an ancient spell, as old as life
itself. Their mantras are raw things of yesterday.
These men can never be a match for you—the knot
of their mantras will be loosened under the stress of
your spells. He is bound to be defeated.

MOTHER. Where are they going?
PRAKRITI. Going? They are going nowhere! During the rains

they remain four months in penance and fasting,
and then they are off again, how should I know
where? That’s what they call being awake!

MOTHER. Then why are you talking of spells, you crazy
thing? He is going so far—how am I to bring him
back?

PRAKRITI. No matter where he goes, you must bring him
back. Distance is nothing for your spells. He showed
no pity to me, I shall show none to him. Chant your
spell, your cruellest spells; wind them about his
mind till every coil bites deep. Wherever he goes, he
shall never escape me!

 MOTHER. You need not fear, it is not beyond our powers. I
will give you this magic mirror; you shall take it in
your hand and dance. His shadow will fall on the
glass, and in it you will see what happens to him
and how near he has come.

PRAKRITI. See there the clouds, the storm clouds, gathered
in the west. The spell will work, mother, it will work.
His dry meditations will scatter like withered leaves;
his lamp will go out, his path will be lost in darkness.
As a bird at dead of night falls fluttering into the

Reprint 2025-26



216/KALEIDOSCOPE

dark courtyard, its nest broken in the storm, even
so shall he be whirled helpless to our doors. The
thunder throbs in my heart, my mind is filled with
the lightning flash, the waves foam high in an ocean
whose shore I cannot see.

MOTHER. Think well even now, lest sudden terror spring
upon you with the work half done. Can you endure
to the end? When the spell has reached its height, it
would cost me my life to undo it. Remember that
this fire will not die down till all that will burn is
burnt to ashes.

PRAKRITI. For whom are you afraid? Is he a common man?
Nothing will hurt him. Let him come, let him tread
the path of fire to the very end. Before me I see in
vision the night of doom, the storm of union, the
bliss of the breaking of worlds.

ACT II

[Fifteen days have passed.]

Read and find out

Will the spell work? What will happen when Ananda
is made to come?

PRAKRITI. O, my heart will break. I will not look in the
mirror, I cannot bear it. Such agony, so furious a
storm. Must the king of the forest crash to the dust
at last, his cloud-kissing glory broken?

MOTHER. Even now, child, if you say so, I will try to undo
the spell. Let the cords of my life be torn apart and
my life-blood spent, if only that great soul can be
saved.

PRAKRITl. That is best, mother. Let the spells stop, I’ll
have no more... no, no, don’t! Go on—the end of the
path is so near! Make him come to the very end,
make him come right to my bosom! After that I will
blot out all his suffering, emptying my whole world
at his feet. At dead of night the wayfarer will come,
and I will kindle the lamps for him in the flames of

Reprint 2025-26



217/CHANDALIKA

my burning heart. Deep within are springs of nectar,
where he shall bathe and anoint his weary, hot and
wounded limbs. Once again he shall say ‘Give me
water’—water from the ocean of my heart. Yes, that
day will come—go on, go on with the spell.

[Song]
In my own sorrow

Will I quit thy sorrow;
Thy hurt will I bathe

In the deep waters of my pain’s immensity.
My world will I give to the flames,

And my blackened shame shall be cleansed.
My mortal pain will I offer as gift at thy feet.

MOTHER. I never knew it would take so long. My spells
have no more power, child; there is no breath left in
my body.

PRAKRITI. Don’t be afraid, mother; hold out a little longer,
only a little. It will not be long now.

MOTHER. The month of Ashad is here, and their four
months’ fast is at hand.

PRAKRITl. They are gone to Vaisali, to the monastery there.
MOTHER. How pitiless you are! That is so far away.
PRAKRITI. Not very far; seven days’ journey. Fifteen days

have already passed. His seat of meditation has been
shaken at last. He is coming, he is coming! All that
once lay so far away, so many million miles away,
beyond the very sun and moon, immeasurably beyond
the reach of my arms—it is coming, nearer and
nearer! He is coming, and my heart is rocked as by
an earthquake.

MOTHER. I have worked the spell through all its stages—
such force might have brought down Indra of the
thunderbolt himself. And yet he does not come. It is
a fight to the death indeed. What did you see in the
mirror?

PRAKRITI. At first I saw a mist covering the whole sky,
deathly pale like the weary gods after their struggle
with the demons, Through rifts in the mist there

Reprint 2025-26



218/KALEIDOSCOPE

glimmered fire. After that the mist gathered itself
up into red and angry clusters, like swollen, festering
sores. That day passed. The next day I looked, and
all the background was a deep black cloud, with
lightning playing across it. Before it he was standing,
all his limbs fenced with flame. My blood ran cold,
and I rushed to tell you to stop your spells at once—
but I found you in deep trace, sitting like a log,
breathing hardly, and unconscious. It seemed as
though a fierce fire burned in you, and your fire was
a flaming serpent that hissed and struck in deadly
duel at the fire that wrapped him round. I came
back and took up the mirror; the light was gone—
only torment, unfathomable torment, was in his face.

MOTHER. Yet that did not kill you? The fire of his suffering
burnt into my soul, till I thought I could bear no more.

PRAKRITI. It seemed that the tortured form I saw was not
his only, but mine too; it belonged to us both. In
those awful fires the gold and the copper had been
melted and fused.

MOTHER. And you felt no fear?
PRAKRITI. Something far greater than fear. I beheld the

God of Creation, more terrible far than the God of
Destruction, lashing the flames to work His purposes,
while they writhed and roared in anger. What lay at
his feet in the casket of the seven elements—Life or
Death? My mind swelled with a joy hard to name—
joy in the tremendous detachment of new creation,
free of care or fear, of pity or sorrow. Creation
breaking, burning and melting among the sparks of
the elemental fires. I could not keep still. My whole
soul and body danced and danced together, as the
pointed flames dance in the fire.

MOTHER. And how did your Bhikshu appear?
PRAKRITI. His eyes were fixed motionless upon the

distance, like stars in the evening twilight. I longed
to escape from myself far into boundless space.

MOTHER. When you danced before the mirror, he saw you?
PRAKRITI. Fie upon it, how I am shamed! Again and again

his eyes grew red, as though he were about to curse.

Reprint 2025-26



219/CHANDALIKA

Again and again he trampled down the glowing fires
of anger, and at last his anger turned upon himself,
quivering, like a spear, and pierced his own breast.

MOTHER. And you bore all this?
PRAKRITI. I was amazed. I, this I, this daughter of yours,

this nobody from nowhere—his suffering and mine
are one today! What holy fire of creation could have
wrought such a union? Who could dream of so great
a thing?

MOTHER. When shall his turmoil be stilled?
PRAKRITl. When my suffering is stilled. How can he attain

his mukti until I attain mine?
MOTHER. When did you last look into your mirror?
PRAKRITl. Yesterday evening. He had passed through the

lion-gate of Vaisali some days before, at dead of
night—seemingly in secret, unknown to the monks.
After that I had sometimes seen him ferried across
rivers or on difficult mountain passes. I had seen
the evening fall, and him alone on the wide commons,
or on the dark forest paths at dead of night. As the
days went by, he fell more deeply under the spell
and became heedless of everything, all the conflict
with his own soul at an end. His face was mazed,
his body slack, his eyes fixed in an unseeing stare,
as though for him there were neither true nor false,
good nor evil—only a blind and thoughtless
compulsion, with no meaning in it.

MOTHER. Can you guess how far he has come today?
PRAKRITI. I saw him yesterday at Patal village on the river

Upali. The river was turbulent with new rains; there
was an old peepul tree by the ghat, fireflies shining
in its branches, and under it a lichened altar. As he
reached it he gave a sudden start and stood still. It
was a place he had known for a long time; I have
heard that one day the Lord Buddha preached there
to King Suprabhas. He sat down and covered his
eyes with his hands—I felt that his dream-spell
might break at any moment. I flung away the mirror,
for I was afraid of what I might see. The whole day
has passed since then, and torn between hope and

Reprint 2025-26



220/KALEIDOSCOPE

fear I have sat on, not daring to know. Now it is dark
again; on the road goes the watchman calling the
hour, it must be an hour past midnight. O mother,
the time is short, so short; don’t let this night be
wasted; put the whole of your strength into the spell.

MOTHER. Child, I can do no more; the spell is weakening,
I am failing body and soul.

PRAKRITl. It mustn’t weaken now—don’t give up now!
Maybe he has turned his face away, maybe the chain
we have bound on him is stretched to the uttermost,
and will not hold. What if he escapes now, away
from this birth of mine, and I can never reach him
again? Then it will be my turn to dream, to return to
the illusion of a chandal birth. I will never endure
that mockery again. I beseech you, mother, put out
your whole strength once only; set in motion your
spell of the primeval earth, and shake the complacent
heaven of the virtuous.

MOTHER. Have you made ready as I told you?
PRAKRITI. Yes. Yesterday was the second night of the

waxing moon. I bathed in the river Gambhira,
plunging below the water. Here in the courtyard I
drew a circle, with rice and pomegranate blossoms,
vermilion and the seven jewels. I planted the flags
of yellow cloth, I placed sandal-paste and garlands
on a brass tray, I lit the lamps. After my bath I put
on a cloth, green like the tender rice shoots, and a
scarf like the champak flower. I sat with my face to
the East. All night long I have contemplated his
image. On my left arm I have tied the bracelet of
thread—sixteen strands of golden yellow bound in
sixteen knots.

MOTHER. Then dance round the circle in your dance of
invocation, while I work my spells before the altar.

[Prakriti dances and sings.]
Now, Prakriti, take your mirror and look. See, a dark
shadow has fallen over the altar. My heart is bursting
and I can do no more. Look into the mirror—how
long will it be now?

Reprint 2025-26



221/CHANDALIKA

PRAKRITl. No, I will not look again, I will listen—listen in
my inmost being. If he reveals himself I shall see
him before me. Bear up a little longer, mother, he
will surely, surely reveal himself. Hark! Hark to the
sudden storm, the storm of his coming! The earth
quivers beneath his tread, and my heart throbs.

MOTHER. It brings a curse for you, unhappy girl. As for
me, it means surely death—the fibres of my being
are shattered.

PRAKRITI. No curse, it brings no curse, it brings the gift of
my new birth. The thunderbolt hammers open the
Lion-gates of Death; the door breaks, the walls
crumble, the falsehood of this birth of mine is
shattered. Tremors of fear shake my mind, but
rhythms of joy enrapture my soul. My All-destroyer,
my All-in-all, you have come! I will enthrone you on
the summit of all my dishonour, and build your royal
seat of my shame, my fear and my joy.

MOTHER. My time is near, I can do no more. Look in the
mirror at once.

PRAKRITI. Mother, I’m afraid. His journey is almost at an
end, and what then? What then for him? Only myself,
my wretched self? Nothing else? Only this to repay
the long and cruel pain? Nothing but me? Only this
at the end of the weary, difficult road?—only me?

MOTHER. Have pity, cruel girl, I can bear no more. Look
in the mirror, quick!

PRAKRITI (looks in the mirror and flings it away). O mother,
mother, stop! Undo the spell now—at once—undo it!
What have you done? What have you done? O
wicked, wicked deed!—better have died. What a sight
to see! Where is the light and radiance, the shining
purity, the heavenly glow? How worn, how faded,
has he come to my door! Bearing his self’s defeat as
a heavy burden, he comes with drooping head... Away
with all this, away with it! [She kicks the
paraphernalia of magic to pieces.] Prakriti, Prakriti,
if in truth you are no chandalini, offer no insult to
the heroic. Victory, victory to him!

Reprint 2025-26



222/KALEIDOSCOPE

[Enter Ananda.]
O Lord, you have come to give me deliverance,
therefore have you known this torment. Forgive me,
forgive me. Let your feet spurn afar the endless
reproach of my birth. I have dragged you down to
earth, how else could you raise me to your heaven?
O pure one, the dust has soiled your feet, but they
have not been soiled in vain. The veil of my illusion
shall fall upon them, and wipe away the dust.
Victory, victory to thee, O Lord!

MOTHER. Victory to thee, O Lord. My sins and my life lie
together at thy feet, and my days end here, in the
haven of thy forgiveness. [She dies.]

ANANDA [chanting].

Buddho Susuddho karuna mahannvo
Yoccanta suddhabbara-gnana locano

Lokassa papupakilesa ghatako
Vandami Buddham ahamadarena tam.

To the most pure Buddha, mighty ocean of mercy,
Seer of knowledge absolute, pure, supreme,

Of the world’s sin and suffering the Destroyer—
Solemnly to the Buddha I bow in homage.

Thinking about the Play

1. Why does something so ordinary and commonplace as giving
water to a wayfarer become so significant to Prakriti?

2. Why is the girl named Prakriti in the play? What are the images
in the play that relate to this theme?

3. How does the churning of emotions bring about self-realisation
in Prakriti even if at the cost of her mother’s life?

4. How does the mirror reflect the turmoil experienced by the monk
as a result of the working of the spell?

5. What is the role of the mother in Prakriti’s self-realisation?
What are her hopes and fears for her daughter?

Reprint 2025-26



223/CHANDALIKA

6. ‘Acceptance of one’s fate is easy. Questioning the imbalance of
the human social order is tumultuous.’ Discuss with reference
to the play.

Appreciation
1. How does the dramatic technique suit the theme of the play?

2. By focusing attention on the consciousness of an outcast girl,
the play sensitises the viewer/reader to the injustice of
distinctions based on the accidents of  human birth. Discuss
how individual conflict is highlighted against the backdrop of
social reality.

3. ‘I will enthrone you on the summit of all my dishonour, and build
your royal seat of my shame, my fear and my joy’. Pick out more
such examples of the interplay of opposites from the text. What
does this device succeed in conveying?

4. ‘Shadow, mist, storm’ on the one hand, ‘flames, fire,’ on the
other. Comment on the effect of these and similar images of
contrast on the viewer/reader.

Suggested Reading
Gora by Rabindranath Tagore.

Reprint 2025-26



224/KALEIDOSCOPE
##21##
2
Broken Images

Girish Karnad is a contemporary writer,
playwright, actor and movie director. He is a
recipient of the Padma Shri (1974), Padma
Bhushan (1992) and the Jnanpith Award
(1998). He writes in both Kannada and English.
His plays generally use history and mythology
to focus on contemporary issues. He is also
active in the world of Indian cinema.
This play, too, can be looked at from multiple
levels—the focus on values, both personal and

Girish Karnad academic, and the issue of bilingualism in
Born 1938 today’s world.

...for you know only
A heap of broken images, where the sun beats,
And the dead tree gives no shelter,...

     T. S. ELIOT

THE WASTE LAND

The interior of a television studio. A big plasma screen hangs on
one side, big enough for a close-up on it to be seen clearly by the
audience. On the other side of the stage, a chair and a typically
‘telly’ table—strong, wide, semi-circular. At the back of the stage
are several television sets, with screens of varying sizes.

A small red bulb glows above the table, high enough not
to appear on the television screen.

Manjula Nayak walks in. She is in her mid-thirties/
forties, and has a confident stride. She is wearing a lapel
mike. It is immediately evident that she is at home in
broadcasting studios. She looks around.

Reprint 2025-26



225/BROKEN IMAGES

MANJULA: Nice, very nice. Neat!
(She goes and sits on the chair. Adjusts the earpiece.)
But where is the camera?
(Listens to the reply.)
Ah! I see. New technology. Isn’t it scary? The rate of
obsolescence? (Listens.) Of course I have. In London.
And in Toronto. But when you think of Indian television
studios, you always imagine them cluttered. Lots of
men and women scurrying about, shouting orders.
Elephantine lights. Headphones. Cameras. You know
what I mean. But here... I mean, it’s all so spartan... I
know. But a bit lonely too. Like a sound studio... All
right. All right... No camera. I just look ahead and
speak to an invisible audience in front of me... Direct.
Fine. Fine... I can hear you. Clearly. Voice test?...
‘Testing, Testing, One, Two, Three, Four, Five, Hello,
Hello!’ Shall I tap on the mike?
(Laughs.)
My speech will last exactly ten minutes. I have timed
it... No, I won’t read. ‘Look ahead and speak!’ Good...
But that may take a little longer. A couple of minutes...
if I don’t fumble too much.
(Giggles.)
The yellow light?... Okay, okay, ready, fine!
(She mouths ‘Ten’ to ‘Zero’ silently, emphasising each
count with her forefinger. At the stroke of ten, the light
turns yellow. The Announcer appears on the big plasma
screen. The other screens remain blank till the last few
minutes of the play.)

ANNOUNCER: Good evening. This is a proud evening for
the Shree-TV channel. For tonight we bring to you Ms
Manjula Nayak. Many of you will know her as a
renowned Kannada short-story writer. Until a year ago,
she was a lecturer in English in Bangalore. But she
had been writing in Kannada. Not unusual, as you
know. It’s amazing how many of our Kannada writers
are lecturers in English: from the earliest days. B. M.
Shree, Gokak, Adiga.

Reprint 2025-26



226/KALEIDOSCOPE

Even modern ones. Lankesh, Shantinath, Anantha
Murthy. And of course there is A. K. Ramanujan, who
was equally at home in both languages. But last year
Mrs Nayak stunned the world—yes, I mean, the world—
by writing a novel. Her first novel. In English! The
River Has No Memories. The advance she received from
her British publishers made headlines, here and in
the West. And then the novel turned out to be a
bestseller all over the world. Our heartiest
congratulations to Mrs Nayak.
This evening we broadcast a Kannada telefilm based
on this remarkable novel. The film will begin in exactly
ten minutes. And we have with us in the studio Ms
Nayak herself, who has graciously agreed to address
our viewers about her work. Ladies and gentlemen,
welcome the Literary Phenomenon of the Decade, Mrs
Manjula Nayak.
(Applause on the sound track. The light turns green. The
Announcer disappears and Manjula’s image appears in
his place. She speaks.)

MANJULA: Namaskara. I am Manjula Nayak. 1 must
mention that officially I am Mrs Manjula Murty, but
my creative self continues to be Manjula Nayak. There
are some areas in which we must not let marriage
intrude too much.
(Laughter.)
Talking about one’s work is a very difficult task. So let
me find an easy way out. Let me just take up two
questions I constantly come across. They seem to
bother everyone—here, abroad. I’ll answer them to
the best of my ability within the short time at my
disposal and shut up. Actually, that’s what a writer
should do, shouldn’t she?—Write and shut up!
(Laughs.)
The first question—you have probably guessed it already.
After having written in Kannada all your life, why did
you choose—suddenly—to write in English? Do you see
yourself as a Kannada writer or an English writer? What
audience do you write for? And variations on that theme.

Reprint 2025-26



227/BROKEN IMAGES

Actually, let me confess. If I had foreseen how many
people I would upset by writing in English—I really
would not have committed that folly.
Intellectuals whom I respected, writers who were gurus
to me, friends who I thought would pat me on my back
and share my delight—they are all suddenly breathing
fire. How dare I write in English and betray Kannada!
(Laughs.)
Betray! The answer is simple; if there was betrayal, it
was not a matter of conscious choice. I wrote the novel
in English because it burst out in English. It surprised
even me. I couldn’t understand why it was all coming
out in English. But it did. That’s all. There is no other
explanation.
What baffles me—actually, let me confess, hurts me—
is why our intellectuals can’t grasp this simple fact! I
have been accused of writing for foreign readers.
Accused! As though I had committed a crime. A writer
seeks audiences where she or he can find them! My
British publishers said to me: ‘We like your book
because it’s so Indian. We receive any number of
manuscripts from India but they are all written with
the western reader in view. Your novel has the genuine
Indian feel!’
(Laughs.)
But who listens here? A pundit for instance has stated
that no Indian writer can express herself—or himself—
honestly in English. ‘For Indian writers, English is a
medium of dishonesty.’ Of course, one could also ask
how many Kannada writers are honest in what they
write—in Kannada. But if you did that, you would be
immediately condemned as a traitor. You can’t win!
Recently the President of the Central Sahitya
Akademi—the National Academy of the Letters— (who
shall remain nameless) declared that Indians who write
in English do so in order to make money. That by
writing in English they confess their complicity in the
global consumer market economy. He of course spoke
in English. Speaking in English, as you know, gives

Reprint 2025-26



228/KALEIDOSCOPE

you the authority to make oracular pronouncements
on Indian literatures and languages. But my response
to the charge that I write in English for money would
be: Why not? Isn’t that a good enough reason? Would
you like to see what royalties I earned when I wrote in
Kannada?
(Pause.)
Yet the accusation hides—or perhaps reveals—a grim
anxiety. As is clear from the dictum of the President of
the Akademi, what is at issue is not Creativity but
Money. What hits everyone in the eye is the money a
writer in English can earn. The advance I received for
my novel—the advance only, mind you—helped me
resign my job and concentrate on writing. Of course it
is a cause for jealousy. Having struggled in Kannada,
I can understand that. A Kannada proverb says: ‘A
response is good. But a meaningful response is better.’
Meaningful: Arthapoorna. The Kannada word for
Meaning is Artha—which also means money! And of
course, fame, publicity, glamour...power.
(Laughs.)
Let me leave it at that.
The second question everyone asks is about the book
itself: thank God! How could you—you seem so strong
and active—I was a long jump athlete in college, though
of course no Anju Bobby George—how could you so
vividly recreate the inner life of a person confined to
bed all her life? How can a healthy, outdoor woman be
so empathetic to the emotional world of a disabled
person? Well, it is sad, but I owe that to my younger
sister, Malini.
She was physically challenged. Suffered from what is
technically called, meningomyelocele—the upper part
of her body was perfectly normal; below the waist, the
nervous system was damaged. Completely
dysfunctional. A series of operations, which started
soon after her birth, reduced her existence to misery—
she spent her entire life confined to the wheel-chair.
Six years ago my parents died. She came to stay with

Reprint 2025-26



229/BROKEN IMAGES

us in our house in Jayanagar, and I nursed her. During
the last few months it was quite clear she didn’t have
much time left. I am childless and she became my
child! Truly, the book is about her. I have dedicated it
to her memory. She died last year—just a few months
before the book came out. I have tried to relive what I
learnt about her emotional life as I nursed her—tended
to her—watched helplessly as she floated into death. I
miss her. I miss my beautiful, gentle sister.
(Her eyes moisten.)
She is the only character in the novel drawn from life.
The other characters and the plot are entirely fictional.
Invented.
(Pause.)
I must here acknowledge the support I received from
one person while I wrote the novel—my husband,
Pramod Murty. I was working full time as a lecturer
then. College chores. And home was full of her
memories. And there was I, suddenly writing in
English. Floundering. Sinking. I was utterly clueless.
There were moments when I broke down, when I felt I
couldn’t go on. But he was always there at my side,
encouraging me, prodding me on. Without him, I would
never have completed the novel. Thank you, Pramod.
(The overhead light turns yellow.)
Well, that’s it. I have committed the cardinal sin of
writing in English.
(Laughs.)
There is no prayashchitta for it, no absolution. But
fortunately the film you are about to see is in Kannada.
That makes me very happy. After all, the family I have
written about is Kannada. I am a Kannada writer
myself, born to the language and civilization, and proud
of it. The Kannada reality I conceived in English has
been translated back into Kannada—to perfection—by
the Director. I couldn’t have done it better. My thanks
to the cast and the crew and of course, Shree-TV. Well,
enjoy the telefilm.
Good Night. Namaskara.

Reprint 2025-26



230/KALEIDOSCOPE

(The light turns red. She leans back in her chair. Pause.
Then into the lapel mike.)
I hope that was okay? I didn’t fumble too much, did I?
(Listens.)
Thank you, Raza. The pleasure’s all mine. See you
outside? (The red light switches off. She smiles
contentedly.)
Whew! That’ll get them. Good. I have taken enough
shit from them.
(Laughs and gets up. Manjula’s image on the screen
should have given way to the film, but hasn’t. Instead,
the Image continues as before, watching her calmly. She
is of course unaware of it.)
(She makes a move to the door.)

IMAGE: Where are you going?
(Startled, Manjula stops and looks around. Touches her
earpiece to check if the sound came from there and moves
on.)
You can’t go yet. —Manjula!
(Manjula looks around baffled and sees that her image
continues on the screen. She does a double take. From
now on, throughout the play, Manjula and her image
react to each other exactly as though they were both live
characters.)

MANJULA: Oh God! Am I still on?
(Confused, she rushes back to the chair and stops.)

IMAGE: You are not. The camera is off.
MANJULA: Is it?.. Then... how?
IMAGE: You are standing up. If the camera were on, I would

be standing up too. I’m not.
MANJULA: Is this some kind of a trick?

(Into her lapel mike.)
Hello! Hello! Can you hear me? How come I’m still on
the screen? Raza, hello...
(Taps her mike. No response.)
Is there a technical hitch?

IMAGE: No hitch.
MANJULA (to the Image): But how... Who are you... How...

Has the tape got stuck?

Reprint 2025-26



231/BROKEN IMAGES

Photographs from the play
‘Broken Images’ staged
by National School of
Drama in 2005.

Reprint 2025-26



232/KALEIDOSCOPE

(Calls out into the mike.)
Raza, Raza. Help! Help!

IMAGE: What are you screaming for? What are you afraid
of? It’s only me.

MANJULA: Who are you?
IMAGE: Me? You.
MANJULA (to herself): This is absurd.
IMAGE: Quite.

(A long pause while Manjula refuses to acknowledge the
presence of the Image. Then she slowly looks up. The
Image smiles.)

IMAGE: A good speech, I must say. My compliments. An
excellent performance. The viewers loved it. All two
million of them.

MANJULA: But the film? Hasn’t it started?
IMAGE: Aw, screw the film... It’s awful anyway.
MANJULA: I told them it won’t work. A telefilm needs lots

of movement. Different locations. Pace. Action. Drama.
‘A good novel does not necessarily make a good film,’ I
argued. But they were persistent. Sponsors were easy
to find. (Pause.) They paid well.

IMAGE: Your performance now... this introduction... it will
be the best thing this evening. You’ll be all over the
papers. You have managed to upset a lot of people.

MANJULA: Thanks. I meant to.
(Pause.)

IMAGE: If one had to comment... in the extreme case that
one had to...that bit about your sister Malini...the
tears...that could have been played down.

MANJULA: I wasn’t pretending. I loved her.
(Pause.)
I love her. Still. I don’t think I have ever been as close
to anyone else.

IMAGE: It was a close bond?
MANJULA: The novel doesn’t really do her justice. She was

attractive—more attractive than me. Intelligent—more
intelligent than me. And vivacious, which I never was.
I accepted that. She radiated life from the wheelchair
to which she was confined. I have always been
reconciled to being the second best.

Reprint 2025-26



233/BROKEN IMAGES

IMAGE: Her illness was unfortunate. But because of it,
she got the best of everything.

MANJULA (defensive): She never asked for anything. Soon
after her birth, the moment the gravity of her situation
was realised, my parents moved to Bangalore. Took a
house in the Koramangala Extension. She became
the...the (searches for a phrase and then settles for)...
the apple of their eye. When she was old enough to go
to school, a teacher came home to teach her English
and Mathematics. Everything else, she read up for
herself. History, Philosophy, Anatomy. She was
hungry—hungry for life. Gobbled it all up.

IMAGE: And you?
MANJULA: I have often wondered whether I would have

been as bright if I’d received all that love and attention.
IMAGE: No, you wouldn’t. Let’s face it.
MANJULA (defensively): I did write a bestseller.
IMAGE: That’s true.
MANJULA: But you are right. I wouldn’t. They left me with

grandparents in Dharwad. An affectionate couple. They
fussed over me. But no substitute for parents. When
vacations approached I could barely wait to get to
Bangalore. And once I finished college, I found a job in
Bangalore and came and lived with them. Those were
the happiest days of my life! Halcyon! But then I met
Pramod. We got married and settled down in Jayanagar.
Father helped with the house but he left most of his
money in her name—for her care. She was always the
focus. Naturally.

IMAGE: But when your parents died, why didn’t you move
into the Koramangala house? Such a nice, big house.
The garden. The sense of space.

MANJULA: The Jayanagar house was my house. I was used
to it. My college was in Jayanagar. We had selected a
house which was within walking distance.
Koramangala would have meant a long haul every
morning.
And then such a huge house! Not easy to look after. I
would have had to stay home all day like mother. Give
up my job probably. No, as I said, she was one of the

Reprint 2025-26



234/KALEIDOSCOPE

most sensitive people I have known. She realised
moving to Koramangala would turn my life upside
down. She insisted that we sell the Koramangala house.
I was reluctant but she wouldn’t listen. She wanted
no sacrifices on her account, no compromises. And
she adjusted beautifully to the smaller house.
(Pause.)
Actually I couldn’t take Koramangala! Non-Kannadigas,
most of them. And of course all those empty houses
bought as investments by Non-Resident Indians. I
fancied myself a Kannada writer in those days. Wanted
to breathe the language. Live in the heart of Kannada
culture.

IMAGE: Now that you are a success in English, have you
bought a big bungalow in Koramangala?

MANJULA: Aw, shut up!
IMAGE: Was Malini at home with Kannada?
MANJULA: Of course, it is our mother-tongue. But she

rarely used it. Her Kannada was limited to the cook
and the maid.

IMAGE: So Kannada was the one area that became yours?
MANJULA: You could say that. I tried to occupy it and

make it mine.
(Laughs.)
Actually, I have never said it publicly, but if you argue
that a novel written in English cannot express truth
about India because we do not express ourselves in
English—
(Takes a breath. Laughs.)
God, what a sentence! But if you believe that, then let
me say I could not have written about my sister in
Kannada. She breathed, laughed, dreamt in English.
Her friends spoke only English. Having her in my house
for six years helped improve my English.
(Pause.)

IMAGE: So when are you going to write your next novel?
Will it also be in English?

MANJULA: I think I have already answered that question.
Why need I write another novel? Surely one is more
than enough?

Reprint 2025-26



235/BROKEN IMAGES

IMAGE: Critically and financially. But then what are you
going to do? You have resigned your job. You are rich—

MANJULA: Well-to-do.
IMAGE: Well-to-do. You have no sister to look after. An

empty house. Nothing you can use.
MANJULA: Are you trying to make me feel guilty? Are you

implying I ‘used’ her? It was my life as well you know.
I am in the back too, though I would never admit to it
publicly. Most readers find the girl’s ‘first cousin’ quite
unattractive.

IMAGE: Eek! That odious character! Is that you?
MANJULA: Well! There you are!
IMAGE: A triumph of objective self-analysis, shall we say?
MANJULA: If you must. But I am not that wicked really. It

was a narrative necessity to have a negative character.
A matter of technique. The sympathetic heroine. A
villain as a counterpoint. You see?

IMAGE: But Pramod must be pleased by your treatment of
his character. He comes across as not very good-looking
or striking...

MANJULA: But not bad-looking, either. Good enough for
me.

IMAGE: ...but an intelligent, warm and lovable person.
Fun­loving. Fond of practical jokes. Noble and simple.
Almost simple-minded.

MANJULA: You can say that again! You know, we met soon
after I moved to Bangalore. He felt attracted to me.
Didn’t know how to convey it. So do you know what he
did? I had a friend called Lucy. A close friend. He wrote
a letter to her about me. And wrote me a letter about
Lucy. Then he mailed her letter in an envelope
addressed to me and vice versa. So I received this
letter addressed to Lucy—moaning and groaning about
how I tortured him. And I didn’t even know he was
interested in me. And of course Lucy received the other
letter. He thought he was being absolutely clever—
original. We went and confronted him. Lucy tore her
letter to shreds and flung the pieces on him and
stormed off. Melodramatically. I felt sorry for him and

Reprint 2025-26



236/KALEIDOSCOPE

said, ‘Idiot, every fifteen-year old tries that trick,
convinced it’s never been done before.’ He blushed to
the roots of his hair.

IMAGE: But you got married. So the ruse worked.
MANJULA: No ruse. He had made such a fool of himself,

he did the only thing he could to save his self-respect.
He married me. I didn’t mind.

IMAGE: Mind? You would never have got another man of
his calibre.

MANJULA: I suppose so.
IMAGE: And what happened to Lucy?
MANJULA: She stopped talking to me.

(They both laugh.)
Women found him attractive.

IMAGE: Malini too?
MANJULA: Of course. She was a woman, after all.
IMAGE: They were close to each other?
MANJULA: Very.
IMAGE: And you didn’t mind?
MANJULA: Mind? Thank God for it. You see, he is in

software development. Works from home. She was
confined to her chair. Can you imagine what would
have happened if they hadn’t got on?

IMAGE: He must be proud of you. That flattering portrayal
of him in the novel. The moving acknowledgment in
your speech today...

MANJULA: I doubt if he will even hear of my speech. Ever.
He is in the US.

IMAGE: Oh! When did he go?
MANJULA: Last year. He lives in Los Angeles now. He is in

demand as a software wizard.
IMAGE: Last year! So has he even read the novel?
MANJULA: The launching of the novel was a major media

event in the US. After all, you must remember it had
already proved a super hit in Britain. They invited me
to New York for the release. There was much fanfare.
He sent me an email of congratulations. From Los
Angeles. Apologised that he couldn’t get leave to attend.

IMAGE: And you didn’t go to LA?

Reprint 2025-26



237/BROKEN IMAGES

MANJULA: He didn’t even hint at it.
IMAGE: I’m sorry. But the chronology is beginning to

confuse me. When did he decide to go to the States?
Was it after Malini’s death?

MANJULA: Yes.
IMAGE: Immediately after?
MANJULA: No. But soon after.
IMAGE: How long after?
MANJULA (explodes): Who are you, for God’s sake? What

gives you the right to interrogate me like this—about
my private life? Either you are me in which case you
know everything. Or you are an electronic image,
externally prying. In which case, you can just... just...
switch off.
(The Image smiles. Suddenly Manjula becomes calm.)

Thinking about the Play
1. How genuine is the love that Manjula expresses for her sister?

2. The sister does not appear in the play but is central to it. What
picture of her is built in your mind from references in the play?

3. When the image says—‘Her illness was unfortunate. But
because of it, she got the best of everything’

(i) What is the nature of Manjula’s reply?

(ii) How can it be related to what follows in the play?

4. What are the issues that the playwright satirises through this

TV monologue of a celebrity?

Talking about the Play
1. ‘Broken Images’ takes up a debate that has grown steadily since

1947—the politics of language in Indian literary culture,
specifically in relation to modern Indian languages and English.
Discuss.

2. The play deals with a Kannada woman writer who unexpectedly
produces an international bestseller in English.

(i) Can a writer be a truly bilingual practitioner?

(ii) Does writing in an ‘other tongue’ amount to betrayal of the
mother tongue?

Reprint 2025-26



238/KALEIDOSCOPE

Appreciation
1. Why do you think the playwright has used the technique of

the image in the play?

2. The play is called a monologue. Why is it made to turn dialogic?

3. What is the posture the celebrity adopts when the camera is

on and when it is off?

Suggested Reading
Two Monologues: Flowers, Broken Images  by Girish Karnad

The Dreams of Tipu Sultan by Girish Karnad.

Reprint 2025-26