Introductory

Microeconomics
Textbook in Economics for Class XII

Reprint 2025-26



12103 – INTRODUCTORY MICROECONOMICS
ISBN 81-7450-678-0

Textbook for Class XII

First Edition
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

February 2007  Phalguna 1928
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system

Repr inted or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,

December 2007, December 2008, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the
publisher.

January 2010, March 2013,
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,

November 2013, December 2014, be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s
December 2015, February 2017, consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is

January 2018, December 2018, published.

September 2019, January 2021, q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any
revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other

November 2021, February 2022 means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.

Revised Edition
November 2022 Kartika 1944

Reprinted OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
March 2024 Chaitra 1946 DIVISION, NCERT

August 2024 Shravan 1946 NCERT Campus
January 2025 Magha 1946 Sri Aurobindo Marg

New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road

PD 150T+100T HK Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
© National Council of Educational P.O.Navjivan

Research and Training, 2007, 2022 Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446

CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454

CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869

Publication Team

` 70.00 Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan
Division

Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar

Chief Production : Jahan Lal
Officer (In charge)

Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar
Manager

Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark Assistant Editor : R. N. Bhardwaj

Published at the Publication Division by the Production Officer : Sunil Sharma
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo
Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and printed at
Manipal Technologies Limited, Udayavani Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Building, Press Corner, Manipal,

Nidhi Wadhwa
Karnataka–576104

Reprint 2025-26



Foreword
THE National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the
school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed
on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea.
They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance
of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-
centred system of education outlined in the National Policy of
Education (1986).

The success of this effort depends on the steps that school
principals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on
their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and
questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom,
children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information
passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the
sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources
and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative
is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in
learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.

These aims imply considerable change in school routines and
mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary
as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the required
number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The
methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how
effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a
happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus
designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by
restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available
for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by
giving higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation
and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring
hands-on experience.

The National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development
committee responsible for this book. We wish to thank the
Chairperson of the advisory group in Social Sciences, at the higher
secondary level, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for
this book, Professor Tapas Majumdar, for guiding the work of this

Reprint 2025-26



committee. Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are
grateful to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the
institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon
their resources, materials and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members
of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, under the
Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande for their
valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform
and continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes
comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revision and
refinements.

Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 November 2006 Research and Training

iv

Reprint 2025-26



RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS

In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content
load on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises
reducing the content load and providing opportunities for experiential
learning with creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has
undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes.
Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across classes
have been taken into consideration in this exercise.

Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the
following:

Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in
•

the same class

Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same
•

subject

Difficulty level
•

Content, which is easily accessible to students without much
•

interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through
self-learning or peer-learning

Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
•

This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the
changes given above.

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26



CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR SOCIAL SCIENCE TEXTBOOKS

AT THE HIGHER SECONDARY LEVEL

Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of
Calcutta, Kolkata

CHIEF ADVISOR

Tapas Majumdar, Professor Emeritus of Economics,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

ADVISOR

Satish Jain, Professor, Centre for Economics Studies and Planning,
School of Social Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

MEMBERS

Harish Dhawan, Lecturer, Ramlal Anand College (Evening) New Delhi

Papiya Ghosh, Research Associate, Delhi School of Economics, New Delhi

Rajendra Prasad Kundu, Lecturer, Economics Department,
Jadavpur University, Kolkata

Sugato Das Gupta, Associate Professor, CESP, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi

Tapasik Bannerjee, Research Fellow, Centre for Economics Studies
and Planning, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

MEMBER-COORDINATOR

Jaya Singh, Lecturer, Economics, Department of Education in Social
Sciences and Humanities, NCERT, New Delhi

Reprint 2025-26



The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
acknowledges the invaluable contribution of academicians and
practising school teachers for bringing out this textbook. We are grateful
to Anjan Mukherjee, Professor, JNU, for going through the manuscript
and suggesting relevant changes. We thank Jhaljit Singh, Reader,
Department of Economics, University of Manipur for his contribution.
We also thank our colleagues Neeraja Rashmi, Reader, Curriculum
Group; M.V. Srinivasan, Ashita Raveendran, Lecturers, Department
of Education in Social Sciences and Humanities (DESSH), for their
feedback and suggestions.

We would like to place on record the precious advise of (Late) Dipak
Banerjee, Professor (Retd.), Presidency College, Kolkata. We could have
benefited much more of his expertise, had his health permitted.

The practising school teachers have helped in many ways. The
Council expresses its gratitude to A.K. Singh, PGT (Economics), Kendriya
Vidyalaya, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh; Ambika Gulati, Head, Department
of Economics, Sanskriti School; B.C. Thakur, PGT (Economics),
Government Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Surajmal Vihar; Ritu Gupta,
Principal, Sneh International School, Shoban Nair, PGT (Economics),
Mother’s International School, Rashmi Sharma, PGT (Economics),
Kendriya Vidalaya, JNU Campus, New Delhi.

We thank Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, DESSH, for her support.
Special thanks are due to Vandana R. Singh, Consultant Editor,

NCERT for going through the manuscript.
The council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Dinesh

Kumar, In-charge, Computer Station; Amar Kumar Prusty and Neena
Chandra, Copy Editors; in shaping this book. The contribution of the
Publication Department in bringing out this book is duly acknowledged.

This textbook has been reviewed with the support of experts like
Meeta Kumar, Associate Professor, Miranda House, University of Delhi;
Shalini Saksena, Associate Professor, DCAC; and Bharat Garg,
Assistant Professor, Shyam Lal College, University of Delhi. Their
contributions are duly acknowledged.

 The council is also thankful to Tampakmayum Alan Mustofa,  JPF;
Ayaz Ahmad Ansari, Farheen Fatima and Amjad Husain, DTP Operators,
in shaping this textbook.

The Council also acknowledges the efforts of Neerja Rashmi,
Professor, DESS, NCERT; M.V. Srinivasan, DESS, NCERT; Jaya Singh,
DESS, NCERT; Pratima Kumari, Associate Professor, DESS, NCERT;
Ashita Raveendran, Associate Professor, PMD, NCERT; Sabita Patnaik,
PGT  Economics, DMS, RIE, Bhubaneshwar; Anita Raveendra PGT
Economics, DMS, RIE, Mysore, towards the rationalishtion of content
of the textbook.

Reprint 2025-26



Contents
Foreword iii

1. INTRODUCTION 1
1.1 A Simple Economy 1
1.2 Central Problems of an Economy 2
1.3 Organisation of Economic Activities 4

1.3.1 The Centrally Planned Economy 4
1.3.2 The Market Economy 5

1.4 Positive and Normative Economics 6
1.5 Microeconomics and Macroeconomics 6
1.6 Plan of the Book 6

2. THEORY OF CONSUMER BEHAVIOUR 8

2.1 Utility 8
2.1.1 Cardinal Utility Analysis 9
2.1.2 Ordinal Utility Analysis 11

2.2 The Consumer’s Budget 15
2.2.1 Budget Set and Budget Line 15
2.2.2 Changes in the Budget Set 17

2.3 Optimal Choice of the Consumer 19
2.4 Demand 21

2.4.1 Demand Curve and the Law of Demand 21
2.4.2 Deriving a Demand Curve from Indifference

Curves and Budget Constraints 23
2.4.3 Normal and Inferior Goods 24
2.4.4 Substitutes and Complements 25
2.4.5 Shifts in the Demand Curve 25
2.4.6 Movements along the Demand Curve and Shifts 26

in the Demand Curve
2.5 Market Demand 26
2.6 Elasticity of Demand 27

2.6.1 Elasticity along a Linear Demand Curve 29
2.6.2 Factors Determining Price Elasticity of Demand for a Good 31
2.6.3 Elasticity and Expenditure 31

3. PRODUCTION AND COSTS 36

3.1 Production Function 36
3.2 The Short Run and the Long Run 38
3.3 Total Product, Average Product and Marginal Product 39

3.3.1 Total Product 39
3.3.2 Average Product 39
3.3.3 Marginal Product 39

Reprint 2025-26



3.4 The Law of Diminishing Marginal Product and the Law of 40
Variable Proportions

3.5 Shapes of Total Product, Marginal Product and Average Product Curves 41
3.6 Returns to Scale 42
3.7 Costs 43

3.7.1 Short Run Costs 43
3.7.2 Long Run Costs 48

4. THE THEORY OF THE FIRM UNDER PERFECT COMPETITION 53
4.1 Perfect Competition: Defining Features 53
4.2 Revenue 54
4.3 Profit Maximisation 56

4.3.1 Condition 1 56
4.3.2 Condition 2 56
4.3.3 Condition 3 57
4.3.4 The Profit Maximisation Problem: Graphical Representation 58

4.4 Supply Curve of a Firm 59
4.4.1 Short Run Supply Curve of a Firm 59
4.4.2 Long Run Supply Curve of a Firm 60
4.4.3 The Shut Down Point 61
4.4.4 The Normal Profit and Break-even Point 61

4.5 Determinants of a Firm’s Supply Curve 62
4.5.1 Technological Progress 62
4.5.2 Input Prices 62

4.6 Market Supply Curve 63
4.7 Price Elasticity of Supply 65

5. MARKET EQUILIBRIUM 71

5.1 Equilibrium, Excess Demand, Excess Supply 71
5.1.1 Market Equilibrium: Fixed Number of Firms 72
5.1.2 Market Equilibrium: Free Entry and Exit 80

5.2 Applications 84
5.2.1 Price Ceiling 84
5.2.2 Price Floor 85

Glossary 88

x

Reprint 2025-26



Chapter 1

Introduction

1.1 A SIMPLE ECONOMY

Think of any society. People in the society need many goods and
services1 in their everyday life including food, clothing, shelter,
transport facilities like roads and railways, postal services and
various other services like that of teachers and doctors. In fact, the
list of goods and services that any individual2 needs is so large that
no individual in society, to begin with, has all the things she needs.
Every individual has some amount of only a few of the goods and
services that she would like to use. A family farm may own a plot of
land, some grains, farming implements, maybe a pair of bullocks
and also the labour services of the family members. A weaver may
have some yarn, some cotton and other instruments required for
weaving cloth. The teacher in the local school has the skills required
to impart education to the students. Some others in society may
not have any resource3 excepting their own labour services. Each of
these decision making units can produce some goods or services
by using the resources that it has and use part of the produce to
obtain the many other goods and services which it needs. For
example, the family farm can produce corn, use part of the produce
for consumption purposes and procure clothing, housing and
various services in exchange for the rest of the produce. Similarly,
the weaver can get the goods and services that she wants in exchange
for the cloth she produces in her yarn. The teacher can earn some
money by teaching students in the school and use the money for
obtaining the goods and services that she wants. The labourer also
can try to fulfill her needs by using whatever money she can earn by
working for someone else. Each individual can thus use her
resources to fulfill her needs. It goes without saying that no
individual has unlimited resources compared to her needs. The
amount of corn that the family farm can produce is limited by the
amount of resources it has, and hence, the amount of different goods

1By goods we means physical, tangible objects used to satisfy people’s wants and needs. The
term ‘goods’ should be contrasted with the term ‘services’, which captures the intangible satisfaction
of wants and needs. As compared to food items and clothes, which are examples of goods, we can
think of the tasks that doctors and teachers perform for us as examples of services.

2By individual, we mean an individual decision making unit. A decision making unit can be a
single person or a group like a household, a firm or any other organisation.

3By resource, we mean those goods and services which are used to produce other goods and
services, e.g. land, labour, tools and machinery, etc.

Reprint 2025-26



and services that it can procure in exchange of corn is also limited. As a result, the
family is forced to make a choice between the different goods and services that are
available. It can have more of a good or service only by giving up some amounts of
other goods or services. For example, if the family wants to have a bigger house, it
may have to give up the idea of having a few more acres of arable land. If it wants
more and better education for the children, it may have to give up some of the
luxuries of life. The same is the case with all other individuals in society. Everyone
faces scarcity of resources, and therefore, has to use the limited resources in the
best possible way to fulfill her needs.

In general, every individual in society is engaged in the production of some
goods or services and she wants a combination of many goods and services not
all of which are produced by her. Needless to say that there has to be some
compatibility between what people in society collectively want to have and what
they produce4. For example, the total amount of corn produced by family farm
along with other farming units in a society must match the total amount of corn
that people in the society collectively want to consume. If people in the society
do not want as much corn as the farming units are capable of producing
collectively, a part of the resources of these units could have been used in the
production of some other good or services which is in high demand. On the
other hand, if people in the society want more corn compared to what the farming
units are producing collectively, the resources used in the production of some
other goods and services may be reallocated to the production of corn. Similar is
the case with all other goods or services. Just as the resources of an individual
are scarce, the resources of the society are also scarce in comparison to what the
people in the society might collectively want to have. The scarce resources of the
society have to be allocated properly in the production of different goods and
services in keeping with the likes and dislikes of the people of the society.

Any allocation5 of resources of the society would result in the production of a
particular combination of  different goods and services. The goods and services
thus produced will have to be distributed among the individuals of the society.

2 The allocation of the limited resources and the distribution of the final mix of goods
and services are two of the basic economic problems faced by the society.

In reality, any economy is much more complex compared to the society
discussed above. In the light of what we have learnt about the society, let us now
discuss the fundamental concerns of the discipline of economics some of which
we shall study throughout this book.

1.2 CENTRAL PROBLEMS OF AN ECONOMY

Production, exchange and consumption of goods and services are among the
basic economic activities of life. In the course of these basic economic activities,
every society has to face scarcity of resources and it is the scarcity of resources
that gives rise to the problem of choice. The scarce resources of an economy
have competing usages. In other words, every society has to decide on how to
use its scarce resources. The problems of an economy are very often summarised
as follows:

4Here we assume that all the goods and services produced in a society are consumed by the people
in the society and that there is no scope of getting anything from outside the society. In reality, this
is not true. However, the general point that is being made here about the compatibility of production
and consumption of goods and services holds for any country or even for the entire world.

5By an allocation of the resources, we mean how much of which resource is devoted to the
production of each of the goods and services.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory Microeconomics



What is produced and in what quantities?
Every society must decide on how much of each of the many possible goods and
services it will produce. Whether to produce more of food, clothing, housing or
to have more of luxury goods. Whether to have more agricultural goods or to
have industrial products and services. Whether to use more resources in education
and health or to use more resources in building military services. Whether to
have more of basic education or more of higher education. Whether to have
more of consumption goods or to have investment goods (like machine) which
will boost production and consumption tomorrow.

How are these goods produced?
Every society has to decide on how much of which of the resources to use in the
production of each of the different goods and services. Whether to use more
labour or more machines. Which of the available technologies to adopt in the
production of each of the goods?

For whom are these goods produced?
Who gets how much of the goods that are produced in the economy? How should
the produce of the economy be distributed among the individuals in the economy?
Who gets more and who gets less? Whether or not to ensure a minimum amount
of consumption for everyone in the economy. Whether or not elementary education
and basic health services should be available freely for everyone in the economy.

Thus, every economy faces the problem of allocating the scarce resources to
the production of different possible goods and services and of distributing the
produced goods and services among the individuals within the economy. The
allocation of scarce resources and the distribution of the final goods and
services are the central problems of any economy.

Production Possibility Frontier
Just as individuals face scarcity of resources, the resources of an economy
as a whole are always limited in comparison to what the people in the 3
economy collectively want to have. The scarce resources have alternative
usages and every society has to decide on how much of each of the resources
to use in the production of different goods and services. In other words,
every society has to determine how to allocate its scarce resources to different
goods and services.

An allocation of the scarce resource of the economy gives rise to a
particular combination of different goods and services. Given the total amount
of resources, it is possible to allocate the resources in many different ways
and, thereby achieving different mixes of all possible goods and services. The
collection of all possible combinations of the goods and services that can be
produced from a given amount of resources and a given stock of technological
knowledge is called the production possibility set of the economy.

EXAMPLE  1
Consider an economy which Table1.1: Production Possibilities

can produce corn or cotton Possibilities Corn Cotton
by using its resources. A 0 10
Table 1.1 gives some of the

B 1 9
combinations of corn and
cotton that the economy can C 2 7

produce. When its resources D 3 4

are fully utilised. E 4 0

Reprint 2025-26

Introduction



If all the resources are used in the production of corn, the maximum
amount of corn that can be produced is 4 units and if all resources are used
in the production of cotton, at the most, 10 units of cotton can be produced.
The economy can also produce1 unit of corn and 9 units of cotton or 2 units
of corn and 7 units of cotton or 3 units of corn and 4 units of cotton. There
can be many other possibilities. The figure illustrates the production
possibilities of the economy. Any point on or below the curve represents a
combination of corn and cotton that can be produced with the economy’s
resources. The curve gives the maximum amount of corn that can be produced
in the economy for any given amount of cotton and vice-versa. This curve is
called the production possibility
frontier.

Cotton
The production possibility
frontier gives the combinations of

A
corn and cotton that can be B

produced when the resources of the C

economy are fully utilised. Note
that a point lying strictly below the D

production possibility frontier
represents a combination of corn E

O
and cotton that will be produced Corn

when all or some of the resources
are either underemployed or are
utilised in a wasteful fashion.

If more of the scarce resources are used in the production of corn,
less resources are available for the production of cotton and vice versa.
Therefore, if we want to have more of one of the goods, we will have less
of the other good. Thus, there is always a cost of having a little more of
one good in terms of the amount of the other good that has to be forgone.
This is known as the opportunity costa of an additional unit of the

4 goods.
Every economy has to choose one of the many possibilities that it has.

In other words, one of the central problems of the economy is to choose
from one of the many production possibilities.

aNote that the concept of opportunity cost is applicable to the individual as well as the
society. The concept is very important and is widely used in economics. Because of its
importance in economics, sometimes, opportunity cost is also called the economic cost.

1.3 ORGANISATION OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES

Basic problems can be solved either by the free interaction of the individuals
pursuing their own objectives as is done in the market or in a planned manner
by some central authority like the government.

1.3.1 The Centrally Planned Economy

In a centrally planned economy, the government or the central authority plans
all the important activities in the economy. All important decisions regarding
production, exchange and consumption of goods and services are made by the
government. The central authority may try to achieve a particular allocation of
resources and a consequent distribution of the final combination of goods and
services which is thought to be desirable for society as a whole. For example, if it
is found that a good or service which is very important for the prosperity and

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory Microeconomics



well-being of the economy as a whole, e.g. education or health service, is not
produced in adequate amount by the individuals on their own, the government
might try to induce the individuals to produce adequate amount of such a good
or service or, alternatively, the government may itself decide to produce the good
or service in question. In a different context, if some people in the economy get
so little a share of the final mix of goods and services produced in the economy
that their survival is at stake, then the central authority may intervene and try
to achieve an equitable distribution of the final mix of goods and services.

1.3.2 The Market Economy

In contrast to a centrally planned economy, in a market economy, all economic
activities are organised through the market. A market, as studied in economics,
is an institution6 which organises the free interaction of individuals pursuing
their respective economic activities. In other words, a market is a set of
arrangements where economic agents can freely exchange their endowments or
products with each other. It is important to note that the term ‘market’ as used
in economics is quite different from the common sense understanding of a
market. In particular, it has nothing as such to do with the marketplace as you
might tend to think of. For buying and selling commodities, individuals may or
may not meet each other in an actual physical location. Interaction between
buyers and sellers can take place in a variety of situations such as a village-
chowk or a super bazaar in a city, or alternatively, buyers and sellers can interact
with each other through telephone or internet and conduct the exchange of
commodities. The arrangements which allow people to buy and sell commodities
freely are the defining features of a market.

For the smooth functioning of any system, it is imperative that there is
coordination in the activities of the different constituent parts of the system.
Otherwise, there can be chaos. You may wonder as to what are the forces which
bring the coordination between the activities of millions of isolated individuals
in a market system.

In a market system, all goods or services come with a price (which is mutually 5

agreed upon by the buyers and sellers) at which the exchanges take place. The
price reflects, on an average, the society’s valuation of the good or service in
question. If the buyers demand more of a certain good, the price of that good
will rise. This signals to the producers of that good that the society as a whole
wants more of that good than is currently being produced and the producers of
the good, in their turn, are likely to increase their production. In this way, prices
of goods and services send important information to all the individuals across
the market and help achieve coordination in a market system. Thus, in a market
system, the central problems regarding how much and what to produce are
solved through the coordination of economic activities brought about by the
price signals.

In reality, all economies are mixed economies where some important
decisions are taken by the government and the economic activities are by and
large conducted through the market. The only difference is in terms of the
extent of the role of the government in deciding the course of economic activities.
In the United States of America, the role of the government is minimal. The
closest example of a centrally planned economy is the China for the major part
of the twentieth century. In India, since Independence, the government has
played a major role in planning economic activities. However, the role of the

6An institution is usually defined as an organisation with some purpose.

Reprint 2025-26

Introduction



government in the Indian economy has been reduced considerably in the last
couple of decades.

1.4  POSITIVE AND NORMATIVE ECONOMICS

It was mentioned earlier that in principle there are more than one ways of
solving the central problems of an economy. These different mechanisms in
general are likely to give rise to different solutions to those problems, thereby
resulting in different allocations of the resources and also different distributions
of the final mix of goods and services produced in the economy. Therefore, it is
important to understand which of these alternative mechanisms is more
desirable for the economy as a whole. In economics, we try to analyse the
different mechanisms and figure out the outcomes which are likely to result
under each of these mechanisms. We also try to evaluate the mechanisms by
studying how desirable the outcomes resulting from them are. Often a
distinction is made between positive economic analysis and normative
economic analysis depending on whether we are trying to figure out how a
particular mechanism functions or we are trying to evaluate it. In positive
economic analysis, we study how the different mechanisms function, and in
normative economics, we try to understand whether these mechanisms are
desirable or not. However, this distinction between positive and normative
economic analysis is not a very sharp one. The positive and the normative
issues involved in the study of the central economic problems are very closely
related to each other and a proper understanding of one is not possible in
isolation to the other.

1.5  MICROECONOMICS AND MACROECONOMICS

Traditionally, the subject matter of economics has been studied under two broad
branches: Microeconomics and Macroeconomics. In microeconomics, we study

6 the behaviour of individual economic agents in the markets for different goods
and services and try to figure out how prices and quantities of goods and services
are determined through the interaction of individuals in these markets. In
macroeconomics, on the other hand, we try to get an understanding of the
economy as a whole by focusing our attention on aggregate measures such as
total output, employment and aggregate price level. Here, we are interested in
finding out how the levels of these aggregate measures are determined and how
the levels of these aggregate measures change over time. Some of the important
questions that are studied in macroeconomics are as follows: What is the level of
total output in the economy? How is the total output determined? How does the
total output grow over time? Are the resources of the economy (eg labour) fully
employed? What are the reasons behind the unemployment of resources? Why
do prices rise? Thus, instead of studying the different markets as is done in
microeconomics, in macroeconomics, we try to study the behaviour of aggregate
or macro measures of the performance of the economy.

1.6  PLAN OF THE BOOK

This book is meant to introduce you to the basic ideas in microeconomics. In
this book, we will focus on the behaviour of the individual consumers and
producers of a single commodity and try to analyse how the price and the
quantity is determined in the market for a single commodity. In Chapter 2, we

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory Microeconomics



shall study the consumer’s behaviour. Chapter 3 deals with basic ideas of
production and cost. In Chapter 4, we study the producer’s behaviour. In Chapter
5, we shall study how price and quantity is determined in a perfectly competitive
market for a commodity. Chapter 6 studies some other forms of market.

Consumption Production Exchange
Scarcity Production possibilities Opportunity cost
Market Market economy Centrally planned economy
Mixed economy Positive analysis Normative analysis
Microeconomics Macroeconomics

? 1. Discuss the central problems of an economy.
2. What do you mean by the production possibilities of an economy?
3. What is a production possibility frontier?
4. Discuss the subject matter of economics.
5. Distinguish between a centrally planned economy and a market economy.
6. What do you understand by positive economic analysis?
7. What do you understand by normative economic analysis?

? 8. Distinguish between microeconomics and macroeconomics.

7

Reprint 2025-26

EEEEExxxxxeeeeerrrrrccccciiiiissssseeeeesssss KKKKKeeeeeyyyyy     CCCCCooooonnnnnccccceeeeeppppptttttsssss

Introduction


##2##
Chapter 2
Theory of
Consumer Behaviour

In this chapter, we will study the behaviour of an individual
consumer. The consumer has to decide how to spend her income
on different goods1. Economists call this the problem of choice.
Most naturally, any consumer will want to get a combination of
goods that gives her maximum satisfaction. What will be this ‘best’
combination? This depends on the likes of the consumer and what
the consumer can afford to buy. The ‘likes’ of the consumer are
also called ‘preferences’. And what the consumer can afford to buy,
depends on prices of the goods and the income of the consumer.
This chapter presents two different approaches that explain
consumer behaviour (i) Cardinal Utility Analysis and (ii) Ordinal
Utility Analysis.

Preliminary Notations and Assumptions

A consumer, in general, consumes many goods; but for simplicity,
we shall consider the consumer’s choice problem in a situation
where there are only two goods2: bananas and mangoes. Any
combination of the amount of the two goods will be called a
consumption bundle or, in short, a bundle. In general, we shall
use the variable x  to denote the quantity of bananas and x to

1 2 

denote the quantity of mangoes. x  and x  can be positive or zero.
1 2

(x x ) would mean the bundle consisting of x  quantity of bananas
1, 2 1

and x  quantity of mangoes. For particular values of x  and x , (x ,
2 1 2 1

x ), would give us a particular bundle. For example, the bundle
2

(5,10) consists of 5 bananas and 10 mangoes; the bundle (10, 5)
consists of 10 bananas and 5 mangoes.

2.1 UTILITY

A consumer usually decides his demand for a commodity on the
basis of utility (or satisfaction) that he derives from it. What is
utility? Utility of a commodity is its want-satisfying capacity. The
more the need of a commodity or the stronger the desire to have it,
the greater is the utility derived from the commodity.

Utility is subjective. Different individuals can get different levels
of utility from the same commodity. For example, some one who

1We shall use the term goods to mean goods as well as services.
2The assumption that there are only two goods simplifies the analysis considerably and allows us

to understand some important concepts by using simple diagrams.

Reprint 2025-26



likes chocolates will get much higher utility from a chocolate than some one
who is not so fond of chocolates, Also, utility that one individual gets from the
commodity can change with change in place and time. For example, utility from
the use of a room heater will depend upon whether the individual is in Ladakh
or Chennai (place) or whether it is summer or winter (time).

2.1.1 Cardinal Utility Analysis

Cardinal utility analysis assumes that level of utility can be expressed in
numbers. For example, we can measure the utility derived from a shirt and say,
this shirt gives me 50 units of utility. Before discussing further, it will be useful
to have a look at two important measures of utility.

Measures of Utility

Total Utility: Total utility of a fixed quantity of a commodity (TU) is the total
satisfaction derived from consuming the given amount of some commodity x.
More of commodity x provides more satisfaction to the consumer. TU depends
on the quantity of the commodity consumed. Therefore, TU  refers to total utility

n

derived from consuming n units of a commodity x.
Marginal Utility: Marginal utility (MU) is the change in total utility due to
consumption of one additional unit of a commodity. For example, suppose 4
bananas give us 28 units of total utility and 5 bananas give us 30 units of total
utility. Clearly, consumption of the 5th banana has caused total utility to increase
by 2 units (30 units minus 28 units). Therefore,  marginal utility of the 5th banana
is 2 units.

MU  =  TU  – TU  = 30 – 28 = 2
5 5 4

In general, MU  = TU  – TU , where subscript n refers to the nth unit of the
n n n-1

commodity
Total utility and marginal utility can also be related in the following way.
TU  = MU  + MU  + … + MU  + MU

n 1 2 n-1 n

This simply means that TU derived from consuming n units of bananas is
the sum total of marginal utility of first banana (MU ), marginal utility of second 9

1

banana (MU ), and so on, till the marginal utility of the nth unit.
2

Table No. 2.1 and Figure 2.1 show an imaginary example of the values of
marginal and total utility derived from consumption of various amounts of a
commodity. Usually, it is seen that the marginal utility diminishes with increase
in consumption of the commodity. This happens because having obtained some
amount of the commodity, the desire of the consumer to have still more of it
becomes weaker. The same is also shown in the table and graph.

Table 2.1: Values of marginal and total utility derived from consumption
of various amounts of a commodity

         Units     Total Utility     Marginal Utility

1 12 12
2 18   6
3 22   4
4 24   2
5 24   0
6 22  -2

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Notice that MU  is less than
3

MU . You may also notice that
2

total utility increases but at a
diminishing rate: The rate of
change in total utility due to
change in quantity of commodity
consumed is a measure of
marginal utility. This marginal
utility diminishes with increase
in consumption of the
commodity from 12 to 6, 6 to 4

The values of marginal and total utility derived
and so on. This follows from the from consumption of various amounts of a
law of diminishing marginal commodity. The marginal utility diminishes with
utility. Law of Diminishing increase in consumption of the commodity.

Marginal Utility states that
marginal utility from consuming each additional unit of a commodity declines
as its consumption increases, while keeping consumption of other commodities
constant.

MU becomes zero at a level when TU remains constant. In the example, TU
does not change at 5th unit of consumption and therefore MU = 0. Thereafter,

5

TU starts falling and MU becomes negative.

Derivation of Demand Curve in the Case of a Single Commodity (Law of
Diminishing Marginal Utility)

Cardinal utility analysis can be used to derive demand curve for a commodity.
What is demand and what is demand curve? The quantity of a commodity that
a consumer is willing to buy and is able to afford, given prices of goods and
income of the consumer, is called demand for that commodity. Demand for a
commodity x, apart from the price of x itself, depends on factors such as prices
of other commodities (see substitutes and complements 2.4.4), income of the

10 consumer and tastes and preferences of the consumers. Demand curve is a
graphic presentation of various quantities of a commodity that a consumer is
willing to buy at different prices of the same commodity, while holding constant
prices of other related commodities
and income of the consumer.

Figure 2.2 presents hypothetical
demand curve of an individual for
commodity x at its different prices.
Quantity is measured along the
horizontal axis and price is measured
along the vertical axis.

The downward sloping demand
curve shows that at lower prices, the
individual is willing to buy more of
commodity x; at higher prices, she is
willing to buy less of commodity x. Demand curve of an individual for
Therefore, there is a negative commodity x
relationship between price of a
commodity and quantity demanded which is referred to as the Law of Demand.

An explaination for a downward sloping demand curve rests on the notion
of diminishing marginal utility. The law of diminishing marginal utility states
that each successive unit of a commodity provides lower marginal utility.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Therefore the individual will not be willing to pay as much for each additional
unit and this results in a downward sloping demand curve. At a price of Rs. 40
per unit x, individual’s demand for x was 5 units. The 6th unit of commodity x
will be worth less than the 5th unit. The individual will be willing to buy the 6th
unit only when the price drops below Rs. 40 per unit. Hence, the law of
diminishing marginal utility explains why demand curves have a negative slope.

2.1.2 Ordinal Utility Analysis

Cardinal utility analysis is simple to understand, but suffers from a major
drawback in the form of quantification of utility in numbers. In real life, we
never express utility in the form of numbers. At the most, we can rank various
alternative combinations in terms of having more or less utility. In other words,
the consumer does not measure utility in numbers, though she often ranks
various consumption bundles. This forms the starting point of this topic – Ordinal
Utility Analysis.

A consumer’s preferences over the set of available bundles can often be
represented diagrammatically. We
have already seen that the bundles
available to the consumer can be
plotted as points in a two- A

dimensional diagram. The points
representing bundles which give the
consumer equal utility can generally
be joined to obtain a curve like the
one in Figure 2.3. The consumer is
said to be indifferent on the different
bundles because each point of the
bundles give the consumer equal
utility.  Such a curve joining all points
representing bundles among which Indifference curve. An indifference curve joins
the consumer is indifferent is called 11

all points representing bundles which are
an indifference curve. All the points considered indifferent by the consumer.
such as A, B, C and D lying on an
indifference curve provide the consumer with the same level of satisfaction.

It is clear that when a consumer gets one more banana, he has to forego
some mangoes, so that her total utility level remains the same and she remains
on the same indifference curve. Therefore, indifference curve slopes downward.
The amount of mangoes that the consumer has to forego, in order to get an
additional banana, her total utility level being the same, is called marginal rate
of substitution (MRS). In other words, MRS is simply the rate at which the
consumer will substitute bananas for mangoes, so that her total utility remains

constant. So, MRS =| ∆Y / ∆X | 3.
One can notice that, in the table 2.2, as we increase the quantity of bananas,

the quantity of mangoes sacrificed for each additional banana declines. In other
words, MRS diminishes with increase in the number of bananas. As the number

3 | ∆Y / ∆X |= ∆Y / ∆X if (∆Y / ∆X ) ≥0

            = −∆Y / ∆X if (∆Y / ∆X ) < 0

MRS =| ∆Y / ∆X | means that MRS equals only the magnitude of the expression ∆Y / ∆X . If

∆Y / ∆X = −3 /1  it means MRS=3.

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Table 2.2: Representation of Law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution

    Combination    Quantity of bananas (Qx)  Quantity of Mangoes (Qy)     MRS

             A                                    1                                              15                              -

             B                                    2                                              12                           3:1

             C                                    3                                               10                          2:1

             D                                   4                                                 9                           1:1

of bananas with the consumer increases, the MU derived from each additional
banana falls. Similarly, with the fall in quantity of mangoes, the marginal utility
derived from mangoes increases. So, with increase in the number of bananas,
the consumer will feel the inclination to sacrifice small and smaller amounts of
mangoes. This tendency for the MRS to fall with increase in quantity of bananas
is known as Law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution. This can be
seen from figure 2.3 also. Going from point A to point B, the consumer sacrifices
3 mangoes for 1 banana, going from point B to point C, the consumer sacrifices
2 mangoes for 1 banana, and going from point C to point D, the consumer
sacrifices just 1 mango for 1 banana. Thus, it is clear that the consumer sacrifices
smaller and smaller quantities of mangoes for each additional banana.

Shape of an Indifference Curve

It may be mentioned that the law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution
causes an indifference curve to be convex to the origin. This is the most common
shape of an indifference curve. But in case of goods being perfect substitutes4,
the marginal rate of substitution does not diminish. It remains the same. Let’s
take an example.

Table 2.3: Representation of Law of Diminishing Marginal Rate of Substitution

12     Combination             Quantity of five                      Quantity of five               MRS

                                  Rupees notes (Qx)                 Rupees coins  (Qy)

             A                                    1                                               8                                 -

             B                                    2                                               7                               1:1

             C                                    3                                               6                                1:1

             D                                   4                                                5                               1:1

Here, the consumer is indifferent for all these combinations as long as the total
of five rupee coins and five rupee notes remains the same. For the consumer, it
hardly matters whether she gets a five rupee coin or a five rupee note. So,
irrespective of how many five rupee notes she has, the consumer will sacrifice
only one five rupee coin for a five rupee note. So these two commodities are
perfect substitutes for the consumer and indifference curve depicting these will
be a straight line.

In the figure.2.4, it can be seen that consumer sacrifices the same number of
five-rupee coins each time he has an additional five-rupee note.

4 Perfect Substitutes are the goods which can be used in place of each other, and provide exactly
the same level of utility to the consumer.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Monotonic Preferences

Consumer’s preferences are
assumed to be such that between
any two bundles (x , x ) and (y , y ),

1 2 1 2

if (x , x ) has more of at least one of
1 2

the goods and no less of the other
good compared to (y , y ), then the

1 2

consumer prefers (x , x ) to (y , y ).
1 2 1 2

Preferences of this kind are called
monotonic preferences. Thus, a
consumer’s preferences are
monotonic if and only if between Indifference Curve for perfect
any two bundles, the consumer substitutes. Indifference curve depicting two

prefers the bundle which has more commodities which are perfect substitutes is

of at least one of the goods and no a straight line.

less of the other good as compared
to the other bundle.

Indifference Map

The consumer’s preferences over all the
bundles can be represented by a family
of indifference curves as shown in Figure
2.5. This is called an indifference map of
the consumer. All points on an
indifference curve represent bundles
which are considered indifferent by the
consumer. Monotonicity of preferences Indifference Map. A family of
imply that between any two indifference indifference curves. The arrow indicates 13
curves, the bundles on the one which lies that bundles on higher indifference curves

above are preferred to the bundles on the are preferred by the consumer to the

one which lies below. bundles on lower indifference curves.

Features of Indifference Curve

1. Indifference curve slopes
downwards from left to right:
An indifference curve slopes downwards
from left to right, which means that in
order to have more of bananas, the
consumer has to forego some mangoes.
If the consumer does not forego some
mangoes with an increase in number of
bananas, it will mean consumer having
more of bananas with same number of
mangoes, taking her to a higher

Slope of the Indifference Curve. The
indifference curve. Thus, as long as the

indifference curve slopes downward. An
consumer is on the same indifference increase in the amount of bananas along the
curve, an increase in bananas must be indifference curve is associated with a
compensated by a fall in quantity of decrease in the amount of mangoes. If ∆ x

1

mangoes. > 0 then ∆ x  < 0.
2

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



2.Higher indifference curve gives greater level of utility:

As long as marginal utility of a commodity is positive, an individual will always
prefer more of that commodity, as more of the commodity will increase the level
of satisfaction.

Table 2.4: Representation of different level of utilities from different combination
of goods

          Combination                      Quantity of bananas               Quantity of Mangoes

                   A                                                  1                                                10

                   B                                                  2                                                10

                   C                                                  3                                                10

 Consider the different combination of bananas and mangoes, A, B and C
depicted in table 2.4 and figure 2.7. Combinations A, B and C consist of same
quantity of mangoes but different quantities of bananas. Since combination B
has more bananas than A, B will
provide the individual a higher
level of satisfaction than A.
Therefore, B will lie on a higher
indifference curve than A,
depicting higher satisfaction.
Likewise, C has more bananas
than B (quantity of mangoes is the
same in both B and C). Therefore,
C will provide higher level of
satisfaction than B, and also lie on
a higher indifference curve than B.

A higher indifference curve
14 consisting of combinations with Higher indifference curves give greater level

more of mangoes, or more of of utility.

bananas, or more of both, will
represent combinations that give higher level of satisfaction.

3.Two indifference curves never intersect each other:

Two indifference curves intersecting
each other will lead to conflicting
results. To explain this, let us allow
two indifference curves to intersect
each other as shown in the figure
2.8. As points A and B lie on the

A (7,10)
same indifference curve IC , utilities

1

derived from combination A and B (9,7)
IC1

combination B will give the same C (9,5)
level of satisfaction. Similarly, as Ic2

points A and C lie on the same
Bananas

indifference curve IC , utility
2

8
derived from combination A and
from combination C will give the Two indifference curves never intersect

same level of satisfaction. each other

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics

Mangoes



From this, it follows that utility from point B and from point C will also be the
same. But this is clearly an absurd result, as on point B, the consumer gets a
greater number of mangoes with the same quantity of bananas. So consumer is
better off at point B than at point C. Thus, it is clear that intersecting indifference
curves will lead to conflicting results. Thus, two indifference curves cannot
intersect each other.

2.2 THE CONSUMER’S BUDGET

Let us consider a consumer who has only a fixed amount of money (income) to
spend on two goods. The prices of the goods are given in the market. The consumer
cannot buy any and every combination of the two goods that she may want to
consume. The consumption bundles that are available to the consumer depend
on the prices of the two goods and the income of the consumer. Given her fixed
income and the prices of the two goods, the consumer can afford to buy only
those bundles which cost her less than or equal to her income.

2.2.1 Budget Set and Budget Line

Suppose the income of the consumer is M and the prices of bananas and mangoes
are p  and p respectively5. If the consumer wants to buy x  quantities of bananas,

1 2 1

she will have to spend p x  amount of money. Similarly, if the consumer wants
1 1

to buy x  quantities of mangoes, she will have to spend p x  amount of money.
2 2 2

Therefore, if the consumer wants to buy the bundle consisting of x  quantities of
1

bananas and x  quantities of mangoes, she will have to spend p x  + p x  amount
2 1 1 2 2

of money. She can buy this bundle only if she has at least p x  + p x  amount of
1 1 2 2

money. Given the prices of the goods and the income of a consumer, she can
choose any bundle as long as it costs less than or equal to the income she has.
In other words, the consumer can buy any bundle (x , x ) such that

1 2

p x  + p x  ≤ M     (2.1) 15
1 1 2 2

The inequality (2.1) is called the consumer’s budget constraint. The set of
bundles available to the consumer is called the budget set. The budget set is
thus the collection of all bundles that the consumer can buy with her income at
the prevailing market prices.

EXAMPLE  2.1

Consider, for example, a consumer who has Rs 20, and suppose, both the goods
are priced at Rs 5 and are available only in integral units. The bundles that this
consumer can afford to buy are: (0, 0), (0, 1), (0, 2), (0, 3), (0, 4), (1, 0), (1, 1),
(1, 2), (1, 3), (2, 0), (2, 1), (2, 2), (3, 0), (3, 1) and (4, 0). Among these bundles,
(0, 4), (1,3), (2, 2), (3, 1) and (4, 0) cost exactly Rs 20 and all the other bundles
cost less than Rs 20. The consumer cannot afford to buy bundles like (3, 3) and
(4, 5) because they cost more than Rs 20 at the prevailing prices.

5 Price of a good is the amount of money that the consumer has to pay per unit of the good she
wants to buy. If rupee is the unit of money and quantity of the good is measured in kilograms, the
price of banana being p means the consumer has to pay p rupees per kilograms of banana that she

1 1 

wants to buy.

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



If both the goods are perfectly
divisible6, the consumer’s budget set
would consist of all bundles (x , x )

1 2

such that x  and x  are any numbers
1 2

greater than or equal to 0 and p x  +
1 1

p x  ≤ M. The budget set can be
2 2

represented in a diagram as in Figure
2.9.

All bundles in the positive
quadrant which are on or below the
line are included in the budget set.
The equation of the line is Budget Set. Quantity of bananas is measured

p x  + p x  = M (2.2) along the horizontal axis and quantity of mangoes
1 1 2 2

is measured along the vertical axis. Any point in
The line consists of all bundles which the diagram represents a bundle of the two
cost exactly equal to M. This line is goods. The budget set consists of all points on

called the budget line. Points below or below the straight line having the equation

the budget line represent bundles p x  + p x  = M.
1 1 2 2

which cost strictly less than M.
The equation (2.2) can also be written as7

M p
x = − 1

2 x (2.3)
p p 1

2 2
M

The budget line is a straight line with horizontal intercept p  and vertical
1

M
intercept p . The horizontal intercept represents the bundle that the consumer

2

can buy if she spends her entire income on bananas. Similarly, the vertical
intercept represents the bundle that the consumer can buy if she spends her

p
entire income on mangoes. The slope of the budget line is –

1

p .
16 2

Price Ratio and the Slope of the Budget Line

Think of any point on the budget line. Such a point represents a bundle which
costs the consumer her entire budget. Now suppose the consumer wants to
have one more banana. She can do it only if she gives up some amount of the
other good. How many mangoes does she have to give up if she wants to have an
extra quantity of bananas? It would depend on the prices of the two goods. A
quantity of banana costs p . Therefore, she will have to reduce her expenditure

1

on mangoes by p  amount, if she wants one more quantity of banana. With p ,
1 1

p1
she could buy p  quantities of mangoes. Therefore, if the consumer wants to

2

have an extra quantity of bananas when she is spending all her money, she will

p1
have to give up p quantities of mangoes. In other words, in the given market

2

6The goods considered in Example 2.1 were not divisible and were available only in integer units.
There are many goods which are divisible in the sense that they are available in non-integer units
also. It is not possible to buy half an orange or one-fourth of a banana, but it is certainly possible to
buy half a kilogram of rice or one-fourth of a litre of milk.

7In school mathematics, you have learnt the equation of a straight line as y = c + mx where c is the
vertical intercept and m is the  slope of the straight line. Note that equation (2.3) has the same form.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Derivation of the Slope of the
Budget Line Mangoes

The slope of the budget line
measures the amount of change in
mangoes required per unit of
change in bananas along the
budget line. Consider any two
points (x , x ) and (x  + ∆x , x  + ∆x )

1 2 1 1 2 2

on the budget line.a
Bananas

It must be the case that

p x  + p x  = M (2.4)
1 1 2 2

and, p (x  + ∆x ) + p (x  + ∆x ) = M          (2.5)
1 1 1 2 2 2

Subtracting (2.4) from (2.5), we obtain

p ∆x  + p ∆x  = 0 (2.6)
1 1 2 2

By rearranging terms in (2.6), we obtain
∆x2 p

= − 1
(2.7)

∆x1 p2

a∆ (delta) is a Greek letter. In mathematics, ∆ is sometimes used to denote ‘a change’.
Thus, ∆x  stands for a change in x  and ∆x  stands for a change in x .

1 1 2 2

p1
conditions, the consumer can substitute bananas for mangoes at the rate p .

2

The absolute value8 of the slope of the budget line measures the rate at which
the consumer is able to substitute bananas for mangoes when she spends her 17
entire budget.

2.2.2 Changes in the Budget Set

The set of available bundles depends on the prices of the two goods and the income
of the consumer. When the price of either of the goods or the consumer’s income
changes, the set of available bundles is also likely to change. Suppose the
consumer’s income changes from M to M ′ but the prices of the two goods remain
unchanged. With the new income, the consumer can afford to buy all bundles
(x , x ) such that p x  + p x  ≤ M ′. Now the equation of the budget line is

1 2 1 1 2 2

p x  + p x  = M ′ (2.8)
1 1 2 2

Equation (2.8) can also be written as

M' p
x = – 1

2 x
p p 1 (2.9)

2 2

Note that the slope of the new budget line is the same as the slope of the
budget line prior to the change in the consumer’s income. However, the vertical
intercept has changed after the change in income. If there is an increase in the

8The absolute value of a number x is equal to x if x ≥ 0 and is equal to – x if x < 0. The absolute
value of x is usually denoted by |x|.

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



income, i.e. if M' > M, the vertical as well as horizontal intercepts increase, there
is a parallel outward shift of the budget line. If the income increases, the
consumer can buy more of the goods at the prevailing market prices. Similarly,
if the income goes down, i.e. if M' < M, both intercepts decrease, and hence, there
is a parallel inward shift of the budget line. If income goes down, the availability
of goods goes down. Changes in the set of available bundles resulting from
changes in consumer’s income when the prices of the two goods remain
unchanged are shown in Figure 2.10.

Mangoes Mangoes

M'<M M'>M

Bananas Bananas

10

Changes in the Set of Available Bundles of Goods Resulting from Changes in the
Consumer’s Income. A decrease in income causes a parallel inward shift of the budget
line as in panel (a). An increase in income causes a parallel outward shift of the budget line
as in panel (b).

Now suppose the price of bananas change from p  to p'  but the price of
1 1

mangoes and the consumer’s income remain unchanged. At the new price of
bananas, the consumer can afford to buy all bundles (x ,x ) such that p' x  +

1 2 1 1
p x  ≤ M. The equation of the budget line is

18 2 2

p' x  + p x  = M (2.10)
1 1 2 2

Equation (2.10) can also be written as

M p'
x 1

2 = – x
p p 1 (2.11)

2 2

Note that the vertical intercept of the new budget line is the same as the
vertical intercept of the budget line prior to the change in the price of bananas.
However, the slope of the budget line and horizontal intercept have changed
after the price change. If the price of bananas increases, ie if p' > p , the absolute

1 1

value of the slope of the budget line increases, and the budget line becomes
steeper (it pivots inwards around the vertical intercept and horizontal intercept
decreases). If the price of bananas decreases, i.e., p' < p , the absolute value of

1 1

the slope of the budget line decreases and hence, the budget line becomes
flatter (it pivots outwards around the vertical intercept and horizontal intercept
increases). Figure 2.11 shows change in the budget set when the price of only one
commodity changes while the price of the other commodity as well as income of
the consumer are constant.

A change in price of mangoes, when price of bananas and the consumer’s
income remain unchanged, will bring about similar changes in the budget set of
the consumer.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Mangoes Mangoes

Bananas
Bananas

11

Changes in the Set of Available Bundles of Goods Resulting from Changes in the
Price of bananas. An increase in the price of bananas makes the budget line steeper as in
panel (a). A decrease in the price of bananas makes the budget line flatter as in panel (b).

2.3 OPTIMAL CHOICE OF THE CONSUMER

The budget set consists of all bundles that are available to the consumer. The
consumer can choose her consumption bundle from the budget set. But on
what basis does she choose her consumption bundle from the ones that are
available to her? In economics, it is assumed that the consumer chooses her
consumption bundle on the basis of her  tatse and preferences over  the bundles
in the budget set. It is generally assumed that the consumer has well defined
preferences over the set of all possible bundles. She can compare any two
bundles. In other words, between any two bundles, she either prefers one to the
other or she is indifferent between the two.

Equality of the Marginal Rate of Substitution and the Ratio of 19
the Prices

The optimum bundle of the consumer is located at the point where the
budget line is tangent to one of the indifference curves. If the budget line
is tangent to an indifference curve at a point, the absolute value of the
slope of the indifference curve (MRS) and that of the budget line (price
ratio) are same at that point. Recall from our earlier discussion that the
slope of the indifference curve is the rate at which the consumer is willing
to substitute one good for the other. The slope of the budget line is the
rate at which the consumer is able to substitute one good for the other
in the market. At the optimum, the two rates should be the same. To see
why, consider a point where this is not so. Suppose the MRS at such a
point is 2 and suppose the two goods have the same price. At this point,
the consumer is willing to give up 2 mangoes if she is given an extra
banana. But in the market, she can buy an extra banana if she gives up
just 1 mango. Therefore, if she buys an extra banana, she can have more
of both the goods compared to the bundle represented by the point, and
hence, move to a preferred bundle. Thus, a point at which the MRS is
greater, the price ratio cannot be the optimum. A similar argument holds
for any point at which the MRS is less than the price ratio.

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



In economics, it is generally assumed that the consumer is a rational
individual. A rational individual clearly knows what is good or what is bad for
her, and in any given situation, she always tries to achieve the best for herself.
Thus, not only does a consumer have well-defined preferences over the set of
available bundles, she also acts according to her preferences. From the bundles
which are available to her, a rational consumer always chooses the one which
gives her maximum satisfaction.

In the earlier sections, it was observed that the budget set describes the
bundles that are available to the consumer and her preferences over the available
bundles can usually be represented by an indifference map. Therefore, the
consumer’s problem can also be stated as follows: The rational consumer’s
problem is to move to a point on the highest possible indifference curve given
her budget set.

If such a point exists, where would it be located? The optimum point would
be located on the budget line. A point below the budget line cannot be the
optimum. Compared to a point below the budget line, there is always some
point on the budget line which contains more of at least one of the goods and
no less of the other, and is, therefore, preferred by a consumer whose preferences
are monotonic. Therefore, if the consumer’s preferences are monotonic, for any
point below the budget line, there is some point on the budget line which is
preferred by the consumer. Points above the budget line are not available to
the consumer. Therefore, the optimum (most preferred) bundle of the consumer
would be on the budget line.

Where on the budget line will the optimum bundle be located? The point at
which the budget line just touches (is tangent to), one of the indifference curves
would be the optimum.9 To see why this is so, note that any point on the budget
line other than the point at which it touches the indifference curve lies on a
lower indifference curve and hence is inferior. Therefore, such a point cannot be
the consumer’s optimum. The optimum bundle is located on the budget line at

20 the point where the budget line is tangent to an indifference curve.
Figure 2.12 illustrates the

consumer’s optimum. At (x *, x *
1 2 ) , the

budget line is tangent to the black
coloured indifference curve. The first
thing to note is that the indifference
curve just touching the budget line
is the highest possible indifference
curve given the consumer’s budget
set. Bundles on the indifference
curves above this, like the grey one,
are not affordable. Points on the
indifference curves below this, like the Consumer’s Optimum. The point (x ∗, x ∗ ), at

1 2

blue one, are certainly inferior to the which the budget line is tangent to an
indifference curve represents the consumers

points on the indifference curve, just
touching the budget line. Any other
point on the budget line lies on a lower indifference curve and hence, is inferior
to (x *, x * ) . Therefore, (x *, *

1 x2 )  is the consumer’s optimum bundle.
1 2

9 To be more precise, if the situation is as depicted in Figure 2.12 then the optimum would be
located at the point where the budget line is tangent to one of the indifference curves. However,
there are other situations in which the optimum is at a point where the consumer spends her entire
income on one of the goods only.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



2.4 DEMAND

In the previous section, we studied the choice problem of the consumer and
derived the consumer’s optimum bundle given the prices of the goods, the
consumer’s income and her preferences. It was observed that the amount of a
good that the consumer chooses optimally, depends on the price of the good
itself, the prices of other goods, the consumer’s income and her tastes and
preferences. The quantity of a commodity that a consumer is willing to buy and
is able to afford, given prices of goods and consumer’s tastes and preferences is
called demand for the commodity. Whenever one or more of these variables
change, the quantity of the good chosen
by the consumer is likely to change as
well. Here we shall change one of these
variables at a time and study how the
amount of the good chosen by the
consumer is related to that variable.

2.4.1 Demand Curve and the Law of

Demand

If the prices of other goods, the
consumer’s income and her tastes and
preferences remain unchanged, the
amount of a good that the consumer Demand Curve. The demand curve is a

relation between the quantity of the good
optimally chooses, becomes entirely

chosen by a consumer and the price of the
dependent on its price. The relation good. The independent variable (price) is
between the consumer’s optimal choice measured along the vertical axis and
of the quantity of a good and its price is dependent variable (quantity) is measured

very important and this relation is called along the horizontal axis. The demand curve

the demand function. Thus, the gives the quantity demanded by the
consumer at each price.

consumer’s demand function for a good
21

Functions

Consider any two variables x and y. A function

y = f (x)

is a relation between the two variables x and y such that for each value of x,
there is an unique value of the variable y. In other words, f (x) is a rule
which assigns an unique value y for each value of x. As the value of y
depends on the value of x, y is called the dependent variable and x is called
the independent variable.

EXAMPLE  1

Consider, for example, a situation where x can take the values 0, 1, 2, 3 and
suppose corresponding values of y are 10, 15, 18 and 20, respectively.
Here y and x are related by the function y = f (x) which is defined as follows:
f (0) = 10; f (1) = 15; f (2) = 18 and f (3) = 20.

EXAMPLE  2

Consider another situation where x can take the values 0, 5, 10 and 20.
And suppose corresponding values of y are 100, 90, 70 and 40, respectively.

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Here, y and x are related by the function y = f (x ) which is defined as follows:
f (0) = 100; f (10) = 90; f (15) = 70 and f (20) = 40.

Very often a functional relation between the two variables can be expressed
in algebraic form like

y = 5 + x and y = 50 – x

A function y = f (x) is an increasing function if the value of y does not
decrease with increase in the value of x. It is a decreasing function if the
value of y does not increase with increase in the value of x. The function in
Example 1 is an increasing function. So is the function y = x + 5. The function
in Example 2 is a decreasing function. The function y = 50 – x is also
decreasing.

Graphical Representation of a Function

A graph of a function y = f (x) is a diagrammatic representation of
the function. Following are the graphs of the functions in the examples
given above.

22

Usually, in a graph, the independent variable is measured along the
horizontal axis and the dependent variable is measured along the vertical
axis. However, in economics, often the opposite is done. The demand curve,
for example, is drawn by taking the independent variable (price) along the
vertical axis and the dependent variable (quantity) along the horizontal axis.
The graph of an increasing function is upward sloping or and the graph of a
decreasing function is downward sloping. As we can see from the diagrams
above, the graph of y = 5 + x is upward sloping and that of y = 50 – x, is
downward sloping.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



gives the amount of the good that the consumer chooses at different levels of its
price when the other things remain unchanged. The consumer’s demand for a
good as a function of its price can be written as

X = f (P) (2.12)
where X denotes the quantity and P denotes the price of the good.

The demand function can also be represented graphically as in Figure 2.13.
The graphical representation of the demand function is called the demand curve.
The relation between the consumer’s demand for a good and the price of the
good is likely to be negative in general. In other words, the amount of a good
that a consumer would optimally choose is likely to increase when the price of
the good falls and it is likely to decrease with a rise in the price of the good.

2.4.2 Deriving a Demand Curve from Indifference Curves and Budget
Constraints

Consider an individual consuming bananas (X )and mangoes (X ), whose income
1 2

is M and market prices of X and X  are 
1 2 P ' and P '
 1 2 respectively. Figure (a) depicts

her consumption equilibrium at point C, where she buys X '1 and X '2 quantities
of bananas and mangoes respectively. In panel (b) of figure 2.14, we plot P '1
against X '1  which is the first point on the demand curve for X .

1

23

Deriving a demand curve from indifference curves and budget constraints

Suppose the price of X  drops to P  with P '
1 2 and M remaining constant. The

1  
budget set in panel (a), expands and new consumption equilibrium is on a
higher indifference curve at point D, where she buys more of bananas ( X1 > X ' ).

1

Thus, demand for bananas increases as its price drops. We plot P  against 
1 X1

in panel (b) of figure 2.14 to get the second point on the demand curve for X .
1

∧

Likewise the price of bananas can be dropped further to P1 , resulting in further
∧ ∧ ∧

increase in consumption of bananas to X1 . P1  plotted against X1  gives us the
third point on the demand curve. Therefore, we observe that a drop in price of
bananas results in an increase in quality of bananas purchased by an individual
who maximises his utility. The demand curve for bananas is thus negatively
sloped.

The negative slope of the demand curve can also be explained in terms of the
two effects namely, substitution effect and income effect that come into play
when price of a commodity changes. When bananas become cheaper, the
consumer maximises his utility by substituting bananas for mangoes in order
to derive the same level of satisfaction of a price change, resulting in an increase
in demand for bananas.

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Moreover, as price of bananas drops, consumer’s purchasing power increases,
which further increases demand for bananas (and mangoes). This is the income
effect of a price change, resulting in further increase in demand for bananas.

Law of Demand: Law of Demand states that other things being equal,
there is a negative relation between demand for a commodity and its price. In
other words, when price of the commodity increases, demand for it falls and
when price of the commodity decreases, demand for it rises, other factors
remaining the same.

Linear Demand

A linear demand curve can be written
as

a
d(p) = a – bp; 0 ≤  p ≤ b

a
 = 0; p >                (2.13)

b
where a is the vertical intercept, –b is
the slope of the demand curve. At
price 0, the demand is a, and at price

a Linear Demand Curve. The diagram depicts
equal to , the demand is 0. The

b the linear demand curve given by equation 2.13.
slope of the demand curve measures
the rate at which demand changes with respect to its price. For a unit increase
in the price of the good, the demand falls by b units. Figure 2.15 depicts a linear
demand curve.

2.4.3 Normal and Inferior Goods

The demand function is a relation between the consumer’s demand for a
good and its price when other things are given. Instead of studying the relation

24 between the demand for a good and its price, we can also study the relation
between the consumer’s demand for the good and the income of the consumer.
The quantity of a good that the
consumer demands can increase or A rise in the purchasing power
decrease with the rise in income (income) of the consumer can
depending on the nature of the good. sometimes induce the consumer to

For most goods, the quantity that a reduce the consumption of a good.

consumer chooses, increases as the In such a case, the substitution
effect and the income effect will work

consumer’s income increases and
in opposite directions. The demand

decreases as the consumer’s income for such a good can be inversely or
decreases. Such goods are called positively related to its price
normal goods. Thus, a consumer’s depending on the relative strengths
demand for a normal good moves in the of these two opposing effects. If the
same direction as the income of the substitution effect is stronger than
consumer. However, there are some the income effect, the demand for the

goods the demands for which move in good and the price of the good would

the opposite direction of the income of still be inversely related. However,
if the income effect is stronger than

the consumer. Such goods are called
the substitution effect, the demand

inferior goods. As the income of the
for the good would be positively

consumer increases, the demand for an related to its price. Such a good is
inferior good falls, and as the income called a Giffen good.
decreases, the demand for an inferior

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



good rises. Examples of inferior goods include low quality food items like
coarse cereals.

A good can be a normal good for the consumer at some levels of income and
an inferior good for her at other levels of income. At very low levels of income, a
consumer’s demand for low quality cereals can increase with income. But, beyond
a level, any increase in income of the consumer is likely to reduce her
consumption of such food items as she switches to better quality cereals.

2.4.4 Substitutes and Complements

We can also study the relation between the quantity of a good that a consumer
chooses and the price of a related good. The quantity of a good that the
consumer chooses can increase or decrease with the rise in the price of a
related good depending on whether the two goods are substitutes or
complementary to each other. Goods which are consumed together are called
complementary goods. Examples of goods which are complement to each
other include tea and sugar, shoes and socks, pen and ink, etc. Since tea
and sugar are used together, an increase in the price of sugar is likely to
decrease the demand for tea and a decrease in the price of sugar is likely to
increase the demand for tea. Similar is the case with other complements. In
general, the demand for a good moves in the opposite direction of the price of
its complementary goods.

In contrast to complements, goods like tea and coffee are not consumed
together. In fact, they are substitutes for each other. Since tea is a substitute for
coffee, if the price of coffee increases, the consumers can shift to tea, and hence,
the consumption of tea is likely to go up. On the other hand, if the price of coffee
decreases, the consumption of tea is likely to go down. The demand for a good
usually moves in the direction of the price of its substitutes.

2.4.5 Shifts in the Demand Curve

The demand curve was drawn under the assumption that the consumer’s
income, the prices of other goods and the preferences of the consumer are given. 25

What happens to the demand curve when any of these things changes?
Given the prices of other goods and the preferences of a consumer, if the

income increases, the demand for the good at each price changes, and hence,
there is a shift in the demand curve. For normal goods, the demand curve shifts
rightward and for inferior goods, the demand curve shifts leftward.

Given the consumer’s income and her preferences, if the price of a related
good changes, the demand for a good at each level of its price changes, and
hence, there is a shift in the demand curve. If there is an increase in the price of
a substitute good, the demand curve shifts rightward. On the other hand, if
there is an increase in the price of a complementary good, the demand curve
shifts leftward.

The demand curve can also shift due to a change in the tastes and preferences
of the consumer. If the consumer’s preferences change in favour of a good, the
demand curve for such a good shifts rightward. On the other hand, the demand
curve shifts leftward due to an unfavourable change in the preferences of the
consumer. The demand curve for ice-creams, for example, is likely to shift
rightward in the summer because of preference for ice-creams goes up in
summer. Revelation of the fact that cold-drinks might be injurious to health can
adversely affect preferences for cold-drinks. This is likely to result in a leftward
shift in the demand curve for cold-drinks.

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Shifts in Demand. The demand curve in panel (a) shifts leftward and that in panel
(b) shifts rightward.

Shifts in the demand curve are depicted in Figure 2.16. It may be mentioned
that shift in demand curve takes place when there is a change in some factor,
other than the price of the commodity.

2.4.6 Movements along the Demand Curve and Shifts in the
Demand Curve

As it has been noted earlier, the amount of a good that the consumer chooses
depends on the price of the good, the prices of other goods, income of the
consumer and her tastes and preferences. The demand function is a relation
between the amount of the good and its price when other things remain
unchanged. The demand curve is a graphical representation of the demand
function. At higher prices, the demand is less, and at lower prices, the demand
is more. Thus, any change in the price leads to movements along the demand
curve. On the other hand, changes in any of the other things lead to a shift in

26 the demand curve. Figure 2.17 illustrates a movement along the demand
curve and a shift in the demand curve.

Movement along a Demand Curve and Shift of a Demand Curve. Panel (a) depicts a
movement along the demand curve and panel (b) depicts a shift of the demand curve.

2.5 MARKET DEMAND

In the last section, we studied the choice problem of the individual consumer
and derived the demand curve of the consumer. However, in the market for a

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



good, there are many consumers. It is important to find out the market demand
for the good. The market demand for a good at a particular price is the total
demand of all consumers taken together. The market demand for a good can be
derived from the individual demand curves. Suppose there are only two

Derivation of the Market Demand Curve. The market demand curve can be derived as
a horizontal summation of the individual demand curves.

consumers in the market for a good. Suppose at price p′, the demand of consumer
1 is q ′ and that of consumer 2 is q ′ . Then, the market demand of the good at p′

1 2

is q ′ + q ′ . Similarly, at price p̂ , if the demand of consumer 1 is q̂
2 1  and that of

1

consumer 2 is q̂2 , the market demand of the good at p̂  is qˆ1 + qˆ 2 . Thus, the
market demand for the good at each price can be derived by adding up the
demands of the two consumers at that price. If there are more than two consumers
in the market for a good, the market demand can be derived similarly.

The market demand curve of a good can also be derived from the individual
demand curves graphically by adding up the individual demand curves
horizontally as shown in Figure 2.18. This method of adding two curves is called
horizontal summation. 27

Adding up Two Linear Demand Curves

Consider, for example, a market where there are two consumers and the demand
curves of the two consumers are given as

d (p) = 10 – p (2.14)
1

and d (p) = 15 – p (2.15)
2

Furthermore, at any price greater than 10, the consumer 1 demands 0 unit of
the good, and similarly, at any price greater than 15, the consumer 2 demands 0
unit of the good. The market demand can be derived by adding equations (2.14)
and (2.15). At any price less than or equal to 10, the market demand is given by
25 – 2p, for any price greater than 10, and less than or equal to 15, market
demand is 15 – p, and at any price greater than 15, the market demand is 0.

2.6 ELASTICITY OF DEMAND

The demand for a good moves in the opposite direction of its price. But the
impact of the price change is always not the same. Sometimes, the demand for a
good changes considerably even for small price changes. On the other hand,
there are some goods for which the demand is not affected much by price changes.

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Demands for some goods are very responsive to price changes while demands
for certain others are not so responsive to price changes. Price elasticity of demand
is a measure of the responsiveness of the demand for a good to changes in its
price. Price elasticity of demand for a good is defined as the percentage change
in demand for the good divided by the percentage change in its price. Price-
elasticity of demand for a good

percentage change in demand for the good
e  = 

D percentage change in the price of the good (2.16a)

∆Q
×100

= Q
∆P ×100
P (2.16b)

=  ∆Q  ×  P 
   ∆ 
 Q   P 

Where, ∆P  is the change in price of the good and ∆Q is the change in quantity
of the good.

EXAMPLE  2.2

Suppose an individual buy 15 bananas when its price is Rs. 5 per banana. when
the price increases to Rs. 7 per banana, she reduces his demand to 12 bananas.

Price Per banana (Rs.) : P     Quantity of bananas demanded : Q

Old Price : P  = 5 Old quantity : Q  = 15
1 1

New Price : P  = 7 New quantity: Q  = 12
2 2

In order to find her elasticity demand for bananas, we find the percentage change
in quantity demanded and its price, using the information summarized in table.

28
Note that the price elasticity of demand is a negative number since the demand

for a good is negatively related to the price of a good. However, for simplicity, we
will always refer to the absolute value of the elasticity.

∆Q
Percentage change in quantity demanded = ×100

Q1

 Q − 
2 Q1

     =   ×100
 Q1 

12 −15
     = ×100 = − 20

15

∆P
Percentage change in Market price = ×100

P1

 P2 − P 
1

      =   ×100
 P1 

7 − 5
      = ×100 = 40

5

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Therefore, in our example, as price of bananas increases by 40 percent,
20

demand for bananas drops by 20 percent. Price elasticity of demand eD = = 0.5 .
40

Clearly, the demand for bananas is not very responsive to a change in price of
bananas. When the percentage change in quantity demanded is less than the
percentage change in market price, eD  is estimated to be less than one and the
demand for the good is said to be inelastic at that price. Demand for essential
goods is often found to be inelastic.

When the percentage change in quantity demanded is more than the
percentage change in market price, the demand is said to be highly responsive

to changes in market price and the estimated eD  is more than one. The demand
for the good is said to be elastic at that price. Demand for luxury goods is seen

to be highly responsive to changes in their market prices and eD >1.
When the percentage change in quantity demanded equals the percentage

change in its market price, eD  is estimated to be equal to one and the demand
for the good is said to be Unitary-elastic at that price. Note that the demand for
certain goods may be elastic, unitary elastic and inelastic at different prices. In
fact, in the next section, elasticity along a linear demand curve is estimated at
different prices and shown to vary at each point on a downward sloping demand
curve.

2.6.1 Elasticity along a Linear Demand Curve

Let us consider a linear demand curve q = a – bp. Note that at any point on the

∆q
demand curve, the change in demand per unit change in the price   b

∆p = – .

∆q
Substituting the value of ∆p  in (2.16b),

29
p

we obtain,  e  = – b
D q

puting the value of q,

bp
       e = –                        (2.17)

D a – bp

From (2.17), it is clear that the
elasticity of demand is different at
different points on a linear demand
curve. At p = 0, the elasticity is 0, at q = Elasticity along a Linear Demand

a Curve. Price elasticity of demand is different
0, elasticity is ∞. At p = , the elasticity

2b at different points on the linear demand
curve.

is 1, at any price greater than 0 and less

a a
than , elasticity is less than 1, and at any price greater than , elasticity is

2b 2b
greater than 1. The price elasticities of demand along the linear demand curve
given by equation (2.17) are depicted in Figure 2.19.

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Geometric Measure of Elasticity along a Linear Demand Curve

The elasticity of a linear demand
curve can easily be measured
geometrically. The elasticity of
demand at any point on a straight
line demand curve is given by the
ratio of the lower segment and the
upper segment of the demand curve
at that point. To see why this is the
case, consider the following figure
which depicts a straight line
demand curve, q = a – bp.

Suppose at price p0, the
demand for the good is q0. Now
consider a small change in the price. The new price is p1, and at that price,
demand for the good is q1.

∆q = q1q0 = CD and ∆p = p1p0 = CE.

1
∆q/q0

∆q p0 q q0 Op0
CD Op0

Therefore, e  =  =  ×  = 
∆p/p0 p q0 1 0  × 0  =  × 

D ∆ p p Oq CE Oq0

0
CD p D p0 o

D Oq
Since ECD and Bp0D are similar triangles,  = . But

CE p0   = o
B p0B p B

op0 q0D
e =  = .

D 
P 0B P 0B

q0D DA
Since, Bp0D and BOA are similar triangles,   

p0 =
B DB

DA
Thus, e  = .

D DB

30 The elasticity of demand at different points on a straight line demand
curve can be derived by this method. Elasticity is 0 at the point where the
demand curve meets the horizontal axis and it is ∝ at the point where the
demand curve meets the vertical axis. At the midpoint of the demand curve,
the elasticity is 1, at any point to the left of the midpoint, it is greater than 1
and at any point to the right, it is less than 1.

Note that along the horizontal axis p = 0, along the vertical axis q = 0 and
a

at the midpoint of the demand curve p = .
2b

Constant Elasticity Demand Curve

The elasticity of demand on different points on a linear demand curve is different
varying from 0 to ∞. But sometimes, the demand curves can be such that the
elasticity of demand remains constant throughout. Consider, for example, a
vertical demand curve as the one depicted in Figure 2.20(a). Whatever be the

price, the demand is given at the level q   . A price never leads to a change in the
demand for such a demand curve and |e | is always 0. Therefore, a vertical

D

demand curve is perfectly inelastic.
Figure 2.20 (b) depics a horizontal demand curve, where market price

remains constant at P , whatever be the level of demand for the commodity. At
any other price, quantity demanded drops to zero and therefore ed = ∞ . A
horizontal demand curve is perfectly elastic.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Constant Elasticity Demand Curves. Elasticity of demand at all points along the vertical
demand curve, as shown in panel (a), is 0. Elasticity of demand at all point along the
horizontal demand curve, as shown in panel (b) is ∞ . Elasticity at all points on the demand
curve in panel (c) is 1.

Figure 2.20(c) depicts a demand curve which has the shape of a rectangular
hyperbola. This demand curve has a property that a percentage change in price
along the demand curve always leads to equal percentage change in quantity.
Therefore, |e | = 1 at every point on this demand curve. This demand curve is

D

called the unitary elastic demand curve.

2.6.2 Factors Determining Price Elasticity of Demand for a Good

The price elasticity of demand for a good depends on the nature of the good and
the availability of close substitutes of the good. Consider, for example, necessities
like food. Such goods are essential for life and the demands for such goods do
not change much in response to changes in their prices. Demand for food does
not change much even if food prices go up. On the other hand, demand for
luxuries can be very responsive to price changes. In general, demand for a
necessity is likely to be price inelastic while demand for a luxury good is likely 31
to be price elastic.

Though demand for food is inelastic, the demands for specific food items are
likely to be more elastic. For example, think of a particular variety of pulses. If the
price of this variety of pulses goes up, people can shift to some other variety of
pulses which is a close substitute. The demand for a good is likely to be elastic if
close substitutes are easily available. On the other hand, if close substitutes are
not available easily, the demand for a good is likely to be inelastic.

2.6.3 Elasticity and Expenditure

The expenditure on a good is equal to the demand for the good times its price.
Often it is important to know how the expenditure on a good changes as a result
of a price change. The price of a good and the demand for the good are inversely
related to each other. Whether the expenditure on the good goes up or down as
a result of an increase in its price depends on how responsive the demand for
the good is to the price change.

Consider an increase in the price of a good. If the percentage decline in
quantity is greater than the percentage increase in the price, the expenditure on
the good will go down. For example, see row 2 in table 2.5 which shows that as
price of a commodity increases by 10%, its demand drops by 12%, resulting in
a decline in expenditure on the good. On the other hand, if the percentage decline
in quantity is less than the percentage increase in the price, the expenditure on

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



the good will go up (See row 1 in table 2.5). And if the percentage decline in
quantity is equal to the percentage increase in the price, the expenditure on the
good will remain unchanged (see row 3 in table 2.5).

Now consider a decline in the price of the good. If the percentage increase in
quantity is greater than the percentage decline in the price, the expenditure on
the good will go up(see row 4 in table 2.5). On the other hand, if the percentage
increase in quantity is less than the percentage decline in the price, the expenditure
on the good will go down(see row 5 in table 2.5). And if the percentage increase
in quantity is equal to the percentage decline in the price, the expenditure on
the good will remain unchanged (see row 6 in table 2.5).

The expenditure on the good would change in the opposite direction as the
price change if and only if the percentage change in quantity is greater than the
percentage change in price, ie if the good is price-elastic (see rows 2 and 4 in
table 2.5). The expenditure on the good would change in the same direction as
the price change if and only if the percentage change in quantity is less than the
percentage change in price, i.e., if the good is price inelastic (see rows 1 and 5 in
table 2.5). The expenditure on the good would remain unchanged if and only if
the percentage change in quantity is equal to the percentage change in price,
i.e., if the good is unit-elastic (see rows 3 and 6 in table 2.5).

Table 2.5: For hypothetic cases of price rise and drop, the following table
summarises the relationship between elasticity and change in expenditure
of a commodity

Change   Change in     % Change   % Change       Impact on     Nature of price
in Price   Quantity      in price     in quantity Expenditure     Elasticity of
    (P)      demand (Q)   demand                              = P×Q           demand ed

1        ↑               ↓                 +10              -8                   ↑            Price Inelastic

2        ↑               ↓                 +10            -12                  ↓              Price Elastic

3        ↑               ↓                 +10            -10           No Change      Unit Elastic
32

4        ↓               ↑                 -10             +15                 ↑              Price Elastic

5         ↓                  ↑                    -10                 +7                    ↓              Price Inelastic

6        ↓               ↑                  -10             +10         No Change     Unit Elastic

Rectangular Hyperbola

An equation of the form

xy = c

where x and y are two variables and c is a
constant, giving us a curve called
rectangular hyperbola. It is a downward
sloping curve in the x-y plane as shown
in the diagram. For any two points p and q
on the curve, the areas of the two
rectangles Oy px and Oy qx are same and

1 1 2 2 

equal to c.
If the equation of a demand curve

takes the form pq = e, where e is a constant, it will be a rectangular
hyperbola, where price (p) times quantity (q) is a constant. With such a
demand curve, no matter at what point the consumer consumes, her
expenditures are always the same and equal to e.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Relationship between Elasticity and change in Expenditure on a Good

Suppose at price p, the demand for a good is q, and at price p + ∆p, the
demand for the good is q + ∆q.

At price p, the total expenditure on the good is pq, and at price p + ∆p,
the total expenditure on the good is (p + ∆p)(q + ∆q).

If price changes from p to (p + ∆p), the change in the expenditure on the
good is, (p + ∆p)(q + ∆q) – pq = q∆p + p∆q + ∆p∆q.

For small values of ∆p and ∆q, the value of the term ∆p∆q is negligible,
and in that case, the change in the expenditure on the good is approximately
given by q∆p + p∆q.

∆q
Approximate change in expenditure = ∆E = q∆p + p∆q = ∆p(q + p )

∆p
∆q p

= ∆p[q(1 + p q )] = ∆p[q(1 + e )].
∆ D

Note that

if e  < –1, then q (1 + e ) < 0, and hence, ∆E has the opposite sign as ∆p,
D D

if e > –1, then q (1 + e ) > 0, and hence, ∆E has the same sign as ∆p,
D D

if e = –1, then q (1 + e ) = 0, and hence, ∆E = 0.
D D

• The budget set is the collection of all bundles of goods that a consumer can buy
with her income at the prevailing market prices.

• The budget line represents all bundles which cost the consumer her entire income.
The budget line is negatively sloping.

• The budget set changes if either of the two prices or the income changes.

• The consumer has well-defined preferences over the collection of all possible
bundles. She can rank the available bundles according to her preferences 33
over them.

• The consumer’s preferences are assumed to be monotonic.

• An indifference curve is a locus of all points representing bundles among which
the consumer is indifferent.

• Monotonicity of preferences implies that the indifference curve is downward
sloping.

• A consumer’s preferences, in general, can be represented by an indifference map.

• A consumer’s preferences, in general, can also be represented by a utility function.

• A rational consumer always chooses her most preferred bundle from the budget set.

• The consumer’s optimum bundle is located at the point of tangency between the
budget line and an indifference curve.

• The consumer’s demand curve gives the amount of the good that a consumer
chooses at different levels of its price when the price of other goods, the consumer’s
income and her tastes and preferences remain unchanged.

• The demand curve is generally downward sloping.

• The demand for a normal good increases (decreases) with increase (decrease) in
the consumer’s income.

• The demand for an inferior good decreases (increases) as the income of the
consumer increases (decreases).

• The market demand curve represents the demand of all consumers in the market

Reprint 2025-26

SSSSSuuuuummmmmmmmmmaaaaarrrrryyyyy

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



taken together at different levels of the price of the good.

• The price elasticity of demand for a good is defined as the percentage change in
demand for the good divided by the percentage change in its price.

• The elasticity of demand is a pure number.

• Elasticity of demand for a good and total expenditure on the good are closely
related.

Budget set Budget line
Preference Indifference
Indifference curve Marginal Rate of substitution
Monotonic preferences Diminishing rate of substitution
Indifference map,Utility function Consumer’s optimum
Demand Law of demand
Demand curve Substitution effect
Income effect Normal good
Inferior good Substitute
Complement Price elasticity of demand

1. What do you mean by the budget set of a consumer?

2. What is budget line?

3. Explain why the budget line is downward sloping.

4. A consumer wants to consume two goods. The prices of the two goods are Rs 4
and Rs 5 respectively. The consumer’s income is Rs 20.
(i) Write down the equation of the budget line.

(ii) How much of good 1 can the consumer consume if she spends her entire
income on that good?

(iii) How much of good 2 can she consume if she spends her entire income on
that good?

34 (iv) What is the slope of the budget line?

Questions 5, 6 and 7 are related to question 4.

5. How does the budget line change if the consumer’s income increases to Rs 40
but the prices remain unchanged?

6. How does the budget line change if the price of good 2 decreases by a rupee
but the price of good 1 and the consumer’s income remain unchanged?

7. What happens to the budget set if both the prices as well as the income double?

8. Suppose a consumer can afford to buy 6 units of good 1 and 8 units of good 2
if she spends her entire income. The prices of the two goods are Rs 6 and Rs 8
respectively. How much is the consumer’s income?

9. Suppose a consumer wants to consume two goods which are available only in
integer units. The two goods are equally priced at Rs 10 and the consumer’s
income is Rs 40.
(i) Write down all the bundles that are available to the consumer.

(ii) Among the bundles that are available to the consumer, identify those which
cost her exactly Rs 40.

10. What do you mean by ‘monotonic preferences’?

11. If a consumer has monotonic preferences, can she be indifferent between the
bundles (10, 8) and (8, 6)?

12. Suppose a consumer’s preferences are monotonic. What can you say about
her preference ranking over the bundles (10, 10), (10, 9) and (9, 9)?

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics

EEEEExxxxxeeeeerrrrrccccciiiiissssseeeeesssss KKKKKeeeeeyyyyy     CCCCCooooonnnnnccccceeeeeppppptttttsssss



13. Suppose your friend is indifferent to the bundles (5, 6) and (6, 6). Are the
preferences of your friend monotonic?

14. Suppose there are two consumers in the market for a good and their demand
functions are as follows:

d (p) = 20 – p for any price less than or equal to 20, and d (p) = 0 at any price
1 1

greater than 20.

d (p) = 30 – 2p for any price less than or equal to 15 and d (p) = 0 at any price
2 1

greater than 15.

Find out the market demand function.

15. Suppose there are 20 consumers for a good and they have identical demand
functions:

10
d(p) = 10 – 3p for any price less than or equal to  and d (p) = 0 at any price

3 1

10
greater than .

3
What is the market demand function?

16. Consider a market where there are just two p d d
1 2

consumers and suppose their demands for the
good are given as follows: 1 9 24

Calculate the market demand for the good. 2 8 20
3  7 18
4 6 16
5 5 14
6 4 12

17. What do you mean by a normal good?

18. What do you mean by an ‘inferior good’? Give some examples.

19. What do you mean by substitutes? Give examples of two goods which are
substitutes of each other.

20. What do you mean by complements? Give examples of two goods which are 35

complements of each other.

21. Explain price elasticity of demand.

22. Consider the demand for a good. At price Rs 4, the demand for the good is 25
units. Suppose price of the good increases to Rs 5, and as a result, the demand
for the good falls to 20 units. Calculate the price elasticity .

5
23. Consider the demand curve D (p) = 10 – 3p. What is the elasticity at price ?

3
24. Suppose the price elasticity of demand for a good is – 0.2. If there is a 5 %

increase in the price of the good, by what percentage will the demand for the
good go down?

25. Suppose the price elasticity of demand for a good is – 0.2. How will the
expenditure on the good be affected if there is a 10 % increase in the price of
the good?

27. Suppose there was a 4 % decrease in the price of a good, and as a result, the
expenditure on the good increased by 2 %. What can you say about the elasticity
of demand?

Reprint 2025-26

Theory of Consumer
Behaviour



Chapter 3

Production and Costs

In the previous chapter, we have discussed the behaviour of the
consumers. In this chapter as well as in the next, we shall examine
the behaviour of a producer. Production is the process by which
inputs are transformed into ‘output’. Production is carried out by
producers or firms. A firm acquires different inputs like labour,
machines, land, raw materials etc. It uses these inputs to produce
output. This output can be consumed by consumers, or used by
other firms for further production. For example, a tailor uses a
sewing machine, cloth, thread and his own labour to ‘produce’
shirts. A farmer uses his land, labour, a tractor, seed, fertilizer,
water etc to produce wheat. A car manufacturer uses land for a
factory, machinery, labour, and various other inputs (steel,
aluminium, rubber etc) to produce cars. A rickshaw puller uses a
rickshaw and his own labour to ‘produce’ rickshaw rides. A
domestic helper uses her labour to produce ‘cleaning services’.
We make certain simplifying assumptions to start with. Production

is instantaneous: in our very simple model of production no
time elapses between the combination of the inputs and

the production of the output. We also tend to use the
terms production and supply synonymously and often
interchangeably.
In order to acquire inputs a firm has to pay for them.
This is called the cost of production. Once output
has been produced, the firm sell it in the market and
earns revenue. The difference between the revenue
and cost is called the firm’s profit. We assume that

the objective of a firm is to earn the maximum profit
that it can.

In this chapter, we discuss the relationship between
inputs and output. Then we look at the cost structure of

the firm. We do this to be able to identifiy the output at which
A Firm Effort firms profits are maximum.

3.1  PRODUCTION FUNCTION

The production function of a firm is a relationship between inputs
used and output produced by the firm. For various quantities of
inputs used, it gives the maximum quantity of output that can be
produced.

Reprint 2025-26



Consider the farmer we mentioned above. For simplicity, we assume that the
farmer uses only two inputs to produce wheat: land and labour. A production
function tells us the maximum amount of wheat he can produce for a given
amount of land that he uses, and a given number of hours of labour that he
performs. Suppose that he uses 2 hours of labour/ day and 1 hectare of land to
produce a maximum of 2 tonnes of wheat. Then, a function that describes this
relation is called a production function.

One possible example of the form this could take is:
q = K × L,
Where, q is the amount of wheat produced, K is the area of land in hectares,

L is the number of hours of work done in a day.
Describing a production function in this manner tells us the exact relation

between inputs and output. If either K or L increase, q will also increase. For
any L and any K, there will be only one q. Since by definition we are taking the
maximum output for any level of inputs, a production function deals only with
the efficient use of inputs. Efficiency implies that it is not possible to get any
more output from the same level of inputs.

A production function is defined for a given technology. It is the technological
knowledge that determines the maximum levels of output that can be produced
using different combinations of inputs. If the technology improves, the maximum
levels of output obtainable for different input combinations increase. We then
have a new production function.

The inputs that a firm uses in the production process are called factors of
production. In order to produce output, a firm may require any number of
different inputs. However, for the time being, here we consider a firm that produces
output using only two factors of production – labour and capital. Our production
function, therefore, tells us the maximum quantity of output (q) that can be
produced by using different combinations of these two factors of productions-
Labour (L) and Capital (K).

We may write the production function as
37

q = f(L,K)     (3.1)
where, L is labour and K is capital and q is the maximum output that can be

produced.

Table 3.1: Production Function

Factor Capital

0 1 2 3 4 5 6

0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

1 0 1 3 7 10 12 13

2 0 3 10 18 24 29 33

    Labour 3 0 7 18 30 40 46 50

4 0 10 24 40 50 56 57

5 0 12 29 46 56 58 59

6 0 13 33 50 57 59 60

A numerical example of production function is given in Table 3.1. The left
column shows the amount of labour and the top row shows the amount of
capital. As we move to the right along any row, capital increases and as we move
down along any column, labour increases. For different values of the two factors,

Reprint 2025-26

Production and Costs



Isoquant

In Chapter 2, we have learnt about indifference curves. Here, we introduce a
similar concept known as isoquant. It is just an alternative way of
representing the production function. Consider a production function with
two inputs labour and capital. An
isoquant is the set of all possible
combinations of the two inputs
that yield the same maximum
possible level of output. Each
isoquant represents a particular
level of output and is labelled with
that amount of output.

Let us return to table 3.1
notice that the output of 10 units
can be produced in 3 ways (4L,
1K), (2L, 2K), (1L, 4K). All these
combination of L, K lie on the
same isoquant, which represents the level of output 10. Can you identify
the sets of inputs that will lie on the isoquant q = 50?

The diagram here generalizes this concept. We place L on the X axis and
K on the Y axis. We have three isoquants for the three output levels, namely
q = q , q = q and q = q . Two input combinations (L , K ) and (L , K ) give us

1 2 3 1 2 2 1

the same level of output q . If we fix capital at K and increase labour to L ,
1 1 3

output increases and we reach a higher isoquant, q = q . When marginal
2

products are positive, with greater amount of one input, the same level of
output can be produced only using lesser amount of the other. Therefore,
isoquants are negatively sloped.

38 the table shows the corresponding output levels. For example, with 1 unit of
labour and 1 unit of capital, the firm can produce at most 1 unit of output; with
2 units of labour and 2 units of capital, it can produce at most 10 units of
output; with 3 units of labour and 2 units of capital, it can produce at most 18
units of output and so on.

In our example, both the inputs are necessary for the production. If any of
the inputs becomes zero, there will be no production. With both inputs positive,
output will be positive. As we increase the amount of any input, output increases.

3.2 THE SHORT RUN AND THE LONG RUN

Before we begin with any further analysis, it is important to discuss two concepts–
the short run and the long run.

In the short run, at least one of the factor – labour or capital – cannot be
varied, and therefore, remains fixed. In order to vary the output level, the firm
can vary only the other factor. The factor that remains fixed is called the fixed
factor whereas the other factor which the firm can vary is called the variable
factor.

Consider the example represented through Table 3.1. Suppose, in the short
run, capital remains fixed at 4 units. Then the corresponding column shows the
different levels of output that the firm may produce using different quantities of
labour in the short run.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



In the long run, all factors of production can be varied. A firm in order to
produce different levels of output in the long run may vary both the inputs
simultaneously. So, in the long run, there is no fixed factor.

For any particular production process, long run generally refers to a longer
time period than the short run. For different production processes, the long run
periods may be different. It is not advisable to define short run and long run in
terms of say, days, months or years. We define a period as long run or short run
simply by looking at whether all the inputs can be varied or not.

3.3 TOTAL PRODUCT, AVERAGE PRODUCT AND MARGINAL PRODUCT

3.3.1 Total Product
Suppose we vary a single input and keep all other inputs constant. Then
for different levels of that input, we get different levels of output. This
relationship between the variable input and output, keeping all other inputs
constant, is often referred to as Total Product (TP) of the variable input.

Let us again look at Table 3.1. Suppose capital is fixed at 4 units. Now in
the Table 3.1, we look at the column where capital takes the value 4. As we
move down along the column, we get the output values for different values of
labour. This is the total product of labour schedule with K  = 4. This is also

2

sometimes called total return to or total physical product of the variable
input. This is shown again in the second column of table in 3.2

Once we have defined total product, it will be useful to define the concepts of
average product (AP) and marginal product (MP). They are useful in order to
describe the contribution of the variable input to the production process.

3.3.2 Average Product

Average product is defined as the output per unit of variable input. We calculate
it as

TP
AP = L

L     (3.2) 39
L

The last column of table 3.2 gives us a numerical example of average product
of labour (with capital fixed at 4) for the production function described in
table 3.1. Values in this column are obtained by dividing TP (column 2) by
L (Column 1).

3.3.3 Marginal Product

Marginal product of an input is defined as the change in output per unit of
change in the input when all other inputs are held constant. When capital is held
constant, the marginal product of labour is

Change inoutput
MP  = 

L
Change ininput

∆TP
        = L

    (3.3)
∆ L

where ∆ represents the change of the variable.
The third column of table 3.2 gives us a numerical example of Marginal

Product of labour (with capital fixed at 4) for the production function described
in table 3.1. Values in this column are obtained by dividing change in TP by

Reprint 2025-26

Production and Costs



change in L. For example, when L changes from 1 to 2, TP changes from 10 to
24.

MP = (TP at L units) – (TP at L – 1 unit)     (3.4)
L

Here, Change in TP = 24 -10 = 14
Change in L = 1
Marginal product of the 2nd unit of labour = 14/1 = 14

Since inputs cannot take negative values, marginal product is undefined at
zero level of input employment. For any level of an input, the sum of marginal
products of every preceeding unit of that input gives the total product. So total
product is the sum of marginal products.

Table 3.2: Total Product, Marginal product and Average product

 Labour TP MP AP
L L

0 0 - -

1 10 10 10

2 24 14 12

3 40 16 13.33

4 50 10 12.5

5 56 6 11.2

6 57 1 9.5

Average product of an input at any level of employment is the average of all
marginal products up to that level. Average and marginal products are often
referred to as average and marginal returns, respectively, to the variable input.

3.4 THE LAW OF DIMINISHING MARGINAL PRODUCT AND
40 THE LAW OF VARIABLE PROPORTIONS

If we plot the data in table 3.2 on graph paper, placing labour on the X-axis and
output on the Y-axis, we get the curves shown in the diagram below. Let us
examine what is happening to TP. Notice that TP increases as labour input
increases. But the rate at which it increases is not constant. An increase in labour
from 1 to 2 increases TP by 10 units. An increase in labour from 2 to 3 increases
TP by 12. The rate at which TP increases, as explained above, is shown by the
MP. Notice that the MP first increases (upto 3 units of labour) and then begins to

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



fall. This tendency of the MP to first increase and then fall is called the law of
variable proportions or the law of diminishing marginal product. Law of
variable proportions say that the marginal product of a factor input initially
rises with its employment level. But after reaching a certain level of employment,
it starts falling.

Why does this happen? In order to understand this, we first define the concept
of factor proportions. Factor proportions represent the ratio in which the two
inputs are combined to produce output.

As we hold one factor fixed and keep increasing the other, the factor
proportions change. Initially, as we increase the amount of the variable input,
the factor proportions become more and more suitable for the production and
marginal product increases. But after a certain level of employment, the
production process becomes too crowded with the variable input.

Suppose table 3.2 describes the output of a farmer who has 4 hectares of
land, and can choose how much labour he wants to use. If he uses only 1 worker,
he has too much land for the worker to cultivate alone. As he increases the
number of workers, the amount of labour per unit land increases, and each
worker adds proportionally more and more to the total output. Marginal product
increases in this phase. When the fourth worker is hired, the land begins to get
‘crowded’. Each worker now has insufficient land to work efficiently. So the output
added by each additional worker is now proportionally less. The marginal product
begins to fall.

We can use these observations to describe the general shapes of the TP, MP
and AP curves as below.

3.5 SHAPES OF TOTAL PRODUCT, MARGINAL PRODUCT

AND AVERAGE PRODUCT CURVES

An increase in the amount of one of the inputs keeping all other inputs constant
results in an increase in output. Table 3.2 shows how the total product changes
as the amount of labour increases. The total product curve in the input-output 41

plane is a positively sloped curve. Figure 3.1 shows the shape of the total product
curve for a typical firm.

We measure units of labour
along the horizontal axis and Output
output along the vertical axis.

TPL
With L units of labour, the firm

q1

can at most produce q  units of
1

output.
According to the law of

variable proportions, the
marginal product of an input
initially rises and then after a
certain level of employment, it
starts falling. The MP curve

O L
therefore, looks like an inverse Labour

‘U’-shaped curve as in figure 3.2. Fig. 3.1

Let us now see what the AP Total Product. This is a total product curve for
curve looks like. For the first unit labour. When all other inputs are held constant, it

of the variable input, one can shows the different output levels obtainable from

easily check that the MP and the different units of labour.

Reprint 2025-26

Production and Costs



AP are same. Now as we increase
the amount of input, the MP rises. Output

AP being the average of marginal
P

products, also rises, but rises less
than MP. Then, after a point, the MP
starts falling. However, as long as
the value of MP remains higher APL

than the value of the  AP, the AP
continues to rise. Once MP has

MPL
fallen sufficiently, its value becomes
less than the AP and the AP also
starts falling. So AP curve is also O L Labour

inverse ‘U’-shaped. Fig. 3.2
As long as the AP increases, it

Average and Marginal Product. These are
must be the case that MP is greater

average and marginal product curves of labour.
than AP. Otherwise, AP cannot rise.
Similarly, when AP falls, MP has to be less than AP. It, follows that MP curve
cuts AP curve from above at its maximum.

Figure 3.2 shows the shapes of AP and MP curves for a typical firm.
The AP of factor 1 is maximum at L. To the left of L, AP is rising and MP is

greater than AP. To the right of L, AP is falling and MP is less than AP.

3.6 RETURNS TO SCALE

The law of variable proportions arises because factor proportions change as
long as one factor is held constant and the other is increased. What if both factors
can change? Remember that this can happen only in the long run. One special
case in the long run occurs when both factors are increased by the same
proportion, or factors are scaled up.

When a proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase in output
42

by the same proportion, the production function is said to display Constant
returns to scale (CRS).

When a proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase in output
by a larger proportion, the production function is said to display Increasing
Returns to Scale (IRS)

Decreasing Returns to Scale (DRS) holds when a proportional increase in
all inputs results in an increase in output by a smaller proportion.

For example, suppose in a production process, all inputs get doubled.
As a result, if the output gets doubled, the production function exhibits CRS.
If output is less than doubled, then DRS holds, and if it is more than doubled,
then IRS holds.

Returns to Scale

Consider a production function

q = f (x , x )
1 2

where the firm produces q amount of output using x  amount of factor 1
1

and x  amount of factor 2. Now suppose the firm decides to increase the
2

employment level of both the factors t (t > 1) times. Mathematically, we

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



can say that the production function exhibits constant returns to scale if
we have,

f (tx , tx ) = t.f (x , x )
1 2 1 2

ie the new output level f (tx , tx ) is exactly t times the previous output level
1 2

f (x , x ).
1 2

Similarly, the production function exhibits increasing returns to scale if,

f (tx , tx ) > t.f (x , x ).
1 2 1 2

It exhibits decreasing returns to scale if,

f (tx , tx ) < t.f (x , x ).
1 2 1 2

3.7 COSTS

In order to produce output, the firm needs to employ inputs. But a given level
of output, typically, can be produced in many ways. There can be more than
one input combinations with which a firm can produce a desired level of output.
In Table 3.1, we can see that 50 units of output can be produced by three
different input combinations (L = 6, K = 3), (L = 4, K = 4) and (L = 3, K = 6). The
question is which input combination will the firm choose? With the input prices
given, it will choose that combination of inputs which is least expensive. So,
for every level of output, the firm chooses the least cost input combination.
Thus the cost function describes the least cost of producing each level of output
given prices of factors of production and technology.

Cobb-Douglas Production Function

Consider a production function
43

q = x α x β
1 2

where α and β are constants. The firm produces q amount of output
using x  amount of factor 1 and x  amount of factor 2. This is called a

1 2

Cobb-Douglas production function. Suppose with x  = x1  and x  = x
2 2 , we

1

have q  units of output, i.e.
0

q  = x α
0 1  x β

2

If we increase both the inputs t (t > 1) times, we get the new output

q = (t x α β
1 ) (t x2 )

1

= t α + β x α
1  x β

2

When α + β = 1, we have q  = tq . That is, the output increases t times. So the
1 0

production function exhibits CRS. Similarly, when α + β > 1, the production
function exhibits IRS. When α + β < 1 the production function exhibits DRS.

3.7.1 Short Run Costs

We have previously discussed the short run and the long run. In the short
run, some of the factors of production cannot be varied, and therefore,
remain fixed. The cost that a firm incurs to employ these fixed inputs is
called the total fixed cost (TFC). Whatever amount of output the firm

Reprint 2025-26

Production and Costs



produces, this cost remains fixed for the firm. To produce any required
level of output, the firm, in the short run, can adjust only variable inputs.
Accordingly, the cost that a firm incurs to employ these variable inputs is
called the total variable cost (TVC). Adding the fixed and the variable costs,
we get the total cost (TC) of a firm

TC = TVC + TFC (3.6)

In order to increase the production of output, the firm must employ more of
the variable inputs. As a result, total variable cost and total cost will increase.
Therefore, as output increases, total variable cost and total cost increase.

In Table 3.3, we have an example of cost function of a typical firm. The first
column shows different levels of output. For all levels of output, the total fixed
cost is Rs 20. Total variable cost increases as output increases. With output
zero, TVC is zero. For 1 unit of output, TVC is Rs 10; for 2 units of output, TVC
is Rs 18 and so on. In the fourth column, we obtain the total cost (TC) as the
sum of the corresponding values in second column (TFC) and third column
(TVC). At zero level of output, TC is just the fixed cost, and hence, equal to Rs
20. For 1 unit of output, total cost is Rs 30; for 2 units of output, the TC is Rs 38
and so on.

The short run average cost (SAC) incurred by the firm is defined as the
total cost per unit of output. We calculate it as

TC
SAC = q (3.7)

In Table 3.3, we get the SAC-column by dividing the values of the fourth
column by the corresponding values of the first column. At zero output, SAC is
undefined. For the first unit, SAC is Rs 30; for 2 units of output, SAC is Rs 19
and so on.

Similarly, the average variable cost (AVC) is defined as the total variable
cost per unit of output. We calculate it as

44 TVC
AVC = q (3.8)

Also, average fixed cost (AFC) is

TFC
AFC = q (3.9)

Clearly,

SAC = AVC + AFC (3.10)

In Table 3.3, we get the AFC-column by dividing the values of the second
column by the corresponding values of the first column. Similarly, we get the
AVC-column by dividing the values of the third column by the corresponding
values of the first column. At zero level of output, both AFC and AVC are
undefined. For the first unit of output, AFC is Rs 20 and AVC is Rs 10. Adding
them, we get the SAC equal to Rs 30.

The short run marginal cost (SMC) is defined as the change in total cost
per unit of change in output

change in total cost ∆TC
SMC = change in output  = ∆q (3.11)

where ∆ represents the change in the value of the variable.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



The last column in table 3.3 gives a numerical example for the calculation of
SMC. Values in this column are obtained by dividing the change in TC by the
change in output, at each level of output.

Thus at q=5,
Change in TC = (TC at q=5) - (TC at q=4)   (3.12)

= (53) – (49)
= 4

Change in q = 1
SMC = 4/1 = 4

Table 3.3: Various Concepts of Costs

Output TFC TVC  TC AFC AVC SAC SMC
(units) (q) (Rs) (Rs) (Rs) (Rs) (Rs) (Rs) (Rs)

0 20 0 20 – – – –
1 20 10 30 20 10 30 10
2 20 18 38 10 9 19 8
3 20 24 44 6.67 8 14.67 6
4 20 29 49 5 7.25 12.25 5
5 20 33 53 4 6.6 10.6 4
6 20 39 59 3.33 6.5 9.83 6
7 20 47 67 2.86 6.7 9.57 8
8 20 60 80 2.5 7.5 10 13
9 20 75 95 2.22 8.33 10.55 15
10 20 95 115 2 9.5 11.5 20

Just like the case of marginal product, marginal cost also is undefined at
zero level of output. It is important to note here that in the short run, fixed cost
cannot be changed. When we change the level of output, whatever change occurs
to total cost is entirely due to the change in total variable cost. So in the short 45

run, marginal cost is the increase in TVC due to increase in production of one
extra unit of output. For any level of output, the sum of marginal costs up to
that level gives us the total variable cost at that level. One may wish to check this
from the example represented
through Table 3.3. Average variable Costs

cost at some level of output is TC

therefore, the average of all marginal
TVC

costs up to that level. In Table 3.3,
we see that when the output is zero,

c3

SMC is undefined. For the first unit
c

of output, SMC is Rs 10; for the 2

second unit, the SMC is Rs 8 and so
on.

c1 TFC
Shapes of the Short Run Cost
Curves O q1 Otput

Now let us see what these short run Fig. 3.3
cost curves look like. You could plot
the data from in table 3.3 by placing Costs. These are total fixed cost (TFC), total

variable cost (TVC) and total cost (TC) curves
output on the x-axis and costs on

for a firm. Total cost is the vertical sum of total
the y-axis. fixed cost and total variable cost.

Reprint 2025-26

Production and Costs



Previously, we have discussed
that in order to increase the Cost

production of output the firm needs
to employ more of the variable
inputs. This results in an increase
in total variable cost, and hence, an
increase in total cost. Therefore, as
output increases, total variable cost F C

and total cost increase. Total fixed
cost, however, is independent of the
amount of output produced and AFC

remains constant for all levels of O q1

production. Output

Figure 3.3 illustrates the shapes Fig. 3.4
of total fixed cost, total variable cost

Average Fixed Cost. The average fixed cost
and total cost curves for a typical curve is a rectangular hyperbola. The area
firm. We place output on the x-axis of the rectangle OFCq  gives us the total

1
and costs on the y-axis. TFC is a fixed cost.
constant which takes the value c

1
and does not change with the change in output. It is, therefore, a horizontal
straight line cutting the cost axis at the point c . At q , TVC is c  and TC is c .

1 1 2 3
AFC is the ratio of TFC to q. TFC is a constant. Therefore, as q increases, AFC

decreases. When output is very close to zero, AFC is arbitrarily large, and as
output moves towards infinity, AFC moves towards zero. AFC curve is, in fact, a
rectangular hyperbola. If we multiply any value q of output with its
corresponding AFC, we always get a constant, namely TFC.

Figure 3.4 shows the shape of average fixed cost curve for a typical firm.
We measure output along the horizontal axis and AFC along the vertical axis.
At q  level of output, we get the corresponding average fixed cost at F. The TFC

1
can be calculated as

46 TFC = AFC × quantity
= OF × Oq

1

= the area of the rectangle OFCq
1

Cost
We can also calculate AFC

from TFC curve. In Figure 3.5, the
horizontal straight line cutting
the vertical axis at F is the TFC
curve. At q  level of output, total

0

fixed cost is equal to OF. At q , the A
0 F TFC

corresponding point on the TFC
curve is A. Let the angle ∠AOq

0

be θ. The AFC at q  is
0

O
TFC q0 Output

AFC = quantity Fig. 3.5

Aq0 The Total Fixed Cost Curve. The slope of
=  Oq  = tanθ the angle ∠AOq  gives us the average fixed

0 0

cost at q .
0

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Let us now look at the SMC
curve. Marginal cost is the additional Cost

cost that a firm incurs to produce AVC

one extra unit of output. According
to the law of variable proportions,
initially, the marginal product of a
factor increases as employment

B
increases, and then after a certain V

point, it decreases. This means
initially to produce every extra unit
of output, the requirement of the
factor becomes less and less, and O q0 Output
then after a certain point, it becomes Fig. 3.6
greater and greater. As a result, with
the factor price given, initially the The Average Variable Cost Curve. The area

of the rectangle OVBq  gives us the total
SMC falls, and then after a certain 0

variable cost at q .
point, it rises. SMC curve is, 0

therefore, ‘U’-shaped.
At zero level of output, SMC is undefined. The TVC at a particular level of

output is given by the area under the SMC curve up to that level.
Now, what does the AVC curve look like? For the first unit of output, it is

easy to check that SMC and AVC are the same. So both SMC and AVC curves
start from the same point. Then, as output increases, SMC falls. AVC being the
average of marginal costs, also falls, but falls less than SMC. Then, after a point,
SMC starts rising. AVC, however, continues to fall as long as the value of SMC
remains less than the prevailing value of AVC. Once the SMC has risen sufficiently,
its value becomes greater than the value of AVC. The AVC then starts rising. The
AVC curve is therefore ‘U’-shaped.

As long as AVC is falling, SMC must be less than the AVC. As  AVC rises,
SMC must be greater than the AVC. So the SMC curve cuts the AVC curve from
below at the minimum point of AVC. 47

Cost

TVC
In Figure 3.7, we measure
output along the horizontal
axis and TVC along the vertical
axis. At q  level of output, OV is

0

the total variable cost. Let the
angle ∠E0q  be equal to θ. Then, E

0 V
at q , the AVC can be calculated

0

as

TVC
AV C = O q0

output Output

Eq Fig. 3.7
0

= Oq  = tan θ
0 The Total Variable Cost Curve. The slope

of the angle ∠EOqo gives us the average
variable cost at qo.

Reprint 2025-26

Production and Costs



In Figure 3.6 we measure output along the horizontal axis and AVC along
the vertical axis. At q  level of output, AVC is equal to OV . The total variable cost

0

at q  is
0

TVC = AVC × quantity

= OV × Oq
0

= the area of the
rectangle OV Bq .

0

Let us now look at SAC. SAC is the sum of AVC and AFC. Initially, both AVC
and AFC decrease as output increases. Therefore, SAC initially falls. After a certain
level of output production, AVC starts rising, but AFC continuous to fall. Initially
the fall in AFC is greater than the rise in AVC and SAC is still falling. But, after a
certain level of production, rise in AVC becomes larger than  the fall in AFC. From
this point onwards, SAC is rising. SAC curve is therefore ‘U’-shaped.

It lies above the AVC curve with the vertical difference being equal to the
value of AFC. The minimum point of SAC curve lies to the right of the minimum
point of AVC curve.

Similar to the case of AVC and SMC,  as long as SAC is falling, SMC is less
than the SAC. When SAC is rising, SMC is greater than the SAC. SMC curve cuts
the SAC curve from below at the minimum point of SAC.

Figure 3.8 shows the shapes of
short run marginal cost, average
variable cost and short run average Cost

SMC
cost curves for a typical firm. AVC
reaches its minimum at q  units of

1

output. To the left of q , AVC is falling SAC
1

and SMC is less than AVC. To the S AVC
right of q , AVC is rising and SMC is

1

greater than AVC. SMC curve cuts
P

the AVC curve at ‘P ’ which is the
48

minimum point of AVC curve. The
minimum point of SAC curve is ‘S ’
which corresponds to the output q . O q q

1 2
2 Output

It is the intersection point between
Fig. 3.8

SMC and SAC curves. To the left of
q , SAC is falling and SMC is less Short Run Costs. Short run marginal cost,

2

than SAC. To the right of q , SAC is average variable cost and average cost curves.
2

rising and SMC is greater than SAC.

3.7.2 Long Run Costs

In the long run, all inputs are variable. There are no fixed costs. The total cost
and the total variable cost therefore, coincide in the long run. Long run average
cost (LRAC) is defined as cost per unit of output, i.e.

TC
LRAC = q (3.13)

Long run marginal cost (LRMC) is the change in total cost per unit of change
in output. When output changes in discrete units, then, if we increase production
from q –1 to q  units of output, the marginal cost of producing q th unit will be

1 1 1

measured as

LRMC = (TC at q  units) – (TC at q  – 1 units) (3.14)
1 1

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Just like the short run, in the long run, the sum of all marginal costs up to
some output level gives us the total cost at that level.

Shapes of the Long Run Cost Curves

We have previously discussed the returns to scales. Now let us see their
implications for the shape of LRAC.

IRS implies that if we increase all the inputs by a certain proportion, output
increases by more than that proportion. In other words, to increase output by a
certain proportion, inputs need to be increased by less than that proportion.
With the input prices given, cost also increases by a lesser proportion. For example,
suppose we want to double the output. To do that, inputs need to be increased,
but less than double. The cost that the firm incurs to hire those inputs therefore
also need to be increased by less than double. What is happening to the average
cost here? It must be the case that as long as IRS operates, average cost falls as
the firm increases output.

DRS implies that if we want to increase the output by a certain proportion,
inputs need to be increased by more than that proportion. As a result, cost also
increases by more than that proportion. So, as long as DRS operates, the average
cost must be rising as the firm increases output.

CRS implies a proportional increase in inputs resulting in a proportional
increase in output. So the average cost remains constant as long as CRS operates.

It is argued that in a typical firm IRS is observed at the initial level of
production. This is then followed by the CRS and then by the DRS. Accordingly,
the LRAC curve is a ‘U’-shaped curve. Its downward sloping part corresponds
to IRS and upward rising part corresponds to DRS. At the minimum point of the
LRAC curve, CRS is observed.

Let us check how the LRMC curve looks like. For the first unit of output,
both LRMC and LRAC are the same. Then, as output increases, LRAC initially
falls, and then, after a certain point, it rises. As long as average cost is falling,
marginal cost must be less than
the average cost. When the LRMC 49

Cost
average cost is rising, marginal
cost must be greater than the
average cost. LRMC curve is LRAC

therefore a ‘U’-shaped curve. It
cuts the LRAC curve from below
at the minimum point of the M

LRAC. Figure 3.9 shows the
shapes of the long run marginal
cost and the long run average cost
curves for a typical firm.

LRAC reaches its minimum O q1 Output
at q . To the left of q , LRAC is

1 1 Fig. 3.9
falling and LRMC is less than the

Long Run Costs. Long run marginal cost and
LRAC curve. To the right of q ,

1 average cost curves.
LRAC is rising and LRMC is
higher than LRAC.

Reprint 2025-26

Production and Costs



• For different combinations of inputs, the production function shows the maximum
quantity of output that can be produced.

• In the short run, some inputs cannot be varied. In the long run, all inputs can be
varied.

• Total product is the relationship between a variable input and output when all
other inputs are held constant.

• For any level of employment of an input, the sum of marginal products of every
unit of that input up to that level gives the total product of that input at that
employment level.

• Both the marginal product and the average product curves are inverse ‘U’-shaped.
The marginal product curve cuts the average product curve from above at the
maximum point of average product curve.

• In order to produce output, the firm chooses least cost input combinations.

• Total cost is the sum of total variable cost and the total fixed cost.

• Average cost is the sum of average variable cost and average fixed cost.

• Average fixed cost curve is downward sloping.

• Short run marginal cost, average variable cost and short run average cost curves
are ‘U’-shaped.

• SMC curve cuts the AVC curve from below at the minimum point of AVC.

• SMC curve cuts the SAC curve from below at the minimum point of SAC.

• In the short run, for any level of output, sum of marginal costs up to that level
gives us the total variable cost. The area under the SMC curve up to any level of
output gives us the total variable cost up to that level.

• Both LRAC and LRMC curves are ‘U’ shaped.

• LRMC curve cuts the LRAC curve from below at the minimum point of LRAC.

Production function Short run
50 Long run Total product

Marginal product Average product
Law of diminishing marginal product Law of variable proportions

Returns to scale
Cost function Marginal cost, Average cost

1. Explain the concept of a production function.

2. What is the total product of an input?

3. What is the average product of an input?

4. What is the marginal product of an input?

5. Explain the relationship between the marginal products and the total product
of an input.

6. Explain the concepts of the short run and the long run.

7. What is the law of diminishing marginal product?

8. What is the law of variable proportions?

9. When does a production function satisfy constant returns to scale?

10. When does a production function satisfy increasing returns to scale?

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics

EEEEExxxxxeeeeerrrrrccccciiiiissssseeeeesssss KKKKKeeeeeyyyyy     CCCCCooooonnnnnccccceeeeeppppptttttsssss SSSSSuuuuummmmmmmmmmaaaaarrrrryyyyy



11. When does a production function satisfy decreasing returns to scale?

12. Briefly explain the concept of the cost function.

13. What are the total fixed cost, total variable cost and total cost of a firm? How are
they related?

14. What are the average fixed cost, average variable cost and average cost of a
firm? How are they related?

15. Can there be some fixed cost in the long run? If not, why?

16. What does the average fixed cost curve look like? Why does it look so?

17. What do the short run marginal cost, average variable cost and short run
average cost curves look like?

18. Why does the SMC curve cut the AVC curve at the minimum point of the AVC
curve?

19. At which point does the SMC curve cut the SAC curve? Give reason in support
of your answer.

20. Why is the short run marginal cost curve ‘U’-shaped?

21. What do the long run marginal cost and the average cost curves look like?

22. The following table gives the total product schedule of L TP
labour. Find the corresponding average product and L

marginal product schedules of labour. 0 0
1 15
2 35
3 50
4 40
5 48

23. The following table gives the average product schedule
L AP

of labour. Find the total product and marginal product L

schedules. It is given that the total product is zero at 1 2
zero level of labour employment. 2 3

3 4
51

4 4.25
5 4
6 3.5

24. The following table gives the marginal product schedule L MP
L

of labour. It is also given that total product of labour is
zero at zero level of employment. Calculate the total and 1 3
average product schedules of labour. 2 5

3 7
4 5
5 3
6 1

25. The following table shows the total cost schedule of a firm.
Q TC

What is the total fixed cost schedule of this firm? Calculate
the TVC, AFC, AVC, SAC and SMC schedules of the firm. 0 10

1 30
2 45
3 55
4 70
5 90
6 120

Reprint 2025-26

Production and Costs



26. The following table gives the total cost schedule of
Q TC

a firm. It is also given that the average fixed cost at
4 units of output is Rs 5. Find the TVC, TFC, AVC, 1 50
AFC, SAC and SMC schedules of the firm for the 2 65
corresponding values of output. 3 75

4 95
5 130
6 185

27. A firm’s SMC schedule is shown in the following
Q TC

table. The total fixed cost of the firm is Rs 100. Find
the TVC, TC, AVC and SAC schedules of the firm. 0 -

1 500
2 300
3 200
4 300
5 500
6 800

28. Let the production function of a firm be
1 1

Q = 5 L2 K 2

Find out the maximum possible output that the firm can produce with 100
units of L and 100 units of K.

29. Let the production function of a firm be

Q = 2L2K2

Find out the maximum possible output that the firm can produce with 5 units
of L and 2 units of K. What is the maximum possible output that the firm can
produce with zero unit of L and 10 units of K?

30. Find out the maximum possible output for a firm with zero unit of L and 10

52 units of K when its production function is

Q = 5L + 2K

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Chapter 4
The Theory of the Firm
under Perfect Competition

In the previous chapter, we studied concepts related to a firm’s
production function and cost curves. The focus of this chapter is
different. Here we ask : how does a firm decide how much to
produce? Our answer to this question is by no means simple or
uncontroversial. We base our answer on a critical, if somewhat
unreasonable, assumption about firm behaviour – a firm, we
maintain, is a ruthless profit maximiser. So, the amount that a
firm produces and sells in the market is that which maximises its
profit. Here, we also assume that the firm sells whatever it produces
so that ‘output’ and quantity sold are often used interchangebly.

The structure of this chapter is as follows. We first set up and
examine in detail the profit maximisation problem of a firm. Then,0
we derive a firm’s supply curve. The supply curve shows the levels
of output that a firm chooses to produce at different  market prices.
Finally, we study how to aggregate the supply curves of individual
firms and obtain the market supply curve.

4.1 PERFECT COMPETITION: DEFINING FEATURES

In order to analyse a firm’s profit maximisation problem, we must
first specify the market environment in which the firm functions.
In this chapter, we study a market environment called perfect
competition. A perfectly competitive market has the following
defining features:
1. The market consists of a large number of buyers and sellers
2. Each firm produces and sells a homogenous product. i.e., the

product of one firm cannot be differentiated from the product
of any other firm.

3. Entry into the market as well as exit from the market are free
for firms.

4. Information is perfect.
The existence of a large number of buyers and sellers means

that each individual buyer and seller is very small compared to
the size of the market. This means that no individual buyer or
seller can influence the market by their size. Homogenous products
further mean that the product of each firm is identical. So a buyer
can choose to buy from any firm in the market, and she gets the
same product. Free entry and exit mean that it is easy for firms to
enter the market, as well as to leave it. This condition is essential

Reprint 2025-26



for the large numbers of firms to exist. If entry was difficult, or restricted, then
the number of firms in the market could be small. Perfect information implies
that all buyers and all sellers are completely informed about the price, quality
and other relevant details about the product, as well as the market.
These features result in the single most distinguishing characteristic of perfect
competition: price taking behaviour. From the viewpoint of a firm, what does
price-taking entail? A price-taking firm believes that if it sets a price above the
market price, it will be unable to sell any quantity of the good that it produces.
On the other hand, should the set price be less than or equal to the market price,
the firm can sell as many units of the good as it wants to sell. From the viewpoint
of a buyer, what does price-taking entail? A buyer would obviously like to buy
the good at the lowest possible price. However, a price-taking buyer believes that
if she asks for a price below the market price, no firm will be willing to sell to her.
On the other hand, should the price asked be greater than or equal to the market
price, the buyer can obtain as many units of the good as she desires to buy.

Price-taking is often thought to be a reasonable assumption when the market
has many firms and buyers have perfect information about the price prevailing
in the market. Why? Let us start with a situation where each firm in the market
charges the same (market) price. Suppose, now, that a certain firm raises its
price above the market price. Observe that since all firms produce the same good
and all buyers are aware of the market price, the firm in question loses all its
buyers. Furthermore, as these buyers switch their purchases to other firms, no
“adjustment” problems arise; their demand is readily accommodated when there
are so many other firms in the market. Recall, now, that an individual firm’s
inability to sell any amount of the good at a price exceeding the market price is
precisely what the price-taking assumption stipulates.

4.2 REVENUE

We have indicated that in a perfectly competitive market, a firm believes that it
54 can sell as many units of the good as it wants by setting a price less than or equal

to the market price. But, if this is the case, surely there is no reason to set a price
lower than the market price. In other words, should the firm desire to sell some
amount of the good, the price that it sets is exactly equal to the market price.

A firm earns revenue by selling the good that it produces in the market. Let
the market price of a unit of the good be p. Let q be the quantity of the good
produced, and therefore sold, by the firm at price p. Then, total revenue (TR) of
the firm is defined as the market price of the good (p) multiplied by the firm’s
output (q). Hence,

TR = p × q
To make matters concrete, consider the following numerical example. Let the

market for candles be perfectly competitive and let the market price of a box of
candles be Rs 10. For a candle manufacturer, Table 4.1: Total Revenue
Table 4.1 shows how total revenue is related to
output. Notice that when no box is sold, Boxes sold   TR (in Rs)

TR is equal to zero; if one box of candles is sold, 0  0
TR is equal to 1×Rs 10= Rs 10; if two boxes of 1 10
candles are produced, TR is equal to 2 × Rs 10 2 20
= Rs 20; and so on. 3 30

We can depict how the total revenue changes 4 40
as the quantity sold changes through a Total 5 50
Revenue Curve. A total revenue curve plots

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



the quantity sold or output on the
X-axis and the Revenue earned on Revenue

the Y-axis. Figure 4.1 shows the
total revenue curve of a firm. Three TR

observations are relevant here.
First, when the output is zero, the
total revenue of the firm is also
zero. Therefore, the TR curve A
passes through point O. Second,
the total revenue increases as the
output goes up. Moreover, the
equation ‘TR = p  × q’ is that of a O q1 Output
straight line because p is constant. Fig. 4.1
This means that the TR curve is
an upward rising straight line. Total Revenue curve. The total revenue curve of

a firm shows the relationship between the total
Third, consider the slope of this

revenue that the firm earns and the output level of
straight line. When the output is the firm. The slope of the curve, Aq /Oq , is the

1 1
one unit (horizontal distance Oq

1 market price.
in Figure 4.1), the total revenue
(vertical height Aq  in Figure 4.1)

1

is p × 1 = p. Therefore, the slope of
the straight line is Aq /Oq  = p. Price

1 1

The average revenue ( AR ) of
a firm is defined as total revenue
per unit of output. Recall that if a
firm’s output is q and the market Price Line

p
price is p, then TR equals p × q.
Hence

TR p × q
AR = q  = q   = p

55
In other words, for a price-taking O Output
firm, average revenue equals the
market price. Fig. 4.2

Now consider Figure 4.2. Price Line. The price line shows the relationship
Here, we plot the average revenue between the market price and a firm’s output level.
or market price (y-axis) for The vertical height of the price line is equal to the

different values of a firm’s output market price, p.

(x-axis). Since the market price is
fixed at p, we obtain a horizontal straight line that cuts the y-axis at a height
equal to p. This horizontal straight line is called the price line. It is also the
firm’s AR curve under perfect competition The price line also depicts the demand
curve facing a firm. Observe that the demand curve is perfectly elastic. This means
that a firm can sell as many units of the good as it wants to sell at price p.

The marginal revenue (MR) of a firm is defined as the increase in total
revenue for a unit increase in the firm’s output. Consider table 4.1 again. Total
revenue from the sale of 2 boxes of candles is Rs.20. Total revenue from the sale
of 3 boxes of candles is Rs.30.

Change in total revenue 30 - 20
Marginal Revenue(MR) = = = 10

Changein quantity 3- 2

Reprint 2025-26

The Theory of the Firm
under Perfect Competition



Is it a coincidence that this is the same as the price? Actually it is not. Consider
the situation when the firm’s output changes from q to q . Given the market

1 2

price p,
MR = (pq –pq )/ (q –q )

2 1 2 1

      = [p (q –q )]/ (q –q )
2 1 2 1

      = p
Thus, for the perfectly competitive firm, MR=AR=p

In other words, for a price-taking firm, marginal revenue equals the market
price.

Setting the algebra aside, the intuition for this result is quite simple. When a
firm increases its output by one unit, this extra unit is sold at the market price.
Hence, the firm’s increase in total revenue from the one-unit output expansion –
that is, MR – is precisely the market price.

4.3 PROFIT MAXIMISATION

A firm produces and sells a certain amount of a good. The firm’s profit, denoted
by 1

 , is defined to be the difference between its total revenue (TR) and its total
cost of production (TC ). In other words

= TR – TC

Clearly, the gap between TR and TC is the firm’s earnings net of costs.
A firm wishes to maximise its profit. The firm would like to identify the quantity

q  at which its profits are maximum. By definition, then, at any quantity other
0

than q , the firm’s profits are less than at q . The critical question is: how do we
0 0

identify q ?
0

For profits to be maximum, three conditions must hold at q :
0

1. The price, p, must equal MC
2. Marginal cost must be non-decreasing at q

0

3. For the firm to continue to produce, in the short run, price must be greater
than the average variable cost (p > AVC); in the long run, price must be greater

56 than the average cost (p > AC).

4.3.1 Condition 1

Profits are the difference between total revenue and total cost. Both total revenue
and total cost increase as output increases. Notice that as long as the change in
total revenue is greater than the change in total cost, profits will continue to
increase. Recall that change in total revenue per unit increase in output is the
marginal revenue; and the change in total cost per unit increase in output is the
marginal cost. Therefore, we can conclude that as long as marginal revenue is
greater than marginal cost, profits are increasing. By the same logic, as long as
marginal revenue is less than marginal cost, profits will fall. It follows that for
profits to be maximum, marginal revenue should equal marginal cost.

In other words, profits are maximum at the level of output (which we have
called q ) for which MR = MC

0

For the perfectly competitive firm, we have established that the MR = P. So the
firm’s profit maximizing output becomes the level of output at which P=MC.

4.3.2 Condition 2

Consider the second condition that must hold when the profit-maximising output
level is positive. Why is it the case that the marginal cost curve cannot slope

1It is a convention in economics to denote profit with the Greek letter  .

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



downwards at the profit-
maximising output level? To
answer this question, refer once
again to Figure 4.3. Note that at
output levels q  and q , the

1 4

market price is equal to the
marginal cost. However, at the
output level q , the marginal

1

cost curve is downward sloping.
We claim that q  cannot be a

1

profit-maximising output level.
Why?

Observe that for all output
levels slightly to the left of q ,

1

the market price is lower than Conditions 1 and 2 for profit maximisation.

the marginal cost. But, the The figure is used to demonstrate that when the

argument outlined in  section market price is p, the output level of a profit-
maximising firm cannot be q  (marginal cost curve,

4.3.1 immediately implies that 1

MC, is downward sloping), q  and q (market price
2 3 

the firm’s profit at an output exceeds marginal cost), or q  and q (marginal cost
5 6 

level slightly smaller than q
1 exceeds market price).

exceeds that corresponding to
the output level q . This being the case, q  cannot be a profit-maximising

1 1

output level.

4.3.3 Condition 3

Consider the third condition that Price,
SMC

costs
must hold when the profit-
maximising output level is
positive. Notice that the third SAC

condition has two parts: one part
AVC

applies in the short run while the 57

other applies in the long run.
E B

Case 1: Price must be greater
p

than or equal to AVC in the A

short run
O q1

We will show that the Output

statement of Case 1 (see above) is Fig. 4.4

true by arguing that a profit-
Price-AVC Relationship with Profit

maximising firm, in the short run, Maximisation (Short Run).  The figure is used to
will not produce at an output level demonstrate that a profit-maximising firm produces
wherein the market price is lower zero output in the short run when the market price,
than the AVC. p, is less than the minimum of its average variable

cost (AVC). If the firm’s output level is q , the firm’s
1

Let us turn to Figure 4.4. total variable cost exceeds its revenue by an amount
equal to the area of rectangle pEBA.

Observe that at the output level q ,
1

the market price p is lower than
the AVC. We claim that q  cannot be a profit-maximising output level. Why?

1
Notice that the firm’s total revenue at q  is as follows

1

      TR = Price ×Quantity
= Vertical height Op × width Oq

1

= The area of rectangle OpAq
1

Reprint 2025-26

The Theory of the Firm
under Perfect Competition



Similarly, the firm’s total variable cost at q  is as follows
1

    TVC = Average variable cost × Quantity
= Vertical height OE × Width Oq

1

= The area of rectangle OEBq
1

Now recall that the firm’s profit at q  is TR – (TVC + TFC); that is, [the area of
1

rectangle OpAq ] – [the area of rectangle OEBq ] – TFC. What happens if the firm
1 1

produces zero output? Since output is zero, TR and TVC are zero as well. Hence,
the firm’s profit at zero output is equal to – TFC. But, the area of rectangle OpAq

1

is strictly less than the area of rectangle OEBq . Hence, the firm’s profit at q  is
1 1

[(area EBAp)-TFC], which is strictly less than what it obtains by not producing at
all. So, the firm will choose not to
produce at  all, and exit from the Price, LRMC
market. costs

Case 2: Price must be greater
than or equal to AC in the LRAC

long run

We will show that the statement of E B

Case 2 (see above) is true by
arguing that a profit-maximising

p
firm, in the long run, will not A

produce at an output level
wherein the market price is lower O q1 Output
than the AC. Fig. 4.5

Let us turn to Figure 4.5.
Observe that at the output level q , Price-AC Relationship with Profit

1 Maximisation (Long Run). The figure is used to
the market price p is lower than

demonstrate that a profit-maximising firm
the (long run) AC. We claim that produces zero output in the long run when the
q  cannot be a profit-maximising

1 market price, p, is less than the minimum of its
output level. Why? long run average cost (LRAC). If the firm’s output

58 Notice that the firm’s total level is q , the firm’s total cost exceeds its revenue
1

revenue, TR, at q  is the area of the by an amount equal to the area of rectangle pEBA.
1

rectangle OpAq  (the product of
1

price and quantity) while the firm’s
total cost, TC , is the area of the
rectangle OEBq  (the product of

1

average cost and quantity). Since
the area of rectangle OEBq  is

1

larger than the area of rectangle
OpAq , the firm incurs a loss at the

1

output level q . But, in the long
1

run set-up, a firm that shuts down
production has a profit of zero.
Again, the firm chooses to exit in
this case.

4.3.4 The Profit Maximisation
Problem: Graphical
Representation Geometric Representation of Profit

Maximisation (Short Run). Given market
Using the material in sections 3.1, price p, the output level of a profit-maximising
3.2 and 3.3, let us graphically firm is q . At q , the firm’s profit is equal to the

0 0

represent a firm’s profit area of rectangle EpAB.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



maximisation problem in the short run. Consider Figure 4.6. Notice that the
market price is p. Equating the market price with the (short run) marginal
cost, we obtain the output level q . At q , observe that SMC slopes upwards

0 0

and p exceeds AVC. Since the three conditions discussed in sections 3.1-3.3
are satisfied at q , we maintain that the profit-maximising output level of the

0

firm is q .
0

What happens at q ? The total revenue of the firm at q  is the area of
0 0

rectangle OpAq  (the product of price and quantity) while the total cost at q  is
0 0

the area of rectangle OEBq  (the product of short run average cost and quantity).
0

So, at q , the firm earns a profit equal to the area of the rectangle EpAB.
0

4.4 SUPPLY CURVE OF A FIRM

A firm’s ‘supply’ is the quantity that it chooses to sell at a given price, given
technology, and given the prices of factors of production. A table describing the
quantities sold by a firm at various prices, technology and prices of factors
remaining unchanged, is called a supply schedule. We may also represent the
information as a graph, called a supply curve. The supply curve of a firm shows
the levels of output (plotted on the x-axis) that the firm chooses to produce
corresponding to different values of the market price (plotted on the y-axis),
again keeping technology and prices of factors of production unchanged. We
distinguish between the short run supply curve and the long run supply
curve.

4.4.1 Short Run Supply Curve of a Firm

Let us turn to Figure 4.7 and derive a firm’s short run supply curve. We shall
split this derivation into two parts. We first determine a firm’s profit-maximising
output level when the market price is greater than or equal to the minimum
AVC. This done, we determine the firm’s profit-maximising output level when
the market price is less than the minimum AVC.

59
Case 1: Price is greater than
or equal to the minimum AVC

Price,
Suppose the market price is p , SMC

1 costs
which exceeds the minimum AVC.
We start out by equating p  with

1

SMC on the rising part of the SMC SAC

curve; this leads to the output level AVC

q . Note also that the AVC at q
1 1 p1

does not exceed the market price,
p . Thus, all three conditions

1
highlighted in section 3 are

p2

satisfied at q . Hence, when the
1

market price is p , the firm’s O q
1 1 Output

output level in the short run is
Fig. 4.7

equal to q .
1

 Market Price Values. The figure shows the
Case 2: Price is less than the output levels chosen by a profit-maximising firm
minimum AVC in the short run for two values of the market price:

Suppose the market price is p , p  and p . When the market price is p , the output
1 2 1

2

which is less than the minimum level of the firm is q ; when the market price is
1

p , the firm produces zero output.
AVC. We have argued (see 2

Reprint 2025-26

The Theory of the Firm
under Perfect Competition



condition 3 in section 3) that if a Price,
profit-maximising firm produces costs Supply

Curve
a positive output in the short run, (SMC)
then the market price, p , must be

2 SAC
greater than or equal to the AVC
at that output level. But notice AVC

from Figure 4.7 that for all positive
output levels, AVC strictly exceeds
p . In other words, it cannot be the

2

case that the firm supplies a
positive output. So, if the market

O
price is p , the firm produces zero Output

2

output. Fig. 4.8
Combining cases 1 and 2, we

The Short Run Supply Curve of a Firm. The
reach an important conclusion. A

short run supply curve of a firm, which is based
firm’s short run supply curve is on its short run marginal cost curve (SMC) and
the rising part of the SMC curve average variable cost curve (AVC), is represented

from and above the minimum AVC by the bold line.

together with zero output for all prices strictly less than the minimum AVC. In
figure 4.8, the bold line represents the short run supply curve of the firm.

4.4.2 Long Run Supply Curve of a Firm

Let us turn to Figure 4.9 and
Price, LRMC

derive the firm’s long run supply
costs

curve. As in the short run case,
we split the derivation into two

LRAC
parts. We first determine the firm’s

p
profit-maximising output level 1

when the market price is greater
60 than or equal to the minimum

(long run) AC. This done, we
determine the firm’s profit-

p2

maximising output level when the
market price is less than the O q1 Output

minimum (long run) AC. Fig. 4.9

Case 1: Price greater than or Profit maximisation in the Long Run for
equal to the minimum LRAC Different Market Price Values. The figure

shows the output levels chosen by a profit-
Suppose the market price is p ,

1 maximising firm in the long run for two values
which exceeds the minimum of the market price: p  and p . When the market

1 2
LRAC. Upon equating p  with

1 price is p , the output level of the firm is q ;
1 1

LRMC on the rising part of the when the market price is p , the firm produces
2

LRMC curve, we obtain output zero output.

level q . Note also that the LRAC
1

at q  does not exceed the market price, p . Thus, all three conditions
1 1

highlighted in section 3 are satisfied at q . Hence, when the market price is
1

p , the firm’s supplies in the long run become an output equal to q .
1 1

Case 2: Price less than the minimum LRAC

Suppose the market price is p , which is less than the minimum LRAC. We have
2

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



argued (see condition 3 in section
Price, Supply Curve(LRMC)

3) that if a profit-maximising firm costs
produces a positive output in the
long run, the market price, p ,

2 LRAC
must be greater than or equal to
the LRAC at that output level. But
notice from Figure 4.9 that for all
positive output levels, LRAC
strictly exceeds p . In other words,

2

it cannot be the case that the firm
supplies a positive output. So,
when the market price is p , the O Output

2

firm produces zero output. Fig. 4.10
Combining cases 1 and 2, we

The Long Run Supply Curve of a Firm. The
reach an important conclusion. A long run supply curve of a firm, which is based on
firm’s long run supply curve is the its long run marginal cost curve (LRMC) and long
rising part of the LRMC curve from run average cost curve (LRAC), is represented by
and above the minimum LRAC the bold line.

together with zero output for all
prices less than the minimum LRAC. In Figure 4.10, the bold line represents the
long run supply curve of the firm.

4.4.3 The Shut Down Point

Previously, while deriving the supply curve, we have discussed that in the short
run the firm continues to produce as long as the price remains greater than or
equal to the minimum of AVC. Therefore, along the supply curve as we move
down, the last price-output combination at which the firm produces positive
output is the point of minimum AVC where the SMC curve cuts the AVC curve.
Below this, there will be no production. This point is called the short run shut
down point of the firm. In the long run, however, the shut down point is the 61
minimum of LRAC curve.

4.4.4 The Normal Profit and Break-even Point

The minimum level of profit that is needed to keep a firm in the existing business
is defined as normal profit. A firm that does not make normal profits is not
going to continue in business. Normal profits are therefore a part of the firm’s
total costs. It may be useful to think of them as an opportunity cost for
entrepreneurship. Profit that a firm earns over and above the normal profit is
called the super-normal profit. In the long run, a firm does not produce if it
earns anything less than the normal profit. In the short run, however, it may
produce even if the profit is less than this level. The point on the supply curve at
which a firm earns only normal profit is called the break-even point of the firm.
The point of minimum average cost at which the supply curve cuts the LRAC
curve (in short run, SAC curve) is therefore the break-even point of a firm.

Opportunity cost

In economics, one often encounters the concept of opportunity cost.
Opportunity cost of some activity is the gain foregone from the second best
activity. Suppose you have Rs 1,000 which you decide to invest in your family
business. What is the opportunity cost of your action? If you do not invest

Reprint 2025-26

The Theory of the Firm
under Perfect Competition



this money, you can either keep it in the house-safe which will give you zero
return or you can deposit it in either bank-1 or bank-2 in which case you get
an interest at the rate of 10 per cent or 5 per cent respectively. So the maximum
benefit that you may get from other alternative activities is the interest from
the bank-1. But this opportunity will no longer be there once you invest the
money in your family business. The opportunity cost of investing the money
in your family business is therefore the amount of forgone interest from the
bank-1.

4.5 DETERMINANTS OF A FIRM’S SUPPLY CURVE

In the previous section, we have seen that a firm’s supply curve is a part of its
marginal cost curve. Thus, any factor that affects a firm’s marginal cost curve is
of course a determinant of its supply curve. In this section, we discuss two
such factors.

4.5.1 Technological Progress

Suppose a firm uses two factors of production – say, capital and labour – to
produce a certain good. Subsequent to an organisational innovation by the firm,
the same levels of capital and labour now produce more units of output. Put
differently, to produce a given level of output, the organisational innovation allows
the firm to use fewer units of inputs. It is expected that this will lower the firm’s
marginal cost at any level of output; that is, there is a rightward (or downward)
shift of the MC curve. As the firm’s supply curve is essentially a segment of the
MC curve, technological progress shifts the supply curve of the firm to the right.
At any given market price, the firm now supplies more units of output.

4.5.2 Input Prices

A change in input prices also affects a firm’s supply curve. If the price of an
62 input (say, the wage rate of labour) increases, the cost of production rises. The

consequent increase in the firm’s average cost at any level of output is usually
accompanied by an increase in the firm’s marginal cost at any level of output;
that is, there is a leftward (or upward) shift of the MC curve. This means that the
firm’s supply curve shifts to the left: at any given market price, the firm now
supplies fewer units of output.

Impact of a unit tax on supply

A unit tax is a tax that the government imposes per unit sale of output. For
example, suppose that the unit tax imposed by the government is Rs 2.
Then, if the firm produces and sells 10 units of the good, the total tax that
the firm must pay to the government is 10 × Rs 2 = Rs 20.

How does the long run supply curve of a firm change when a unit tax is
imposed? Let us turn to figure 4.11. Before the unit tax is imposed, LRMC0

and LRAC0 are, respectively, the long run marginal cost curve and the long
run average cost curve of the firm. Now, suppose the government puts in
place a unit tax of Rs t. Since the firm must pay an extra Rs t for each unit
of the good produced, the firm’s long run average cost and long run marginal
cost at any level of output increases by Rs t. In Figure 4.11, LRMC1 and
LRAC1 are, respectively, the long run marginal cost curve and the long run
average cost curve of the firm upon imposition of the unit tax.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Recall that the long run supply curve of a firm is the rising part of the
LRMC curve from and above the minimum LRAC together with zero output
for all prices less than the minimum LRAC. Using this observation in Figure
4.12, it is immediate that S0 and S1 are, respectively, the long run supply
curve of the firm before and after the imposition of the unit tax. Notice that
the unit tax shifts the firm’s long run supply curve to the left: at any given
market price, the firm now supplies fewer units of output.

1
LRMC Price 1

S 0
S

Costs
1

LRAC

0
LRMC

0
LRAC

0
p + t 0

p + t

t
0

p
0

p

O O q
q 0

0 Output Output

Fig. 4.11 Fig. 4.12

Cost Curves and the Unit Tax. LRAC0 Supply Curves and Unit Tax. S0 is the
and LRMC0 are, respectively, the long run supply curve of a firm before a unit tax
average cost curve and the long run is imposed. After a unit tax of Rs t is
marginal cost curve of a firm before a unit imposed, S1 represents the supply curve
tax is imposed. LRAC1 and LRMC1 are, of the firm.
respectively, the long run average cost
curve and the long run marginal cost curve
of a firm after a unit tax of Rs t is imposed.

4.6 MARKET SUPPLY CURVE
63

The market supply curve shows the output levels (plotted on the x-axis) that
firms in the market produce in aggregate corresponding to different values of
the market price (plotted on the y-axis).

How is the market supply curve derived? Consider a market with n firms:
firm 1, firm 2, firm 3, and so on. Suppose the market price is fixed at p. Then,
the output produced by the n firms in aggregate is [supply of firm 1 at price p]
+ [supply of firm 2 at price p] + ... + [supply of firm n at price p]. In other words,
the market supply at price p is the summation of the supplies of individual
firms at that price.

Let us now construct the market supply curve geometrically with just two
firms in the market: firm 1 and firm 2. The two firms have different cost structures.

Firm 1 will not produce anything if the market price is less than p1  while firm 2

will not produce anything if the market price is less than p2 . Assume also that

p2  is greater than p1 .
In panel (a) of Figure 4.13 we have the supply curve of firm 1, denoted by

S ; in panel (b), we have the supply curve of firm 2, denoted by S . Panel (c) of
1 2

Figure 4.13 shows the market supply curve, denoted by Sm. When the market

price is strictly below p1 , both firms choose not to produce any amount of the
good; hence, market supply will also be zero for all such prices. For a market

Reprint 2025-26

The Theory of the Firm
under Perfect Competition



price greater than or equal to p1  but strictly less than p2 , only firm 1 will produce
a positive amount of the good. Therefore, in this range, the market supply curve
coincides with the supply curve of firm 1. For a market price greater than or

equal to p2 , both firms will have positive output levels. For example, consider a
situation wherein the market price assumes the value p  (observe that p

3 3

exceeds p2 ). Given p , firm 1 supplies q  units of output while firm 2 supplies q
3 3 4

units of output. So, the market supply at price p  is q , where q  = q  + q . Notice
3 5 5 3 4

how the market supply curve, S , in panel (c) is being constructed: we obtain S
m m

by taking a horizontal summation of the supply curves of the two firms in the
market, S  and S .

1 2

Price

S1 S2

Sm

p3

p2

p1

O q3 O q4 O q5 Output
(a) (b) (c)

Fig. 4.13

The Market Supply Curve Panel. (a) shows the supply curve of firm 1. Panel (b) shows the
supply curve of firm 2. Panel (c) shows the market supply curve, which is obtained by taking
a horizontal summation of the supply curves of the two firms.

It should be noted that the market supply curve has been derived for a fixed
64 number of firms in the market. As the number of firms changes, the market

supply curve shifts as well. Specifically, if the number of firms in the market
increases (decreases), the market supply curve shifts to the right (left).

We now supplement the graphical analysis given above with a related
numerical example. Consider a market with two firms: firm 1 and firm 2. Let the
supply curve of firm 1 be as follows

0 : p < 10
S (p) = 

1 p – 10 : p ≥ 10

Notice that S (p) indicates that (1) firm 1 produces an output of 0 if the market
1

price, p, is strictly less than 10, and (2) firm 1 produces an output of (p – 10) if
the market price, p, is greater than or equal to 10. Let the supply curve of firm 2
be as follows

0 : p < 15
S (p) = 

2 p – 15 : p ≥ 15

The interpretation of S (p) is identical to that of S (p), and is, hence, omitted.
2 1

Now, the market supply curve, S (p), simply sums up the supply curves of the
m

two firms; in other words

S (p) = S (p) + S (p)
m 1 2

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



But, this means that S (p) is as follows
m

0 : p < 10


S (p) = p – 10 : p ≥ 10 and p < 15
m


(p – 10) + (p – 15) = 2p – 25 : p ≥ 15

4.7 PRICE ELASTICITY OF SUPPLY

The price elasticity of supply of a good measures the responsiveness of quantity
supplied to changes in the price of the good. More specifically, the price elasticity
of supply, denoted by e , is defined as follows

S

Percentage change in quantity supplied
Price elasticity of supply, e  = 

S Percentage change in price

∆Q
×100

Q ∆Q P
= = ×

       ∆P
×100 Q ∆P

P

Where ∆Q is the change in quantity of the good supplied to the market as market
price changes by ∆P .

To make matters concrete, consider the following numerical example. Suppose
the market for cricket balls is perfectly competitive. When the price of a cricket ball
is Rs10, let us assume that 200 cricket balls are produced in aggregate by the firms
in the market. When the price of a cricket ball rises to Rs 30, let us assume that 1,000
cricket balls are produced in aggregate by the firms in the market.

The percentage change in quantity supplied and market price can be estimated
using the information summarised in the table below:

65
         Price of Cricket balls (P)     Quantity of Cricket balls

       produced and sold (Q)

Old price  : P  = 10     Old quantity : Q  = 200
1 1

New price : P  = 30     New quantity: Q  = 1000
2 2

∆Q
Percentage change in quantity supplied= ×100

Q1

Q − Q
= 2 1 ×100

Q1

1000 − 200
= ×100

200

 = 400

∆P
Percentage change in market price = ×100

P1

Reprint 2025-26

The Theory of the Firm
under Perfect Competition



P2 − P
= 1 ×100

P1

      30 −10
= ×100

10

      = 200

400
Therefore, price elasticity of supply, e  = = 2

S 200
When the supply curve is vertical, supply is completely insensitive to price

and the elasticity of supply is zero. In other cases, when supply curve is
positively sloped, with a rise in price, supply rises and hence, the elasticity of
supply is positive. Like the price elasticity of demand, the price elasticity of
supply is also independent of units.

The Geometric Method

Consider the Figure 4.14. Panel (a) shows a straight line supply curve. S is a
point on the supply curve. It cuts the price-axis at its positive range and as we
extend the straight line, it cuts the quantity-axis at M which is at its negative
range. The price elasticity of this supply curve at the point S is given by the
ratio, Mq /Oq . For any point S on such a supply curve, we see that Mq  > Oq .

0 0 0 0

The elasticity at any point on such a supply curve, therefore, will be greater
than 1.

In panel (c) we consider a straight line supply curve and S is a point on it.
It cuts the quantity-axis at M which is at its positive range. Again the price
elasticity of this supply curve at the point S is given by the ratio, Mq /Oq .

0 0

Now, Mq  < Oq  and hence, e < 1. S can be any point on the supply curve,
0 0 S 

and therefore at all points on such a supply curve e  < 1.
S

Now we come to panel (b). Here the supply curve goes through the origin.
66 One can imagine that the point M has coincided with the origin here, i.e., Mq

0

has become equal to Oq . The price elasticity of this supply curve at the
0

point S is given by the ratio, Oq /Oq  which is equal to 1. At any point on a
0 0

straight line, supply curve going through the origin price elasticity will be
one.

Price Price Price

S S S
p0 p0 p0

O
M O q0 Output O q0 Output M q0 Output

(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 4.14

Price Elasticity Associated with Straight Line Supply Curves. In panel (a), price elasticity
(e ) at S is greater than 1. In panel (b), price elasticity (e ) at S is equal to 1. In panel (c), price

S S

elasticity (e ) at S is less than 1.
S

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



• In a perfectly competitive market, firms are price-takers.

• The total revenue of a firm is the market price of the good multiplied by the firm’s
output of the good.

• For a price-taking firm, average revenue is equal to market price.

• For a price-taking firm, marginal revenue is equal to market price.

• The demand curve that a firm faces in a perfectly competitive market is perfectly
elastic; it is a horizontal straight line at the market price.

• The profit of a firm is the difference between total revenue earned and total cost
incurred.

• If there is a positive level of output at which a firm’s profit is maximised in the
short run, three conditions must hold at that output level

(i) p = SMC
(ii) SMC is non-decreasing
(iii) p ≥ AV C.

• If there is a positive level of output at which a firm’s profit is maximised in the
long run, three conditions must hold at that output level

(i)  p = LRMC

(ii) LRMC is non-decreasing

(iii) p ≥ LRAC.

• The short run supply curve of a firm is the rising part of the SMC curve from and
above minimum AVC together with 0 output for all prices less than the minimum
AVC.

• The long run supply curve of a firm is the rising part of the LRMC curve from and
above minimum LRAC together with 0 output for all prices less than the minimum
LRAC.

• Technological progress is expected to shift the supply curve of a firm to the right.

• An increase (decrease) in input prices is expected to shift the supply curve of a
firm to the left (right).

• The imposition of a unit tax shifts the supply curve of a firm to the left.
67

• The market supply curve is obtained by the horizontal summation of the supply
curves of individual firms.

• The price elasticity of supply of a good is the percentage change in quantity
supplied due to one per cent change in the market price of the good.

Perfect competition Revenue, Profit

Profit maximisation Firms supply curve

Market supply curve Price elasticity of supply

1. What are the characteristics of a perfectly competitive market?
?

2. How are the total revenue of a firm, market price, and the quantity sold by the
firm related to each other?

3. What is the ‘price line’?

4. Why is the total revenue curve of a price-taking firm an upward-sloping straight

? line? Why does the curve pass through the origin?

Reprint 2025-26

EEEEExxxxxeeeeerrrrrccccciiiiissssseeeeesssss KKKKKeeeeeyyyyy     CCCCCooooonnnnnccccceeeeeppppptttttsssss SSSSSuuuuummmmmmmmmmaaaaarrrrryyyyy
The Theory of the Firm
under Perfect Competition



5. What is the relation between market price and average revenue of a price-
taking firm?

6. What is the relation between market price and marginal revenue of a price-
taking firm?

7. What conditions must hold if a profit-maximising firm produces positive output
in a competitive market?

8. Can there be a positive level of output that a profit-maximising firm produces
in a competitive market at which market price is not equal to marginal cost?
Give an explanation.

9. Will a profit-maximising firm in a competitive market ever produce a positive
level of output in the range where the marginal cost is falling? Give an
explanation.

10. Will a profit-maximising firm in a competitive market produce a positive level of
output in the short run if the market price is less than the minimum of AVC?
Give an explanation.

11. Will a profit-maximising firm in a competitive market produce a positive level of
output in the long run if the market price is less than the minimum of AC?
Give an explanation.

12. What is the supply curve of a firm in the short run?

13. What is the supply curve of a firm in the long run?

14. How does technological progress affect the supply curve of a firm?

15. How does the imposition of a unit tax affect the supply curve of a firm?

16. How does an increase in the price of an input affect the supply curve of a firm?

17. How does an increase in the number of firms in a market affect the market
supply curve?

18. What does the price elasticity of supply mean? How do we measure it?

19. Compute the total revenue, marginal
revenue and average revenue schedules Quantity Sold TR MR AR

in the following table. Market price of each 0
68 unit of the good is Rs 10.

1
2
3
4
5
6

20. The following table shows the
Quantity Sold TR (Rs) TC (Rs) Profit

total revenue and total cost
schedules of a competitive 0 0 5
firm. Calculate the profit at 1 5 7
each output level. Determine 2 10 10
also the market price of the

3 15 12
good.

4 20 15
5 25 23
6 30 33
7 35 40

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



21. The following table shows the total cost schedule
Output TC (Rs)

of a competitive firm. It is given that the price
of the good is Rs 10. Calculate the profit at each 0 5
output level. Find the profit maximising level of 1 15
output. 2 22

3 27
4 31
5 38
6 49
7 63
8 81
9 101
10 123

22. Consider a market with two
firms. The following table Price (Rs) SS  (units) SS  (units)

1 2

shows the supply schedules 0 0 0
of the two firms: the SS

1 1 0 0
column gives the supply

2 0 0
schedule of firm 1 and the
SS  column gives the supply 3 1 1

2

schedule of firm 2. Compute 4 2 2
the market supply schedule. 5 3 3

6 4 4

23. Consider a market with two
firms. In the following table, Price (Rs) SS  (kg) SS  (kg)

1 2

columns labelled as SS
1 0 0 0

and SS  give the supply
2 1 0 0

schedules of firm 1 and firm
2 0 0

2 respectively. Compute the
market supply schedule. 3 1 0 69

4 2 0.5
5 3 1
6 4 1.5
7 5 2
8 6 2.5

24. There are three identical firms in a market. The
following table shows the supply schedule of firm Price (Rs) SS  (units)

1

1. Compute the market supply schedule. 0 0
1 0
2 2
3 4
4 6
5 8
6 10
7 12
8 14

Reprint 2025-26

The Theory of the Firm
under Perfect Competition



25. A firm earns a revenue of Rs 50 when the market price of a good is Rs 10. The
? market price increases to Rs 15 and the firm now earns a revenue of Rs 150.

What is the price elasticity of the firm’s supply curve?

26. The market price of a good changes from Rs 5 to Rs 20. As a result, the quantity
supplied by a firm increases by 15 units. The price elasticity of the firm’s supply
curve is 0.5. Find the initial and final output levels of the firm.

27. At the market price of Rs 10, a firm supplies 4 units of output. The market price
increases to Rs 30. The price elasticity of the firm’s supply is 1.25. What quantity

? will the firm supply at the new price?

70

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory
Microeconomics



Chapter 5

Market Equilibrium SS

p
f

p*

This chapter will be built on the foundation laid down in Chapters p1

DD

2 and 4 where we studied the consumer and firm behaviour when
they are price takers. In Chapter 2, we have seen that an O q' q'

1 1 q* q2 q1

individual’s demand curve for a commodity tells us what quantity Quantity

a consumer is willing to buy at different prices when he takes price
as given. The market demand curve in turn tells us how much of
the commodity all the consumers taken together are willing to
purchase at different prices when everyone takes price as given.
In Chapter 4, we have seen that an individual firm’s supply curve
tells us the quantity of the commodity that a profit-maximising
firm would wish to sell at different prices when it takes price as
given and the market supply curve tells us how much of the
commodity all the firms taken together would wish to supply at
different prices when each firm takes price as given.

In this chapter, we combine both consumers’ and firms’
behaviour to study market equilibrium through demand-supply
analysis and determine at what price equilibrium will be attained.
We also examine the effects of demand and supply shifts on
equilibrium. At the end of the chapter, we will look at some of the
applications of demand-supply analysis.

5.1 EQUILIBRIUM, EXCESS DEMAND, EXCESS SUPPLY

A perfectly competitive market consists of buyers and sellers who
are driven by their self-interested objectives. Recall from Chapters
2 and 4 that objectives of the consumers are to maximise their
respective preference and that of the firms are to maximise their
respective profits. Both the consumers’ and firms’ objectives are
compatible in the equilibrium.

An equilibrium is defined as a situation where the plans of all
consumers and firms in the market match and the market clears.
In equilibrium, the aggregate quantity that all firms wish to sell
equals the quantity that all the consumers in the market wish to
buy; in other words, market supply equals market demand. The
price at which equilibrium is reached is called equilibrium price
and the quantity bought and sold at this price is called equilibrium
quantity. Therefore, (p*, q*) is an equilibrium if

qD(p∗) = qS(p∗)

Reprint 2025-26

Price



where p∗ denotes the equilibrium price and qD(p∗) and qS(p∗) denote the market
demand and market supply of the commodity respectively at price p∗.

If at a price, market supply is greater than market demand, we say that
there is an excess supply in the market at that price and if market demand
exceeds market supply at a price, it is said that excess demand exists in the
market at that price. Therefore, equilibrium in a perfectly competitive market
can be defined alternatively as zero excess demand-zero excess supply situation.
Whenever market supply is not equal to market demand, and hence the market
is not in equilibrium, there will be a tendency for the price to change. In the next
two sections, we will try to understand what drives this change.

Out-of-equilibrium Behaviour

From the time of Adam Smith (1723-1790), it has been maintained that in
a perfectly competitive market an ‘Invisible Hand’ is at play which changes
price whenever there is imbalance in the market. Our intuition also tells us
that this ‘Invisible Hand’ should raise the prices in case of ‘excess demand’
and lower the prices in case of ‘excess supply’. Throughout our analysis we
shall maintain that the ‘Invisible Hand’ plays this very important role.
Moreover, we shall take it that the ‘Invisible Hand’ by following this process
is able to reach the equilibrium. This assumption will be taken to hold in all
that we discuss in the text.

5.1.1 Market Equilibrium: Fixed Number of Firms

Recall that in Chapter 2 we have derived the market demand curve for price-
taking consumers, and for price-taking firms the market supply curve was
derived in Chapter 4 under the assumption of a fixed number of firms. In this
section with the help of these two curves we will look at how supply and demand
forces work together to determine where the market will be in equilibrium when
the number of firms is fixed. We will also study how the equilibrium price and

72 quantity change due to shifts in demand and supply curves.
Figure 5.1 illustrates equilibrium

for a perfectly competitive market Price
with a fixed number of firms. Here
SS denotes the market supply
curve and DD denotes the market

SS
demand curve for a commodity.
The market supply curve SS p2

shows how much of the
p*

commodity, firms would wish to
supply at different prices, and the

p
demand curve DD tells us how 1

DD
much of the commodity, the
consumers would be willing to O q'1 q'2 q* q2 q1 Quantity
purchase at different prices. Fig. 5.1
Graphically, an equilibrium is a
point where the market supply Market Equilibrium with Fixed Number of

curve intersects the market Firms. Equilibrium occurs at the intersection of the
market demand curve DD and market supply curve

demand curve because this is SS. The equilibrium quantity is q* and the equilibrium
where the market demand equals price is p*. At a price greater than p*, there will be
market supply. At any other point, excess supply, and at a price below p*, there will be
either there is excess supply or excess demand.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory Microeconomics



there is excess demand. To see what happens when market demand does not
equal market supply, let us look in figure 5.1 again.

In Figure 5.1, if the prevailing price is p , the market demand is q  whereas
1 1

the market supply is q1'  . Therefore, there is excess demand in the market equal
to q1' q . Some consumers who are either unable to obtain the commodity at all

1

or obtain it in insufficient quantity will be willing to pay more than p . The market
1

price would tend to increase. All other things remaining the same as price rises,
quantity demanded falls and quantity supplied increases. The market moves
towards the point where the quantity that the firms want to sell is equal to the
quantity that the consumers want to buy. This happens when price is p* , the
supply decisions of the firms only match with the demand decisions of the
consumers.

Similarly, if the prevailing price is p , the market supply (q ) will exceed the
2 2

market demand ( q2'  ) at that price giving rise to excess supply equal to q2' q .
2

Some firms will not be then able to sell  quantity they want to sell; so, they will
lower their price. All other things remaining the same as price falls, quantity
demanded rises, quantity supplied falls, and at p*, the firms are able to sell
their desired output since market demand equals market supply at that price.
Therefore, p* is the equilibrium price and the corresponding quantity q* is the
equilibrium quantity.

To understand the equilibrium price and quantity determination more
clearly, let us explain it through an example.

EXAMPLE  5.1

Let us consider the example of a market consisting of identical1 farms producing
same quality of wheat. Suppose the market demand curve and the market supply
curve for wheat are given by:

qD = 200 – p for 0 ≤ p ≤ 200

= 0 for p > 200 73

qS = 120 + p for p ≥ 10

= 0 for 0 ≤ p < 10

where qD and qS denote the demand for and supply of wheat (in kg) respectively
and p denotes the price of wheat per kg in rupees.

Since at equilibrium price market clears, we find the equilibrium price
(denoted by p*) by equating market demand and supply and solve for p*.

qD(p*) = qS(p*)

 200 – p* = 120 + p*

Rearranging terms,

2p* = 80

  p* = 40

Therefore, the equilibrium price of wheat is Rs 40 per kg. The equilibrium
quantity (denoted by q*) is obtained by substituting the equilibrium price into
either the demand or the supply curve’s equation since in equilibrium quantity
demanded and supplied are equal.

1Here, by identical we mean that all farms have same cost structure.

Reprint 2025-26

Market Equilibrium



qD = q* = 200 – 40 = 160

Alternatively,

qS = q* = 120 + 40 = 160

Thus, the equilibrium quantity is 160 kg.
At a price less than p*, say p1 = 25

qD = 200 – 25 = 175

qS = 120 + 25 = 145

Therefore, at p  = 25, qD > qS which implies that there is excess demand at
1

this price.
Algebraically, excess demand (ED) can be expressed as

ED(p) = qD – qS

= 200 – p – (120 + p)

= 80 – 2p

Notice from the above expression that for any price less than p*(= 40), excess
demand will be positive.

Similarly, at a price greater than p*, say p = 45
2 

qD = 200 – 45 = 155

qS = 120 + 45 = 165

Therefore, there is excess supply at this price since qS > qD. Algebraically,
excess supply (ES) can be expressed as

ES(p) = qS – qD

= 120 + p – (200 – p)

= 2p – 80

Notice from the above expression that for any price greater than p*(= 40),

74 excess supply will be positive.
Therefore, at any price greater than p*, there will be excess supply, and at

any price lower than p*,there will be excess demand.

Wage Determination in Labour Market

Here we will briefly discuss the theory of wage determination under a
perfectly competitive market structure using the demand-supply analysis.
The basic difference between a labour market and a market for goods is
with respect to the source of supply and demand. In the labour market,
households are the suppliers of labour and the demand for labour comes
from firms whereas in the market for goods, it is the opposite. Here, it is
important to point out that by labour, we mean the hours of work provided
by labourers and not the number of labourers. The wage rate is determined
at the intersection of the demand and supply curves of labour where the
demand for and supply of labour balance. We shall now see what the demand
and supply curves of labour look like.

To examine the demand for labour by a single firm, we assume that the
labour is the only variable factor of production and the labour market is
perfectly competitive, which in turn, implies that each firm takes wage rate
as given. Also, the firm we are concerned with, is perfectly competitive in

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory Microeconomics



nature and carries out production with the goal of profit maximisation. We
also assume that given the technology of the firm, the law of diminishing
marginal product holds.

The firm being a profit maximiser will always employ labour upto
the point where the extra cost she incurs for employing the last unit of
labour is equal to the additional benefit she earns from that unit. The
extra cost of hiring one more unit of labour is the wage rate (w). The
extra output produced by one more unit of labour is its marginal product
(MPL) and by selling each extra unit of output, the additional earning of
the firm is the marginal revenue (MR) she gets from that unit. Therefore,
for each extra unit of labour, she gets an additional benefit equal to
marginal revenue times marginal product which is called Marginal
Revenue Product of Labour (MRPL). Thus, while hiring labour, the firm
employs labour up to the point where

      w = MRPL

and MRPL = MR × MPL

Since we are dealing with a perfectly competitive firm, marginal
revenue is equal to the price of the commoditya and hence marginal
revenue product of labour in this case is equal to the value of marginal
product of labour (VMP ).

L

As long as the VMPL is greater than the wage rate, the firm will earn
more profit by hiring one more unit of labour, and if at any level of labour
employment VMPL is less than the wage rate, the firm can increase her
profit by reducing a unit of labour employed.

Given the assumption of the law of diminishing marginal product,
the fact that the firm always produces at w = VMP  implies that the

L

demand curve for labour is downward sloping. To explain why it is so,
let us assume at some wage rate w , demand for labour is l . Now, suppose

1 1
the wage rate increases to w . To maintain the wage-VMPL equality, VMP

2 L

should also increase. The price of the commodity remaining 75
constantb, this is possible
only if MPL increases which in

Wage
turn implies that less labour
should be employed owing to SL

the diminishing marginal
productivity of labour.
Hence, at higher wage, less
labour is demanded thereby w*

leading to a downward
sloping demand, curve. To
arrive at the market demand DL

curve from individual firms’
demand curve, we simply
add up the demand for O l* Labour(in hrs)
labour by individual firms at
different wages and since Wage is determined at the point where the labour
each firm demands less demand and supply curves intersect.
labour as wage increases, the
market demand curve is also downward sloping.

aRecall from Chapter 4 that for a perfectly competitive firm, marginal revenue equals price.
bSince the firm under consideration is perfectly competitive, it believes it cannot influence

the price of the commodity.

Reprint 2025-26

Market Equilibrium



Having explored the demand side, we now turn to the supply side.
As already mentioned, it is the households which determine how much
labour to supply at a given wage rate. Their supply decision is essentially
a choice between income and leisure. On the one hand, individuals enjoy
leisure and find work irksome and on the other, they value income for
which they must work.

So there is a trade-off between enjoying leisure and spending more
hours for work. To derive the labour supply curve for a single individual,
let us assume at some wage rate w , the individual supplies l  units of

1 1
labour. Now suppose the wage rises to w . This increase in wage rate will

2
have two effects: First, due to the increase in wage rate, the opportunity
cost of leisure increases which makes leisure costlier. Therefore, the
individual will want to enjoy less leisure. As a result, they will work for
longer hours. Second, because of the increase in wage rate to w , the

2
purchasing power of the individual increases. So, she would want to
spend more on leisure activities. The final effect of the increase in wage
rate will depend on which of the two effects predominates. At low wage
rates, the first effect dominates the second and so the individual will be
willing to supply more labour with an increase in wage rate. But at high
wage rates, the second effect dominates the first and the individual will
be willing to supply less labour for every increase in wage rate. Thus, we
get a backward bending individual labour supply curve which shows
that up to a certain wage rate for every increase in wage rate, there is an
increased supply of labour. Beyond this wage rate for every increase in
wage rate, labour supply will decrease. Nevertheless, the market supply
curve of labour, which we obtain by aggregating individuals’ supply at
different wages, will be upward sloping because though at higher wages
some individuals may be willing to work less, many more individuals
will be attracted to supply more labour.

With an upward sloping supply curve and downward sloping demand
curve, the equilibrium wage rate is determined at the point where these two

76 curves intersect; in other words, where the labour that the households wish
to supply is equal to the labour that the firms wish to hire. This is shown in
the diagram.

Shifts in Demand and Supply
In the above section, we studied market equilibrium under the assumption
that tastes and preferences of the consumers, prices of the related
commodities, incomes of the consumers, technology, size of the market, prices
of the inputs used in production, etc remain constant. However, with changes
in one or more of these factors either the supply or the demand curve or both
may shift, thereby affecting the equilibrium price and quantity. Here, we first
develop the general theory which outlines the impact of these shifts on
equilibrium and then discuss the impact of changes in some of the above
mentioned factors on equilibrium.

Demand Shift
Consider Figure 5.2 in which we depict the impact of demand shift when the
number of firms is fixed. Here, the initial equilibrium point is E where the market
demand curve DD  and the market supply curve SS  intersect so that q  and p

0 0 0 0
are the equilibrium quantity and price respectively.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory Microeconomics



Price Price

SS0 SS0

G E
p2 p0

F
p0 p1

E

DD2 DD0

DD0 DD1

O q0 q q¢¢
2 0 Quantity O q1

0 q1 q0 Quantity
Fig. 5.2 (a) (b)

Shifts in Demand. Initially, the market equilibrium is at E. Due to the shift in demand to the
right, the new equilibrium is at G as shown in panel (a) and due to the leftward shift, the new
equilibrium is at F, as shown in panel (b). With rightward shift the equilibrium quantity and price
increase whereas with leftward shift, equilibrium quantity and price decrease.

Now suppose the market demand curve shifts rightward to DD  with supply
2

curve remaining unchanged at SS , as shown in panel (a). This shift indicates
0

that at any price the quantity demanded is more than before. Therefore, at price
p  now there is excess demand in the market equal to q0q0'' . In response to this

0

excess demand some individuals will be willing to pay higher price and the price
would tend to rise. The new equilibrium is attained at G where the equilibrium
quantity q  is greater than q  and the equilibrium price p  is greater than p .

2 0 2 0

Similarly if the demand curve shifts leftward to DD , as shown in panel (b), at
1

any price the quantity demanded will be less than what it was before the shift.
Therefore, at the initial equilibrium price p  now there will be excess supply in

0

the market equal to q0' q0  in response to which some firms will reduce the price
of their commodity so that they can sell their desired quantity. The new 77
equilibrium is attained at the point F at which the demand curve DD  and the

1

supply curve SS  intersect and the resulting equilibrium price p  is less than p
0 1 0

and quantity q  is less than q . Notice that the direction of change in equilibrium
1 0

price and quantity is same whenever there is a shift in demand curve.
Having developed the general theory, we now consider some examples to

understand how demand curve and the equilibrium quantity and price are
affected in response to a change in some of the aforementioned factors which
are also enlisted in Chapter 2. More specifically, we would analyse the impact
of increase in consumers’ income and an increase in the number of consumers
on equilibrium.

Suppose due to a hike in the salaries of the consumers, their incomes increase.
How would it affect equilibrium? With an increase in income, consumers are able
to spend more money on some goods. But recall from Chapter 2 that the consumers
will spend less on an inferior good with increase in income whereas for a normal
good, with prices of all commodities and tastes and preferences of the consumers
held constant, we would expect the demand for the good to increase at each price
as a result of which the market demand curve will shift rightward. Here we consider
the example of a normal good like clothes, the demand for which increases
with increase in income of consumers, thereby causing a rightward shift in the
demand curve. However, this income increase does not have any impact on

Reprint 2025-26

Market Equilibrium



the supply curve, which shifts only due to some changes in the factors relating to
technology or cost of production of the firms. Thus, the supply curve remains
unchanged. In the Figure 5.2 (a), this is shown by a shift in the demand curve
from DD  to DD  but the supply curve remains unchanged at SS . From the figure,

0 2 0

it is clear that at the new equilibrium, the price of clothes is higher and the quantity
demanded and sold is also higher.

Now let us turn to another example. Suppose due to some reason, there is
increase in the number of consumers in the market for clothes. As the number
of consumers increases, other factors remaining unchanged, at each price, more
clothes will be demanded. Thus, the demand curve will shift rightwards. But
this increase in the number of consumers does not have any impact on the
supply curve since the supply curve may shift only due to changes in the
parameters relating to firms’ behaviour or with an increase in the number of
firms, as stated in Chapter 4. This case again can be illustrated through Figure
5.2(a) in which the demand curve DD  shifts rightward to DD , the supply curve

0 2

remaining unchanged at SS . The figure clearly shows that compared to the old
0

equilibrium point E, at point G which is the new equilibrium point, there is an
increase in both price and quantity demanded and supplied.

Supply Shift

In Figure 5.3, we show the impact of a shift in supply curve on the equilibrium
price and quantity. Suppose, initially, the market is in equilibrium at point E
where the market demand curve DD  intersects the market supply curve SS

0 0

such that the equilibrium price is p  and the equilibrium quantity is q .
0 0

78

Shifts in Supply. Initially, the market equilibrium is at E. Due to the shift in supply curve to the
left, the new equilibrium point is G as shown in panel (a) and due to the rightward shift the new
equilibrium point is F, as shown in panel (b). With rightward shift, the equilibrium quantity
increases and price decreases whereas with leftward shift,equilibrium quantity decreases and
price increases.

Now, suppose due to some reason, the market supply curve shifts leftward to
SS  with the demand curve remaining unchanged, as shown in panel (a). Because

2

of the shift, at the prevailing price, p , there will be excess demand equal to q0'' q  in
0 o

the market. Some consumers who are unable to obtain the good will be willing to
pay higher prices and the market price tends to increase. The new equilibrium is
attained at point G where the supply curve SS intersects the demand curve DD

2 0
such that q quantity will be bought and sold at price p . Similarly, when supply

2 2
curve shifts rightward, as shown in panel (b), at p  there will be supply excess of

0

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory Microeconomics



goods  equal to q q . n r spo se 
0 0' I e n to this excess supply, some firms will reduce

their price and the new equilibrium will be attained at F where the supply curve
SS intersects the demand curve DD such that the new market price is p at

1 0 1 
which q quantity is bought and sold.Notice the directions of change in price and

1  
quantity are opposite whenever there is a shift in supply curve.

Now with this understanding, we can analyse the behaviour of equilibrium
price and quantity when various aspects of the market change. Here, we will
consider the effect of an increase in input price and an increase in number of
firms on equilibrium.

Let us consider a situation where all other things remaining constant, there
is an increase in the price of an input used in the production of a commodity.
This will increase the marginal cost of production of the firms using this input.
Therefore, at each price, the market supply will be less than before. Hence, the
supply curve shifts leftward. In the Figure 5.3(a), this is shown by a shift in the
supply curve from SS  to SS . But this increase in input price has no impact on

0 2
the demand of the consumers since it does not depend on the input prices
directly. Therefore, the demand curve remains unchanged. In Figure 5.3(a), this
is shown by the demand curve remaining unchanged at DD . As a result,

0
compared to the old equilibrium, now the market price rises and quantity
produced decreases.

Let us discuss the impact of an increase in the number of firms. Since at
each price now more firms will supply the commodity, the supply curve shifts to
the right but it does not have any effect on the demand curve. This example can
be illustrated by Figure 5.3(b) where the supply curve shifts from SS  to SS

0 1
whereas the demand curve remains unchanged at DD . From the figure, we can

0
say that there will be a decrease in price of the commodity and increase in the
quantity produced compared to the initial situation.

Simultaneous Shifts of Demand and Supply

What happens when both demand and supply curves shift simultaneously?
The simultaneous shifts can happen in four possible ways: 79
(i) Both supply and demand curves shift rightwards.
(ii) Both supply and demand curves shift leftwards.
(iii) Supply curve shifts leftward and demand curve shifts rightward.
(iv) Supply curve shifts rightward and demand curve shifts leftward.

The impact on equilibrium price and quantity in all the four cases are
given in Table 5.1. Each row of the table describes the direction in which the
equilibrium price and quantity will change for each possible combination of
the simultaneous shifts in demand and supply curves. For instance, from the
second row of the table, we see that due to a rightward shift in both demand
and supply curves, the equilibrium quantity increases invariably but the
equilibrium price may either increase, decrease or remain unchanged. The
actual direction in which the price will change will depend on the
magnitude of the shifts. Check this yourself by varying the magnitude
of shifts for this particular case.

In the first two cases which are shown in the first two rows of the table, the
impact on equilibrium quantity is unambiguous but the equilibrium price may
change, if at all, in either direction depending on the magnitudes of shifts. In the
next two cases, shown in the last two rows of the table, the effect on price is
unambiguous whereas effect on quantity depends on the magnitude of shifts in
the two curves.

Reprint 2025-26

Market Equilibrium



Table 5.1:  Impact of Simultaneous Shifts on Equilibrium

Shift in Demand Shift in Supply Quantity Price

Leftward Leftward Decreases May increase,
decrease or
remain unchanged

Rightward Rightward Increases May increase,
decrease or
remain unchanged

Leftward Rightward May increase, Decreases
decrease or
remain unchanged

Rightward Leftward May increase, Increases
decrease or
remain unchanged

Here we give diagrammatic representations for case (ii) and case (iii) in Figure
5.4 and leave the rest as exercises for the readers.

80

Simultaneous Shifts in Demand and Supply. Initially, the equilibrium is at E where
the demand curve DD  and supply curve SS  intersect. In panel (a), both the supply and

0 0

the demand curves shift rightward leaving price unchanged but a higher equilibrium quantity.
In panel (b), the supply curve shifts rightward and demand curve shifts leftward leaving
quantity unchanged but a lower equilibrium price.

In the Figure 5.4(a), it can be seen that due to rightward shifts in both demand
and supply curves, the equilibrium quantity increases whereas the equilibrium
price remains unchanged, and in Figure 5.4(b), equilibrium quantity remains
the same whereas price decreases due to a leftward shift in demand curve and a
rightward shift in supply curve.

5.1.2 Market Equilibrium: Free Entry and Exit

In the last section, the market equilibrium was studied under the assumption
that there is a fixed number of firms. In this section, we will study market
equilibrium when firms can enter and exit the market freely. Here, for simplicity,
we assume that all the firms in the market are identical.

What is the implication of the entry and exit assumption? This assumption
implies that in equilibrium no firm earns supernormal profit or incurs loss by
remaining in production; in other words, the equilibrium price will be equal to
the minimum average cost of the firms.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory Microeconomics



To see why it is so, suppose, at the
prevailing market price, each firm is
earning supernormal profit. The
possibility of earning supernormal profit
will attract some new firms. As new
firms enter the market supply curve
shifts rightward. However, demand remains
unchanged. This causes market price to fall. As
prices fall, supernormal profits are eventually
wiped out. At this point, with all firms in the
market earning normal profit, no more firms will
have incentive to enter. Similarly, if the firms are
earning less than normal profit at the prevailing
price, some firms will exit which will lead to an
increase in price, and with sufficient number of
firms, the profits of each firm will increase to
the level of normal profit. At this point, no more
firm will want to leave since they will be earning
normal profit here. Thus, with free entry and

Free for all
exit, each firm will always earn normal profit at
the prevailing market price.

Recall from the previous chapter that the firms will earn supernormal profit
so long as the price is greater than the minimum average cost and at prices less
than minimum average cost, they will earn less than normal profit. Therefore, at
prices greater than the minimum average cost, new firms will enter, and at prices
below minimum average cost, existing firms will start exiting. At the price level
equal to the minimum average cost of the firms, each firm will earn normal profit
so that no new firm will be attracted to enter the market. Also the existing firms
will not leave the market since they are not incurring any loss by producing at
this point. So, this price will prevail in the market.

Therefore, free entry and exit of the firms imply that the market price will 81

always be equal to the minimum average cost, that is

p = min AC

From the above, it follows
that the equilibrium price will be
equal to the minimum average
cost of the firms. In equilibrium,
the quantity supplied will be
determined by the market
demand at that price so that they
are equal. Graphically, this is
shown in Figure 5.5 where the
market will be in equilibrium at
point E at which the demand
curve DD intersects the p  = min

0

AC line such that the market
Price Determination with Free Entry and

price is p  and the total quantity
0 Exit. With free entry and exit in a perfectly

demanded and supplied is competitive market, the equilibrium price is always
equal to q .

0 equal to min AC and the equilibrium quantity is
At p  = min AC each firm determined at the intersection of the market

0
supplies same amount of output, demand curve DD with the price line p = min AC.

Reprint 2025-26

Market Equilibrium



say q . Therefore, the equilibrium number of firms in the market is equal to the
0f 

number of firms required to supply q  output at p , each in turn supplying q
0 0 0f

amount at that price. If we denote the equilibrium number of firms by n , then
0  

q0
n  = 

0 q0 f

To understand the equilibrium price and quantity determination more
clearly, let us look at the following example.

EXAMPLE  5.2

Consider the example of a market for wheat such that the demand curve for
wheat is given as follows

qD = 200 – p for 0 ≤ p ≤ 200

= 0 for p > 200

Assume that the market consists of identical firms. The supply curve of a
single firm is given by

s
q = 10 + p for p ≥ 20

f

= 0 for 0 ≤ p < 20

The free entry and exit of firms would mean that the firms will never produce
below minimum average cost because otherwise they will incur loss from
production in which case they will exit the market.

As we know, with free entry and exit, the market will be in equilibrium at a
price which equals the minimum average cost of the firms. Therefore, the
equilibrium price is

p  = 20
0

At this price, market will supply that quantity which is equal to the market
demand. Therefore, from the demand curve, we get the equilibrium quantity:

82
q  = 200 – 20 = 180

0

Also at p  = 20, each firm supplies
0

q  = 10 + 20 = 30
0f

Therefore, the equilibrium number of firms is
q0 180

n  = q  =  = 6
0 0

f 30
Thus, with free entry and exit, the equilibrium price, quantity and number of
firms are Rs 20, 180 kg and 6 respectively.

Shifts in Demand

Let us examine the impact of shift in demand on equilibrium price and quantity
when the firms can freely enter and exit the market. From the previous section,
we know that free entry and exit of the firms would imply that under all
circumstances equilibrium price will be equal to the minimum average cost of
the existing firms. Under this condition, even if the market demand curve shifts
in either direction, at the new equilibrium, the market will supply the desired
quantity at the same price.

In Figure 5.6, DD  is the market demand curve which tells us how much
0

quantity will be demanded by the consumers at different prices and p  denotes
0

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory Microeconomics



the price which is equal to the minimum average cost of the firms. The initial
equilibrium is at point E where the demand curve DD cuts the p  = minAC line

0 0

and the total quantity demanded and supplied is q . The equilibrium number of
0

firms is n  in this situation.
0

Now suppose the demand curve shifts to the right for some reason. At p
0

there will be excess demand for the commodity. Some dissatisfied consumers
will be willing to pay higher price for the commodity, so the price tends to
rise. This gives rise to a possibility of earning supernormal profit which will
attract new firms to the market. The entry of these new firms will eventually
wipe out the supernormal profit and the price will again reach p . Now higher

0

quantity will be supplied at the same price. From the panel (a), we can see
that the new demand curve DD  intersects the p  = minAC line at point F such

1 0

that the new equilibrium will be (p , q ) where q  is greater than q . The new
0 1 1 0

equilibrium number of firms n  is greater than n  because of the entry of new
1 0

firms. Similarly, for a leftward shift of the demand curve to DD , there will be
2

Shifts in Demand. Initially, the demand curve was DD , the equilibrium quantity and price
0 83

were q  and p  respectively. With rightward shift of the demand curve to DD , as shown in
0 0 1

panel (a), the equilibrium quantity increases and with leftward shift of the demand curve to
DD , as shown in panel (b), the equilibrium quantity decreases. In both the cases, the equilibrium

2

price remains unchanged at p .
0

excess supply at the price p . In response to this excess supply, some firms,
0

which will be unable to sell their desired quantity at p , will wish to lower
0

their price. The price tends to decrease which will lead to the exit of some of
the existing firms and the price will again reach p . Therefore, in the new

0

equilibrium, less quantity will be supplied which will be equal to the reduced
demand at that price. This is shown in panel (b) where due to the shift of
demand curve from DD  to DD , quantity demanded and supplied will

0 2

decrease to q whereas the price will remain unchanged at p . Here, the
2 0

equilibrium number of firms, n  is less than n  due to the exit of some existing
2 0

firms. Thus, due to a shift in demand rightwards (leftwards), the equilibrium
quantity and number of firms will increase (decrease) whereas the
equilibrium price will remain unchanged.

Here, we should note that with free entry and exit, shift in demand has a
larger effect on quantity than it does with the fixed number of firms. But
unlike with fixed number of firms, here, we do not have any effect on
equilibrium price at all.

Reprint 2025-26

Market Equilibrium



5.2 APPLICATIONS

In this section, we try to understand how the supply-demand analysis can be
applied. In particular, we look at two examples of government intervention in
the form of price control. Often, it becomes necessary for the government to
regulate the prices of certain goods and services when their prices are either too

high or too low in comparison to the
desired levels. We will analyse these
issues within the framework of perfect
competition to look at what impact
these regulations have on the market for
these goods.

5.2.1 Price Ceiling

It is not very uncommon to come across
instances where government fixes a
maximum allowable price for certain
goods. The government-imposed upper
limit on the price of a good or service is
called price ceiling. Price ceiling is
generally imposed on necessary items
like wheat, rice, kerosene, sugar and it
is fixed below the market-determined
price since at the market-determined

Price Catcher price some section of the population
will not be able to afford these goods.

Let us examine the effects of price ceiling on market equilibrium through the
example of market for wheat.

Figure 5.7 shows the market
supply curve SS and the market

84 demand curve DD for wheat.
The equilibrium price and

quantity of wheat are p* and
q* respectively. When the
government imposes price ceiling

at p which is lower than the
c

equilibrium price level, there will
be an excess demand for wheat in
the market at that price. The
consumers demand q  kilograms

c

of wheat whereas  the  firms
Effect of Price Ceiling in Wheat Market. The

supply q '  kilograms. equilibrium price and quantity are p* and q*
c

Hence, though the intention of respectively. Imposition of price ceiling at p  gives
c

rise to excess demand in the wheat market.
the government was to help the
consumers, it could end up creating shortage of wheat. How is the quantity of
wheat (q' ) then distributed among the consumers? One way of doing this is to

c

distribute it to everyone, through a system of rationing. Ration coupons are
issued to the consumers so that no individual can buy more than a certain amount
of wheat and this stipulated amount of wheat is sold through ration shops which
are also called fair price shops.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory Microeconomics



In general, price ceiling accompanied by rationing of the goods may have the
following adverse consequences on the consumers: (a) Each consumer has to
stand in long queues to buy the good from ration shops. (b) Since all consumers
will not be satisfied by the quantity of the goods that they get from the fair price
shop, some of them will be willing to pay higher price for it. This may result in
the creation of black market.

5.2.2 Price Floor

For certain goods and services, fall Price
in price below a particular level is
not desirable and hence the
government sets floors or

SS
minimum prices for these goods
and services. The government- pf

imposed lower limit on the price
p*

that may be charged for a
particular good or service is called
price floor. Most well-known DD
examples of imposition of price
floor are agricultural price O qf q* q'f Quantity
support programmes and the Fig. 5.8
minimum wage legislation.

Through an agricultural price Effect of Price Floor on the Market for Goods.

support programme, the The market equilibrium is at (p*, q*). Imposition of
price floor at p  gives rise to an excess supply.

government imposes a lower limit f

on the purchase price for some of
the agricultural goods and the floor is normally set at a level higher than the
market-determined price for these goods. Similarly, through the minimum wage
legislation, the government ensures that the wage rate of the labourers does not
fall below a particular level and here again the minimum wage rate is set above
the equilibrium wage rate. 85

Figure 5.8 shows the market supply and the market demand curve for a
commodity on which price floor is imposed. The market equilibrium here would
occur at price p* and quantity q*. But when the government imposes a floor higher
than the equilibrium price at p , the market demand is q whereas the firms want

f f 

to supply q ′, thereby leading to an excess supply in the market equal to q q ′ .
f f f

In the case of agricultural support, to prevent price from falling because of
excess supply, government needs to buy the surplus at the predetermined price.

• In a perfectly competitive market, equilibrium occurs where market demand
equals market supply.

• The equilibrium price and quantity are determined at the intersection of the
market demand and market supply curves when there is fixed number of firms.

• Each firm employs labour upto the point where the marginal revenue product
of labour equals the wage rate.

• With supply curve remaining unchanged when demand curve shifts
rightward (leftward), the equilibrium quantity increases (decreases) and
equilibrium price increases (decreases) with fixed number of firms.

Reprint 2025-26

SSSSSuuuuummmmmmmmmmaaaaarrrrryyyyy

Market Equilibrium



• With demand curve remaining unchanged when supply curve shifts
rightward (leftward), the equilibrium quantity increases (decreases) and
equilibrium price decreases (increases) with fixed number of firms.

• When both demand and supply curves shift in the same direction, the effect
on equilibrium quantity can be unambiguously determined whereas the
effect on equilibrium price depends on the magnitude of the shifts.

• When demand and supply curves shift in opposite directions, the effect on
equilibrium price can be unambiguously determined whereas the effect on
equilibrium quantity depends on the magnitude of the shifts.

• In a perfectly competitive market with identical firms if the firms can enter
and exit the market freely, the equilibrium price is always equal to minimum
average cost of the firms.

• With free entry and exit, the shift in demand has no impact on equilibrium
price but changes the equilibrium quantity and number of firms in the same
direction as the change in demand.

• In comparison to a market with fixed number of firms, the impact of a shift
in demand curve on equilibrium quantity is more pronounced in a market
with free entry and exit.

• Imposition of price ceiling below the equilibrium price leads to an excess demand.
• Imposition of price floor above the equilibrium price leads to an excess supply.

Equilibrium
Excess demand
Excess supply
Marginal revenue product of labour
Value of marginal product of labour
Price ceiling, Price floor

86
1. Explain market equilibrium.

2. When do we say there is excess demand for a commodity in the market?

3. When do we say there is excess supply for a commodity in the market?

4. What will happen if the price prevailing in the market is
(i) above the equilibrium price?

(ii) below the equilibrium price?

5. Explain how price is determined in a perfectly competitive market with fixed
number of firms.

6. Suppose the price at which equilibrium is attained in exercise 5 is above the
minimum average cost of the firms constituting the market. Now if we allow for
free entry and exit of firms, how will the market price adjust to it?

7. At what level of price do the firms in a perfectly competitive market supply
when free entry and exit is allowed in the market? How is equilibrium quantity
determined in such a market?

8. How is the equilibrium number of firms determined in a market where entry
and exit is permitted?

9. How are equilibrium price and quantity affected when income of the consumers
(a) increase? (b) decrease?

10. Using supply and demand curves, show how an increase in the price of shoes
affects the price of a pair of socks and the number of pairs of socks bought and sold.

Reprint 2025-26

Introductory Microeconomics

EEEEExxxxxeeeeerrrrrccccciiiiissssseeeeesssss KKKKKeeeeeyyyyy     CCCCCooooonnnnnccccceeeeeppppptttttsssss



11.How will a change in price of coffee affect the equilibrium price of tea? Explain
the effect on equilibrium quantity also through a diagram.

12.How do the equilibrium price and quantity of a commodity change when price
of input used in its production changes?

13. If the price of a substitute(Y) of good X increases, what impact does it have on
the equilibrium price and quantity of good X?

14.Compare the effect of shift in demand curve on the equilibrium when the number
of firms in the market is fixed with the situation when entry-exit is permitted.

15.Explain through a diagram the effect of a rightward shift of both the demand
and supply curves on equilibrium price and quantity.

16.How are the equilibrium price and quantity affected when
(a) both demand and supply curves shift in the same direction?
(b) demand and supply curves shift in opposite directions?

17. In what respect do the supply and demand curves in the labour market differ
from those in the goods market?

18.How is the optimal amount of labour determined in a perfectly competitive market?

19.How is the wage rate determined in a perfectly competitive labour market?
20.Can you think of any commodity on which price ceiling is imposed in India?

What may be the consequence of price-ceiling?
21.A shift in demand curve has a larger effect on price and smaller effect on

quantity when the number of firms is fixed compared to the situation when
free entry and exit is permitted. Explain.

22.Suppose the demand and supply curve of commodity X in a perfectly competitive
market are given by:

qD = 700 – p
qS = 500 + 3p for p ≥ 15

= 0 for 0 ≤ p < 15
Assume that the market consists of identical firms. Identify the reason behind
the market supply of commodity X being zero at any price less than Rs 15.
What will be the equilibrium price for this commodity? At equilibrium, what
quantity of X will be produced?

23.Considering the same demand curve as in exercise 22, now let us allow for free 87

entry and exit of the firms producing commodity X. Also assume the market
consists of identical firms producing commodity X. Let the supply curve of a
single firm be explained as

qS  = 8 + 3p for p ≥ 20
f

= 0 for 0 ≤ p < 20
(a) What is the significance of p = 20?
(b) At what price will the market for X be in equilibrium? State the reason for

your answer.
(c) Calculate the equilibrium quantity and number of firms.

24.Suppose the demand and supply curves of salt are given by:

qD = 1,000 – p qS = 700 + 2p

(a) Find the equilibrium price and quantity.
(b) Now suppose that the price of an input used to produce salt has increased

so that the new supply curve is
qS = 400 + 2p
How does the equilibrium price and quantity change? Does the change
conform to your expectation?

(c) Suppose the government has imposed a tax of Rs 3 per unit of sale of salt.
How does it affect the equilibrium price and quantity?

25. Suppose the market determined rent for apartments is too high for common people
to afford. If the government comes forward to help those seeking apartments on rent
by imposing control on rent, what impact will it have on the market for apartments?

Reprint 2025-26

Market Equilibrium



Average cost Total cost per unit of output.

Average fixed cost Total fixed cost per unit of output.

Average product Output per unit of the variable input.

Average revenue Total revenue per unit of output.
Average variable cost Total variable cost per unit of output.

Break-even point is the point on the supply curve at which a firm
earns normal profit.

Budget line consists of all bundles which cost exactly equal to the
consumer’s income.

Budget set is the collection of all bundles that the consumer can
buy with her income at the prevailing market prices.

Constant returns to scale is a property of production function that
holds when a proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase
in output by the same proportion.

Cost function For every level of output, it shows the minimum cost
for the firm.

Decreasing returns to scale is a property of production function
 that holds when a proportional increase in all inputs results in an

increase in output by less than the proportion.

Demand curve is a graphical representation of the demand function.
It gives the quantity demanded by the consumer at each price.

Demand function A consumer’s demand function for a good gives
the amount of the good that the consumer chooses at different levels
of its price when the other things remain unchanged.

Duopoly is a market with just two firms.

Equilibrium is a situation where the plans of all consumers and
firms in the market match.

Excess demand If at a price market, demand exceeds market supply,
it is said that excess demand exists in the market at that price.

Excess supply If at a price market, supply is greater than market
demand, it is said that there is excess supply in the market at that
price.

Firm’s supply curve shows the levels of output that a profit-
maximising firm will choose to produce at different values of the
market price.

Fixed input An input which cannot be varied in the short run is
called a fixed input.

Reprint 2025-26





Income effect The change in the optimal quantity of a good when the purchasing
power changes consequent upon a change in the price of the good is called the
income effect.

Increasing returns to scale is a property of production function that holds when a
proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase in output by more than
the proportion.

Indifference curve is the locus of all points among which the consumer is indifferent.

Inferior good A good for which the demand decreases with increase in the income
of the consumer is called an inferior good.

Isoquant is the set of all possible combinations of the two inputs that yield the
same maximum possible level of output.

Law of demand If a consumer’s demand for a good moves in the same direction as
the consumer’s income, the consumer’s demand for that good must be inversely
related to the price of the good.

Law of diminishing marginal product If we keep increasing the employment of an
input with other inputs fixed then eventually a point will be reached after which the
marginal product of that input will start falling.

Law of variable proportions The marginal product of a factor input initially rises
with its employment level when the level of employment of the input is low. But after
reaching a certain level of employment, it starts falling.

Long run refers to a time period in which all factors of production can
be varied.

Marginal cost Change in total cost per unit of change in output.

Marginal product Change in output per unit of change in the input when all other
inputs are held constant.

Marginal revenue Change in total revenue per unit change in sale of output.

Marginal revenue product(MRP) of a factor Marginal Revenue times Marginal
Product of the factor.

Market supply curve shows the output levels that firms in the market produce in
aggregate corresponding to different values of the market price. 
Monopolistic competition is a market structure where there exit a very large
number of sellers selling differentiated but substitutable products.

Monopoly A market structure in which there is a single seller and there are sufficient
restrictions to prevent any other seller from entering the market.

Monotonic preferences A consumer’s preferences are monotonic if and only if
between any two bundles, the consumer prefers the bundle which has more of at
least one of the goods and no less of the other good as compared to the other bundle.

Normal good A good for which the demand increases with increase in the income of
the consumer is called a normal good.

Normal profit The profit level that is just enough to cover the explicit costs and
opportunity costs of the firm is called the normal profit.

Oligopoly A market consisting of more than one (but few) sellers is called a oligopoly.

Opportunity cost of some activity is the gain foregone from the second best activity.

Perfect competition A market environment wherein (i) all firms in the market
produce the same good and (ii) buyers and sellers are price-takers.

Price ceiling The government-imposed upper limit on the price of a good or service
is called price ceiling.

Price elasticity of demand for a good is defined as the percentage change in
demand for the good divided by the percentage change in its price.

Reprint 2025-26





Price elasticity of supply is the percentage change in quantity supplied due to a
one per cent change in the market price of the good.

Price floor The government-imposed lower limit on the price that may be charged
for a particular good or service is called price floor.

Price line is a horizontal straight line that shows the relationship between market
price and a firm’s output level.

Production function shows the maximum quantity of output that can be produced
by using different combinations of the inputs.

Profit is the difference between a firm’s total revenue and its total cost of production.

Short run refers to a time period in which some factors of production cannot be
varied.

Shut down point In the short run, it is the minimum point of AVC curve and in the
long run, it is the minimum point of LRAC curve.

Substitution effect The change in the optimal quantity of a good when its price
changes and the consumer’s income is adjusted so that she can just buy the bundle
that she was buying before the price change is called the substitution effect.

Super-normal profit Profit that a firm earns over and above the normal profit is
called the super-normal profit.

Total cost is the sum of total fixed cost and total variable cost.

Total fixed cost The cost that a firm incurs to employ fixed inputs is called the total
fixed cost.

Total physical product Same as the total product.

Total product If we vary a single input keeping all other inputs constant, then for
different levels of employment of that input we get different levels of output from the
production function. This relationship between the variable input and output is
referred to as total product.

Total return Same as the total product.

Total revenue is equal to the market price of the good multiplied by the quantity of
the good sold by a firm.

 Total revenue curve shows the relationship between firm’s total revenue and firm’s
output level.

Total variable cost The cost that a firm incurs to employ variable inputs is called
the total variable cost.

Value of marginal product (VMP) of a factor Price times Marginal Product of
the factor.

Variable input An input the amount of which can be varied.

Reprint 2025-26





Average cost Total cost per unit of output.

Average fixed cost Total fixed cost per unit of output.

Average product Output per unit of the variable input.

Average revenue Total revenue per unit of output.
Average variable cost Total variable cost per unit of output.

Break-even point is the point on the supply curve at which a firm
earns normal profit.

Budget line consists of all bundles which cost exactly equal to the
consumer’s income.

Budget set is the collection of all bundles that the consumer can
buy with her income at the prevailing market prices.

Constant returns to scale is a property of production function that
holds when a proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase
in output by the same proportion.

Cost function For every level of output, it shows the minimum cost
for the firm.

Decreasing returns to scale is a property of production function
 that holds when a proportional increase in all inputs results in an

increase in output by less than the proportion.

Demand curve is a graphical representation of the demand function.
It gives the quantity demanded by the consumer at each price.

Demand function A consumer’s demand function for a good gives
the amount of the good that the consumer chooses at different levels
of its price when the other things remain unchanged.

Duopoly is a market with just two firms.

Equilibrium is a situation where the plans of all consumers and
firms in the market match.

Excess demand If at a price market, demand exceeds market supply,
it is said that excess demand exists in the market at that price.

Excess supply If at a price market, supply is greater than market
demand, it is said that there is excess supply in the market at that
price.

Firm’s supply curve shows the levels of output that a profit-
maximising firm will choose to produce at different values of the
market price.

Fixed input An input which cannot be varied in the short run is
called a fixed input.

Reprint 2025-26





Income effect The change in the optimal quantity of a good when the purchasing
power changes consequent upon a change in the price of the good is called the
income effect.

Increasing returns to scale is a property of production function that holds when a
proportional increase in all inputs results in an increase in output by more than
the proportion.

Indifference curve is the locus of all points among which the consumer is indifferent.

Inferior good A good for which the demand decreases with increase in the income
of the consumer is called an inferior good.

Isoquant is the set of all possible combinations of the two inputs that yield the
same maximum possible level of output.

Law of demand If a consumer’s demand for a good moves in the same direction as
the consumer’s income, the consumer’s demand for that good must be inversely
related to the price of the good.

Law of diminishing marginal product If we keep increasing the employment of an
input with other inputs fixed then eventually a point will be reached after which the
marginal product of that input will start falling.

Law of variable proportions The marginal product of a factor input initially rises
with its employment level when the level of employment of the input is low. But after
reaching a certain level of employment, it starts falling.

Long run refers to a time period in which all factors of production can
be varied.

Marginal cost Change in total cost per unit of change in output.

Marginal product Change in output per unit of change in the input when all other
inputs are held constant.

Marginal revenue Change in total revenue per unit change in sale of output.

Marginal revenue product(MRP) of a factor Marginal Revenue times Marginal
Product of the factor.

Market supply curve shows the output levels that firms in the market produce in
aggregate corresponding to different values of the market price. 
Monopolistic competition is a market structure where there exit a very large
number of sellers selling differentiated but substitutable products.

Monopoly A market structure in which there is a single seller and there are sufficient
restrictions to prevent any other seller from entering the market.

Monotonic preferences A consumer’s preferences are monotonic if and only if
between any two bundles, the consumer prefers the bundle which has more of at
least one of the goods and no less of the other good as compared to the other bundle.

Normal good A good for which the demand increases with increase in the income of
the consumer is called a normal good.

Normal profit The profit level that is just enough to cover the explicit costs and
opportunity costs of the firm is called the normal profit.

Oligopoly A market consisting of more than one (but few) sellers is called a oligopoly.

Opportunity cost of some activity is the gain foregone from the second best activity.

Perfect competition A market environment wherein (i) all firms in the market
produce the same good and (ii) buyers and sellers are price-takers.

Price ceiling The government-imposed upper limit on the price of a good or service
is called price ceiling.

Price elasticity of demand for a good is defined as the percentage change in
demand for the good divided by the percentage change in its price.

Reprint 2025-26





Price elasticity of supply is the percentage change in quantity supplied due to a
one per cent change in the market price of the good.

Price floor The government-imposed lower limit on the price that may be charged
for a particular good or service is called price floor.

Price line is a horizontal straight line that shows the relationship between market
price and a firm’s output level.

Production function shows the maximum quantity of output that can be produced
by using different combinations of the inputs.

Profit is the difference between a firm’s total revenue and its total cost of production.

Short run refers to a time period in which some factors of production cannot be
varied.

Shut down point In the short run, it is the minimum point of AVC curve and in the
long run, it is the minimum point of LRAC curve.

Substitution effect The change in the optimal quantity of a good when its price
changes and the consumer’s income is adjusted so that she can just buy the bundle
that she was buying before the price change is called the substitution effect.

Super-normal profit Profit that a firm earns over and above the normal profit is
called the super-normal profit.

Total cost is the sum of total fixed cost and total variable cost.

Total fixed cost The cost that a firm incurs to employ fixed inputs is called the total
fixed cost.

Total physical product Same as the total product.

Total product If we vary a single input keeping all other inputs constant, then for
different levels of employment of that input we get different levels of output from the
production function. This relationship between the variable input and output is
referred to as total product.

Total return Same as the total product.

Total revenue is equal to the market price of the good multiplied by the quantity of
the good sold by a firm.

 Total revenue curve shows the relationship between firm’s total revenue and firm’s
output level.

Total variable cost The cost that a firm incurs to employ variable inputs is called
the total variable cost.

Value of marginal product (VMP) of a factor Price times Marginal Product of
the factor.

Variable input An input the amount of which can be varied.

Reprint 2025-26

