Supplementary Reader in English for Class XII 
(Core Course) 

Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   1 12/18/2024   10:00:46 AM



12075 – Vistas
Supplementary Reader for Class XII ISBN  81-7450-723-X

First Edition ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
April 2007   Chaitra 1929 	 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 

system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
Reprinted mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior 

permission of the publisher.
November 2007, February 2009, 

	 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of 
December 2009, February 2010, trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without 
January 2012, November 2012, the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than 
October 2013, December 2014, that in which it is published. 
December 2015, December 2016, 	 The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, 
November 2017, November 2018, any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or 

by any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
December 2018, August 2019, 
July 2021 and November 2021 OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION  

DIVISION, NCERT
Revised Edition

NCERT Campus
November 2022 Agrahayana 1944 Sri Aurobindo Marg

New  Delhi 110 016	 Phone :  011-26562708
Reprinted

108, 100 Feet Road 
March 2024	 Chaitra 1946 Hosdakere Halli Extension
December 2024 Agrahayana 1946 Banashankari III Stage

Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740

PD 700T+200T BS Navjivan Trust Building
P.O. Navjivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446

© National Council of  
CWC Campus

Educational Research  Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
and Training, 2007, 2022 Panihati

Kolkata 700 114	 Phone :  033-25530454

CWC Complex
Maligaon  
Guwahati 781 021	 Phone :  0361-2674869

` 40.00

Publication Team

Head, Publication	 :	M.V. Srinivasan
Division

Chief Editor 	 :	Bijnan Sutar

Chief Production	 :	Jahan Lal
Printed on 80 GSM paper with Officer (In charge)
NCERT watermark

Chief Business	 :	Amitabh Kumar
Published at the Publication Manager
Division by the Secretary, National 
Council of Educational Research Assistant Production	 :	Deepak Kumar 
and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg, Officer
New Delhi 110016 and printed at 
D.P. Printing & Binding, B-149, Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Okhla-I, A-1, New Delhi–110020 Joel Gill

Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   2 12-02-2025   12:38:56



Foreword
The National Curriculum Framework, 2005, recommends 
that children’s life at school must be linked to their life 
outside the school. This principle marks a departure from 
the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape 
our system and causes a gap between the school, home 
and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on 
the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic 
idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the 
maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject 
areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly 
further in the direction of a child-centred system of education 
outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).

The success of this effort depends on the steps that school 
principals and teachers will take to encourage children to 
reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative 
activities and questions. We must recognise that, given 
space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge 
by engaging with the information passed on to them by 
adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of 
examination is one of the key reasons why other resources 
and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and 
initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as 
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of 
knowledge.

These aims imply considerable change in school routines 
and mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is 
as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar 
so that the required number of teaching days are actually 
devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and 
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook 
proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, 
rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers 
have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by 
restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages 
with greater consideration for child psychology and the time 
available for teaching. The Supplementary Reader attempts 
to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and 
space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, 

Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   3 12/18/2024   10:00:46 AM



discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-
on experience.

The National Council of Educational Research and 
Training (NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the 
Textbook Development Committee responsible for this book. 
We wish to thank the Chairperson of the Advisory Committee 
in Languages, Professor Namwar Singh and the Chief Advisor 
for this book, Professor Amritavalli for guiding the work of this 
committee. Several teachers contributed to the development 
of this Supplementary Reader; we are grateful to their 
principals for making this possible. We are indebted to 
the institutions and organisations which have generously 
permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and 
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of 
the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the 
Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry 
of Human Resource Development under the Chairmanship 
of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for 
their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation 
committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement 
in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments 
and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further 
revision and refinement.

Director
	 National Council of 
New Delhi	 Educational Research 
20 November 2006 			   and Training

iv

Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   4 12/18/2024   10:00:46 AM



Rationalisation of Content in the 
Textbooks

In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to 
reduce content load on students. The National Education 
Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the content load 
and providing opportunities for experiential learning with 
creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has 
undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across 
all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed by the 
NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration 
in this exercise.

Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view 
of the following:

•	 Content based on genres of literature in the textbooks 
and supplementary readers at different stages of school 
education

•	 Content that is meant for achieving Learning Outcomes 
for developing language proficiency and is accessible at 
different stages 

•	 For reducing the curriculum load and examination stress 
in view of the prevailing condition of Pandemic

•	 Content, which is easily accessible to students without 
much interventions from teachers and can be learned 
by children through self-learning or peer-learning

•	 Content, which is irrelevant in the present context

This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying 
out the changes given above.

Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   5 12/18/2024   10:00:46 AM



Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   6 12/18/2024   10:00:46 AM



About the book

Vistas is a supplementary reader in English (Core course) for 
Class XII, based on the guidelines of the National Curriculum 
Framework 2005. The main objective of this book is to make 
extensive reading an enjoyable experience, lead students 
to appreciate some of the best examples of writing and 
understand the social milieu they live in.

An attempt has been made to attain these objectives by 
presenting varied themes and genres of writing. The themes 
range from scientific fantasy, political satire, and adventure, 
to ethical and moral issues and personal conflicts.

Jack Finney’s ‘The Third Level’ is a scientific fantasy, 
while ‘The Tiger King’ by Kalki is a political satire. 
‘Antartica’ is a travel piece, with a suggestion that the young 
reader could take part in the expedition by logging on to 
www.studentsonice.com.

The two stories that follow are by Pearl S. Buck. Buck’s 
story sets human fellow-feeling against national loyalty.  

The play by Susan Hill is on the themes of disabilities 
while excerpts from Bama’s ‘Karukku’ and an excerpt from 
‘The Land of the Red Apple’, a story in Zitkala-Sa’s, book 
‘The School Days of an Indian Girl’.

Each unit has questions. The question on the texts in 
the supplementary reader take the learner beyond factual 
comprehension to contemplating on the issues that the texts 
raise. Activities suggested take off from the texts.

What will now  
happen to the 

astrologer? Do you 
think the prophecy 
was indisputably 

disproved? 

Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   7 12/18/2024   10:00:46 AM



Gandhiji’s Talisman
I will give you a talisman. Whenever 
you are in doubt or when the self 
becomes too much with you, apply 
the following test:

Recall the face of the poorest 
and the weakest man whom you 
may have seen and ask yourself if 
the step you contemplate is going 
to be of any use to him. Will he 
gain anything by it? Will it restore 
him to a control over his own life 
and destiny? In other words, will 
it lead to Swaraj for the hungry 
and spiritually starving millions?

Then you will find your doubts 
and your self melting away.

Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   8 12/18/2024   10:00:47 AM



Textbook Development Committee
Chairperson, Advisory Committee for Textbooks in Languages 
at the Higher Secondary level

	 Namwar Singh, Professor and formerly Chairman, School 
of Languages, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

Chief Advisor

	 R. Amritavalli, Professor, English and Foreign Languages 
University (EFLU), Hyderabad

Chief Coordinator

	 Ram Janma Sharma, Professor and Former Head, 
Department of Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi

Members

Chaya Nautiyal, Deputy Director, Secondary Education, 
Directorate of Education, Allahabad
Gayatri Khanna, ELT Consultant, New Delhi
Indu Khetarpal, Principal, Salwan Public School, Gurgaon
Kirti Kapur, Assistant Professor, NCERT, New Delhi
Malathy Krishnan, Professor, EFLU, Hyderabad
Nasiruddin Khan, Reader (Retd.), NCERT, New Delhi
Pranjit Dev Savema, PGT, J.N.V, Roing, Arunachal Pradesh
Rajendrasinh Jadeja, Director,  H.M.Patel Institute of English 
Training and Research, Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat
Saryug Yadav, Associate Professor, RIE, Ajmer
S.K. Shyamla, PGT , Demonstration Multi Purpose School, 
RIE, Mysore

Member-coordinator	
Meenakshi Khar, Assistant Professor, Department of 
Education in Languages, NCERT, New Delhi

Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   9 12/18/2024   10:00:47 AM



Acknowledgements

The National Council of Educational Research and Training 
is grateful to Professor Harish Trivedi and Professor Alok 
Rai from the Department of English Delhi University and 
Vandana R Singh, Consultant Editor for going through the 
manuscript and making valuable suggestions. 

For permission to reproduce copyright material in 
this book, NCERT would like to thank The Hindu for 
‘Journey to the end of the Earth’ by Tishani Doshi and for 
Macmillan India Limited for Bama, ‘Karukku’, Dalit writing 
and Translation by Bama; Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd for 
‘The Tiger King’ by Kalki; and Blackwell Publishers for ‘The 
Cutting of my Long Hair’ by Zitkala-Sa.

The Council is grateful to the members of the Review 
Committee for Rationalisation of Curriculum constituted by 
Department of Curriculum Studies NCERT, from CBSE and 
Department of Education in Languages NCERT New Delhi 
for reviewing the textbooks and Supplementary Readers.

The Council acknowledges the services of Sunanda 
Khanna and G C Chandrakar, Copy Editors; Surender K 
Vats, Proof Reader; Mohd. Harun, DTP Operator; and Parash 
Ram Kaushik, Incharge, Computer Station. The efforts of the 
publication Department, NCERT are also highly appreciated.

It has not been possible to trace the copyright in all 
cases. The publishers apologise for any omissions and would 
be glad to hear from any such unacknowledged copyright 
holders. 

Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   10 12/18/2024   10:00:47 AM



Contents

	 Foreword		  iii	
	 Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks	 v	
	 About the Book	 	 vii	

1.	 The Third Level	 Jack Finney	 1	

2.	 The Tiger King	 Kalki	 8	

3.	 Journey to the end of the Earth	Tishani Doshi	 18

4.	 The Enemy	 Pearl S. Buck	 24

5.	 On the face of It	 Susan Hill	 47

6.	 Memories of Childhood		  62

	 •  The Cutting of My Long Hair	 Zitkala-Sa	
	 •  We Too are Human Beings	 Bama	

Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   11 12/18/2024   10:00:47 AM



Reprint 2025-26

Prelims.indd   12 12/18/2024   10:00:49 AM


##36##
1
The Third Level

Jack Finney

Before you read
Have you ever had any curious experience which others find hard to 
believe?

THE presidents of the New York Central and the 
New York, New Haven and Hartford railroads 
will swear on a stack of timetables that there 
are only two. But I say there are three, because 
I’ve been on the third level of the Grand Central 
Station. Yes, I’ve taken the obvious step: I talked What does
to a psychiatrist friend of mine, among others. I the third level
told him about the third level at Grand Central refer to?
Station, and he said it was a waking-dream 
wish fulfillment. He said I was unhappy. That made my wife kind 
of mad, but he explained that he meant the modern world is full 
of insecurity, fear, war, worry and all the rest of it, and that I just 
want to escape. Well, who doesn’t? Everybody I know wants to 
escape, but they don’t wander down into any third level at Grand 
Central Station.

But that’s the reason, he said, and my friends all agreed. 
Everything points to it, they claimed. My stamp collecting, for 
example; that’s a ‘temporary refuge from reality.’ Well, maybe, but 
my grandfather didn’t need any refuge from reality; things were 
pretty nice and peaceful in his day, from all I hear, and he started 
my collection. It’s a nice collection too, blocks of four of practically 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   1 12/16/2024   1:42:09 PM



every U.S. issue, first-day covers, and so on. President Roosevelt 
collected stamps too, you know. 

Anyway, here’s what happened 
at Grand Central. One night last 

summer I worked late at the office. 
I was in a hurry to get uptown to 

my apartment so I decided 
to take the subway from 

Grand Central because 
it’s faster than the bus.

Now, I don’t know 
why this should have 
happened to me. 
I’m just an ordinary 
guy named Charley, 
thirty-one years old, 
and I was wearing a 
tan gabardine suit 
and a straw hat 
with a fancy band; 

I passed a dozen men who looked just like me. And I wasn’t trying to 
escape from anything; I just wanted to get home to Louisa, my wife.

I turned into Grand Central from Vanderbilt Avenue, and went 
down the steps to the first level, where you take trains like the 
Twentieth Century. Then I walked down another flight to the second 
level, where the suburban trains leave from, ducked into an arched 
doorway heading for the subway — and got lost. That’s easy to do. 
I’ve been in and out of Grand Central hundreds of times, but I’m 
always bumping into new doorways and stairs and corridors. Once 
I got into a tunnel about a mile long and came out in the lobby of 
the Roosevelt Hotel. Another time I came up in an office building 
on Forty-sixth Street, three blocks away.

Sometimes I think Grand Central is growing like a tree, pushing 
out new corridors and staircases like roots. There’s probably a long 
tunnel that nobody knows about feeling its way under the city right 
now, on its way to Times Square, and maybe another to Central 
Park. And maybe — because for so many people through the years 

2 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   2 12/16/2024   1:42:10 PM



Grand Central has been an 
exit, a way of escape — maybe 
that’s how the tunnel I got 
into... But I never told my 
psychiatrist friend about that 
idea.

The corridor I was in began angling 
left and slanting downward and I thought 
that was wrong, but I kept on walking. All 
I could hear was the empty sound of my 
own footsteps and I didn’t pass a soul. Then 
I heard that sort of hollow roar ahead that 
means open space and people talking. 
The tunnel turned sharp left; I went down 
a short flight of stairs and came out on the 
third level at Grand Central Station. For just a 
moment I thought I was back on the second level, 
but I saw the room was smaller, there were fewer 
ticket windows and train gates, and the information 
booth in the centre was wood and old-looking. And 
the man in the booth wore a green eyeshade and 
long black sleeve protectors. The lights were dim and 
sort of flickering. Then I saw why; they were open-
flame gaslights.

There were brass spittoons on the floor, and 
across the station a glint of light caught my eye; 
a man was pulling a gold watch from his vest 
pocket. He snapped open the cover, glanced 
at his watch and frowned. He wore a 
derby hat, a black four-button suit 
with tiny lapels, and he had 
a big, black, handlebar 
mus tache .  Then  I 
looked around and 
saw that everyone in 
the station was dressed 
like eighteen-ninety-
something; I never saw so 

The Third Level 3

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   3 12/16/2024   1:42:11 PM



many beards, sideburns and fancy mustaches in my life. A woman 
walked in through the train gate; she wore a dress with leg-of-
mutton sleeves and skirts to the top of her high-buttoned shoes. 
Back of her, out on the tracks, I caught a glimpse of a locomotive, 
a very small Currier & Ives locomotive with a funnel-shaped stack. 
And then I knew.

To make sure, I walked over 
to a newsboy and glanced at the 

stack of papers at his feet. It was 
The World; and The World hasn’t been 

published for years. The lead story said 
something about President Cleveland. 

I’ve found that front page since, in the 
Public Library files, and it was printed 
June 11, 1894.

I turned toward the ticket windows 
knowing that here — on the third level at Grand Central — I could 
buy tickets that would take Louisa and me anywhere in the United 
States we wanted to go. In the year 1894. And I wanted two tickets 
to Galesburg, Illinois.

Have you ever been there? It’s a wonderful town still, with 
big old frame houses, huge lawns, and tremendous trees whose 
branches meet overhead and roof the streets. And in 1894, summer 
evenings were twice as long, and people sat out on their lawns, the 
men smoking cigars and talking quietly, the women waving palm-
leaf fans, with the fire-flies all around, in a peaceful world. To be 
back there with the First World War still twenty years off, and World 
War II over forty years in the future... I wanted two tickets for that.

The clerk figured the fare — he glanced at my fancy hatband, 
but he figured the fare — and I had enough for two coach tickets, 
one way. But when I counted out the money and looked up, the 
clerk was staring at me. He nodded at the bills. ‘‘That ain’t money, 
mister,’’ he said, ‘‘and if you’re trying to skin me, you won’t get very 
far,’’ and he glanced at the cash drawer beside him. Of course the 
money was old-style bills, half again as big as the money we use 
nowadays, and different-looking. I turned away and got out fast. 
There’s nothing nice about jail, even in 1894.

4 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   4 12/16/2024   1:42:11 PM



And that was that. I left the same way I came, 
I suppose. Next day, during lunch hour, I drew 
three hundred dollars out of the bank, nearly 
all we had, and bought old-style currency (that 
really worried my psychiatrist friend). You can 
buy old money at almost any coin dealer’s, but 

Would Charley ever you have to pay a premium. My three hundred 
go back to the ticket-
counter on the third dollars bought less than two hundred in old-style 
level to buy tickets bills, but I didn’t care; eggs were thirteen cents 
to Galesburg for a dozen in 1894.

himself and  But I’ve never again found the corridor that 
his wife? leads to the third level at Grand Central Station, 

although I’ve tried often enough.
Louisa was pretty worried when I told her all this, and didn’t 

want me to look for the third level any more, and after a while I 
stopped; I went back to my stamps. But now we’re both looking, 
every weekend, because now we have proof that the third level is 
still there. My friend Sam Weiner disappeared! Nobody knew where, 
but I sort of suspected because Sam’s a city boy, and I used to tell 
him about Galesburg — I went to school there — and he always 
said he liked the sound of the place. And that’s where he is, all 
right. In 1894.

Because one night, fussing with my stamp collection, I found — 
Well, do you know what a first-day cover is? When a new stamp is 
issued, stamp collectors buy some and use them to mail envelopes 
to themselves on the very first day of sale; and the postmark proves 
the date. The envelope is called a first-day cover. They’re never 
opened; you just put blank paper in the envelope.

That night, among my oldest first-day covers, I found one that 
shouldn’t have been there. But there it was. It was there because 
someone had mailed it to my grandfather at his home in Galesburg; 
that’s what the address on the envelope said. And it had been there 
since July 18, 1894 — the postmark showed that — yet I didn’t 
remember it at all. The stamp was a six-cent, dull brown, with a 
picture of President Garfield. Naturally, when the envelope came to 
Granddad in the mail, it went right into his collection and stayed 
there — till I took it out and opened it. 

The Third Level 5

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   5 12/16/2024   1:42:11 PM



The paper inside wasn’t blank. It read: 

941 Willard Street 
Galesburg, Illinois 

July 18, 1894
Charley

I got to wishing that you were right. Then I got to believing you were 
right. And, Charley, it’s true; I found the third level! I’ve been here two weeks, 
and right now, down the street at the Daly’s, someone is playing a piano, 
and they’re all out on the front porch singing ‘Seeing Nelly Home.’ And I’m 
invited over for lemonade. Come on back, Charley and Louisa. Keep looking 
till you find the third level! It’s worth it, believe me!

The note is signed Sam.

At the stamp and coin store I go to, I found out that Sam bought 
eight hundred dollars’ worth of old-style currency. That ought to set 
him up in a nice little hay, feed and grain business; he always said 
that’s what he really wished he could do, and he certainly can’t go 
back to his old business. Not in Galesburg, Illinois, in 1894. His 
old business? Why, Sam was my psychiatrist.

Reading with Insight
1.	 Do you think that the third level was a medium of escape 

for Charley? Why?
2.	 What do you infer from Sam’s letter to Charley?
3.	 ‘The modern world is full of insecurity, fear, war, worry and 

stress.’ What are the ways in which we attempt to overcome 
them?

4.	 Do you see an intersection of time and space in  the story?
5. 	 Apparent illogicality sometimes turns out to be a  futuristic 

projection? Discuss.

6 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   6 12/16/2024   1:42:11 PM



6.	 Philately helps keep the past alive. Discuss other  ways in 
which this is done. What do you think of  the human tendency 
to constantly move between  the past, the present and the 
future?

7.	 You have read ‘Adventure’ by Jayant Narlikar in  Hornbill 
Class XI. Compare the interweaving of  fantasy and reality 
in the two stories.

The Third Level 7

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 1.indd   7 12/16/2024   1:42:11 PM

##37##

2
The Tiger King

Kalki

I
Before you read

What is the general attitude of human beings towards  
wild animals?

THE Maharaja of Pratibandapuram is the hero of 
this story. He may be identified as His Highness 
Jamedar-General, Khiledar-Major, Sata Vyaghra 
Samhari, Maharajadhiraja Visva Bhuvana 
Samrat, Sir Jilani Jung Jung Bahadur, M.A.D., 
A.C.T.C., or C.R.C.K. But this name is often 
shortened to the Tiger King. Who is the Tiger 

King? Why does 
I have come forward to tell you why he came he get that

to be known as Tiger King. I have no intention of name?
pretending to advance only to end in a strategic 
withdrawal. Even the threat of a Stuka bomber will not throw me off 
track. The Stuka, if it likes, can beat a hasty retreat from my story.

Right at the start, it is imperative to disclose a matter of vital 
importance about the Tiger King. Everyone who reads of him will 
experience the natural desire to meet a man of his indomitable 
courage face-to-face. But there is no chance of its fulfilment. As 
Bharata said to Rama about Dasaratha, the Tiger King has reached 
that final abode of all living creatures. In other words, the Tiger 
King is dead.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   8 12/16/2024   1:42:54 PM



The manner of his death is a matter of extraordinary interest. 
It can be revealed only at the end of the tale. The most fantastic 
aspect of his demise was that as soon as he was born, astrologers 
had foretold that one day the Tiger King would actually have to die.

“The child will grow up to become the warrior of warriors, hero 
of heroes, champion of champions. But...” they bit their lips and 
swallowed hard. When compelled to continue, the astrologers came 
out with it. “This is a secret which should not be revealed at all. 
And yet we are forced to speak out. The child born under this star 
will one day have to meet its death.”

At that very moment a great miracle took place. An astonishing 
phrase emerged from the lips of the ten-day-old Jilani Jung Jung 
Bahadur, “O wise prophets!’’

Everyone stood transfixed in stupefaction. They looked wildly 
at each other and blinked.

‘‘O wise prophets! It was I who spoke.’’
This time there were no grounds for doubt. It was the infant 

born just ten days ago who had enunciated the words so clearly. 
The chief astrologer took off his spectacles and gazed intently 

at the baby.
‘‘All those who are born will one day have to die. We don’t need 

your predictions to know that. There would be some sense in it if 
you could tell us the manner of that death,’’ the royal infant uttered 
these words in his little squeaky voice.

The chief astrologer placed his finger on his nose in wonder. A 
baby barely ten days old opens its lips in speech! Not only that, it 
also raises intelligent questions! Incredible! Rather like the bulletins 
issued by the war office, than facts.  

The chief astrologer took his finger off his nose and fixed his 
eyes upon the little prince.

‘‘The prince was born in the hour of the Bull. The Bull and 
the Tiger are enemies, therefore, death comes from the Tiger,’’ he 
explained.

You may think that crown prince Jung Jung Bahadur was 
thrown into a quake when he heard the word ‘Tiger’. That was 
exactly what did not happen. As soon as he heard it pronounced, 

The Tiger King 9

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   9 12/16/2024   1:42:55 PM



the crown prince gave a deep growl. Terrifying words emerged from 
his lips.

‘‘Let tigers beware!’’
This account is only a rumour rife in Pratibandapuram. But 

with hindsight we may conclude it was based on some truth.

II

Crown prince Jung Jung Bahadur grew 
taller and stronger day by day. No other miracle 
marked his childhood days apart from the event 
already described. The boy drank the milk of 
an English cow, was brought up by an English 
nanny, tutored in English by an Englishman, 

What did the royal saw nothing but English films — exactly as the 
infant grow up  crown princes of all the other Indian states did. 

to be? When he came of age at twenty, the State, which 
had been with the Court of Wards until then, 
came into his hands.

But everyone in the kingdom remembered the astrologer’s 
prediction. Many continued to discuss the matter. Slowly it came 
to the Maharaja’s ears.

There were innumerable forests in the Pratibandapuram State. 
They had tigers in them. The Maharaja knew the old saying, ‘You 
may kill even a cow in self-defence’. There could certainly be no 
objection to killing tigers in self-defence. The Maharaja started out 
on a tiger hunt.

The Maharaja was thrilled beyond measure when he killed 
his first tiger. He sent for the State astrologer and showed him the 
dead beast.

‘‘What do you say now?’’ he demanded.
‘‘Your majesty may kill ninety-nine tigers in exactly the same 

manner. But...’’ the astrologer drawled.
‘‘But what? Speak without fear.’’
“But you must be very careful with the hundredth tiger.’’
‘‘What if the hundredth tiger were also killed?’’

10 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   10 12/16/2024   1:42:55 PM



‘‘Then I will tear up all my books on astrology, set fire to them, 
and…’’

‘‘And…’’
‘‘I shall cut off my tuft, crop my hair short and become an 

insurance agent,’’ the astrologer finished on an incoherent note.

III
From that day onwards it was celebration time for all the tigers 

inhabiting Pratibandapuram.
The State banned tiger hunting by anyone except the Maharaja. 

A proclamation was issued to the effect that if anyone dared to fling 
so much as a stone at a tiger, all his wealth and property would 
be confiscated.

The Maharaja vowed he would attend to all other matters only 
after killing the hundred tigers. Initially the king seemed well set 
to realise his ambition.

Not that he faced no dangers. There were times when the bullet 
missed its mark, the tiger leapt upon him and he fought the beast 
with his bare hands. Each time it was the Maharaja who won.

The Tiger King 11

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   11 12/16/2024   1:42:55 PM



At another time he was in danger of losing his throne. A high-
ranking British officer visited Pratibandapuram. He was very fond of 
hunting tigers. And fonder of being photographed with the tigers he 
had shot. As usual, he wished to hunt tigers in Pratibandapuram. 
But the Maharaja was firm in his resolve. He refused permission. 
‘‘I can organise any other hunt. You may go on a boar hunt. You 
may conduct a mouse hunt. We are ready for a mosquito hunt. But 
tiger hunt! That’s impossible!’’

The British officer’s secretary sent word to the Maharaja through 
the dewan that the durai himself did not have to kill the tiger. The 
Maharaja could do the actual killing. What was important to the 
durai was a photograph of himself holding the gun and standing 
over the tiger’s carcass. But the Maharaja would not agree even to 
this proposal. If he relented now, what would he do if other British 
officers turned up for tiger hunts?

Because he prevented a British officer from fulfilling his desire, 
the Maharaja stood in danger of losing his kingdom itself.

The Maharaja and the dewan held deliberations over this 
issue. As a result, a telegram was despatched forthwith to a famous 
British company of jewellers in Calcutta. ‘Send samples of expensive 
diamond rings of different designs.’

Some fifty rings arrived. The Maharaja sent the whole lot to 
the British officer’s good lady. The king and the minister expected 
the duraisani to choose one or two rings and send the rest back. 
Within no time at all the duraisani sent her reply: ‘Thank you very 
much for your gifts.’ 

In two days a bill for three lakh of rupees came from the British 
jewellers. The Maharaja was happy that though he had lost three 
lakh of rupees, he had managed to retain his kingdom.

IV

The Maharaja’s tiger hunts continued to be highly successful. 
Within ten years he was able to kill seventy tigers. And then, an 
unforeseen hurdle brought his mission to a standstill. The tiger 
population became extinct in the forests of Pratibandapuram. Who 
knows whether the tigers practised birth control or committed 

12 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   12 12/16/2024   1:42:55 PM



harakiri? Or simply ran away from the State because they desired 
to be shot by British hands alone?

One day the Maharaja sent for the dewan. 
‘‘Dewan saheb, aren’t you aware of the fact that 
thirty tigers still remain to be shot down by this 
gun of mine?’’ he asked brandishing his gun.

Shuddering at the sight of the gun, the 
dewan cried out, ‘‘Your Majesty! I am not a tiger!’’

What will the ‘‘Which idiot would call you a tiger?’’
Maharaja do to 

find the required “No, and I’m not a gun!’’
number of tigers “You are neither tiger nor gun. Dewan 

to kill? saheb, I summoned you here for a different 
purpose. I have decided to get married.’’

The dewan began to babble even more. ‘‘Your Majesty, I have 
two wives already. If I marry you ...’’

‘‘Don’t talk nonsense! Why should I marry you? What I want 
is a tiger...’’

‘‘Your Majesty! Please think it over. Your ancestors were married 
to the sword. If you like, marry the gun. A Tiger King is more than 
enough for this state. It doesn’t need a Tiger Queen as well!’’

The Maharaja gave a loud crack of laughter. ‘‘I’m not thinking of 
marrying either a tiger or a gun, but a girl from the ranks of human 
beings. First you may draw up statistics of tiger populations in the 
different native states. Next you may investigate if there is a girl I 
can marry in the royal family of a state with a large tiger population.’’

The dewan followed his orders. He found the right girl from a 
state which possessed a large number of tigers.

Maharaja Jung Jung Bahadur killed five or six tigers each time 
he visited his father-in-law. In this manner, ninety-nine tiger skins 
adorned the walls of the reception hall in the Pratibandapuram 
palace.

V

The Maharaja’s anxiety reached a fever pitch when there 
remained just one tiger to achieve his tally of a hundred. He had 

The Tiger King 13

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   13 12/16/2024   1:42:56 PM



this one thought during the day and the same 
dream at night. By this time the tiger farms had 
run dry even in his father-in-Iaw’s kingdom. It 
became impossible to locate tigers anywhere. 
Yet only one more was needed. If he could kill 
just that one single beast, the Maharaja would 

How will the have no fears left. He could give up tiger hunting 
Maharaja prepare altogether.

himself for the But he had to be extremely careful with 
hundredth tiger that last tiger. What had the late chief astrologer 

which was 
supposed to decide said? “Even after killing ninety-nine tigers the 

his fate? Maharaja should beware of the hundredth...’’ 
True enough. The tiger was a savage beast after 
all. One had to be wary of it. But where was that 

hundredth tiger to be found? It seemed easier to find tiger’s milk 
than a live tiger.

Thus the Maharaja was sunk in gloom. But soon came the happy 
news which dispelled that gloom. In his own state sheep began to 
disappear frequently from a hillside village.

It was first ascertained that this was not the work of Khader 
Mian Saheb or Virasami Naicker, both famed for their ability to 
swallow sheep whole. Surely, a tiger was at work. The villagers ran 
to inform the Maharaja. The Maharaja announced a three-year 
exemption from all taxes for that village and set out on the hunt 
at once.

The tiger was not easily found. It seemed as if it had wantonly 
hid itself in order to flout the Maharaja’s will.

The Maharaja was equally determined. He refused to leave 
the forest until the tiger was found. As the days passed, the 
Maharaja’s fury and obstinacy mounted alarmingly. Many officers 
lost their jobs.

One day when his rage was at its height, the Maharaja called 
the dewan and ordered him to double the land tax forthwith.

‘‘The people will become discontented. Then our state too will 
fall a prey to the Indian National Congress.’’

‘‘In that case you may resign from your post,’’ said the king.

14 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   14 12/16/2024   1:42:56 PM



The dewan went home convinced that if the Maharaja did not 
find the tiger soon, the results could be catastrophic. He felt life 
returning to him only when he saw the tiger which had been brought 
from the People’s Park in Madras and kept hidden in his house. 

At midnight when the town slept in peace, the dewan and his 
aged wife dragged the tiger to the car and shoved it into the seat. 
The dewan himself drove the car straight to the forest where the 
Maharaja was hunting. When they reached the forest the tiger 
launched its satyagraha and refused to get out of the car. The dewan 
was thoroughly exhausted in his efforts to haul the beast out of the 
car and push it down to the ground.

On the following day, the same old tiger wandered into the 
Maharaja’s presence and stood as if in humble supplication, 
“Master, what do you command of me?’’ It was with boundless joy 
that the Maharaja took careful aim at the beast. The tiger fell in a 
crumpled heap.

‘‘I have killed the hundredth tiger. My vow has been fulfilled,’’ 
the Maharaja was overcome with elation. Ordering the tiger to be 
brought to the capital in grand procession, the Maharaja hastened 
away in his car.

After the Maharaja left, the hunters went to take 
a closer look at the tiger. The tiger looked back at 
them rolling its eyes in bafflement. The men realised 
that the tiger was not dead; the bullet had missed it. 
It had fainted from the shock of the bullet whizzing 
past. The hunters wondered what they should do. 

What will now They decided that the Maharaja must not come to 
happen to the know that he had missed his target. If he did, they 

astrologer? Do you 
think the prophecy could lose their jobs. One of the hunters took aim 
was indisputably from a distance of one foot and shot the tiger. This 

disproved? time he killed it without missing his mark.
Then, as commanded by the king, the dead 

tiger was taken in procession through the town and buried. A tomb 
was erected over it.

A few days later the Maharaja’s son’s third birthday was 
celebrated. Until then the Maharaja had given his entire mind over 
to tiger hunting. He had had no time to spare for the crown prince. 

The Tiger King 15

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   15 12/16/2024   1:42:56 PM



But now the king turned his attention to the child. He wished to 
give him some special gift on his birthday. He went to the shopping 
centre in Pratibandapuram and searched every shop, but couldn’t 
find anything suitable. Finally he spotted a wooden tiger in a toyshop 
and decided it was the perfect gift.

The wooden tiger cost only two annas and a quarter. But the 
shopkeeper knew that if he quoted such a low price to the Maharaja, 
he would be punished under the rules of the Emergency. So, he said, 
‘‘Your Majesty, this is an extremely rare example of craftsmanship. 
A bargain at three hundred rupees!’’

‘‘Very good. Let this be your offering to the crown prince on his 
birthday,’’ said the king and took it away with him.

On that day father and son played with that tiny little wooden 
tiger. It had been carved by an unskilled carpenter. Its surface was 
rough; tiny slivers of wood stood up like quills all over it. One of 
those slivers pierced the Maharaja’s right hand. He pulled it out 
with his left hand and continued to play with the prince.

The next day, infection flared in the Maharaja’s right 
hand. In four days, it developed into a 

suppurating sore which spread 
all over the arm.

16 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   16 12/16/2024   1:42:56 PM



Three famous surgeons were brought in from Madras. After 
holding a consultation they decided to operate. The operation took 
place.

The three surgeons who performed it came out of the theatre 
and announced, “The operation was successful. The Maharaja is 
dead.”

In this manner the hundredth tiger took its final revenge upon 
the Tiger King.

Reading with Insight
1.	 The story is a satire on the conceit of those in power. How 

does the author employ the literary device of dramatic irony 
in the story?

2.	 What is the author’s indirect comment on subjecting innocent 
animals to the willfulness of human beings?

3. 	 How would you describe the behaviour of the Maharaja’s 
minions towards him?  Do you find them truly sincere 
towards him or are they driven by fear when they obey him? 
Do we find a similarity in today’s political order?

4. 	 Can you relate instances of game-hunting among the rich 
and the powerful in the present times that illustrate the 
callousness of human beings towards wildlife?

5.	 We need a new system for the age of ecology — a system 
which is embedded in the care of all people and also in the 
care of the Earth and all life upon it. Discuss.

The Tiger King 17

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 2.indd   17 12/16/2024   1:42:56 PM

##38##

3
Journey to the end of the Earth

Tishani Doshi

Before you read
If you want to know more about the planet’s past, present and future, 
the Antarctica is the place to go to. Bon Voyage!

EARLY this year, I found myself aboard a Russian research vessel 
— the Akademik Shokalskiy — heading towards the coldest, driest, 
windiest continent in the world: Antarctica. My journey began 13.09 
degrees north of the Equator in Madras, and involved crossing nine 
time zones, six checkpoints, three bodies of water, and at least as 
many ecospheres. 

By the time I actually set foot on the Antarctic continent I 
had been travelling over 100 hours in combination of a car, an 
aeroplane and a ship; so, my first emotion on facing Antarctica’s 
expansive white landscape and uninterrupted blue horizon was 
relief, followed up with an immediate and profound wonder. Wonder 
at its immensity, its isolation, but mainly at how there could ever 
have been a time when India and Antarctica were part of the same 
landmass. 

Part of history
Six hundred and fifty million years ago, a giant amalgamated 

southern supercontinent — Gondwana — did indeed exist, centred 
roughly around the present-day Antarctica. Things were quite 
different then: humans hadn’t arrived on the global scene, and 
the climate was much warmer, hosting a huge variety of flora and 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   18 12/16/2024   1:44:11 PM



fauna. For 500 million years Gondwana thrived, but around the time 
when the dinosaurs were wiped out and the age of the mammals 
got under way, the landmass was forced to separate into countries, 
shaping the globe much as we know it today. 

To visit Antarctica now is to be a part of 
that history; to get a grasp of where we’ve come 
from and where we could possibly be heading. 
It’s to understand the significance of Cordilleran 
folds and pre-Cambrian granite shields; ozone 
and carbon; evolution and extinction. When 
you think about all that can happen in a million 

How do geological 
phenomena help years, it can get pretty mind-boggling. Imagine: 
us to know about India pushing northwards, jamming against 

the history of Asia to buckle its crust and form the Himalayas; 
humankind? South America drifting off to join North America, 

opening up the Drake Passage to create a cold 
circumpolar current, keeping Antarctica frigid, 

desolate, and at the bottom of the world. 
For a sun-worshipping South Indian like myself, two weeks in a 

place where 90 per cent of the Earth’s total ice volumes are stored is 
a chilling prospect (not just for circulatory and metabolic functions, 
but also for the imagination). It’s like walking into a giant ping-pong 
ball devoid of any human markers — no trees, billboards, buildings. 
You lose all earthly sense of perspective and time here. The visual 
scale ranges from the microscopic to the mighty: midges and mites 
to blue whales and icebergs as big as countries (the largest recorded 

Journey to the end of the Earth 19

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   19 12/16/2024   1:44:11 PM



was the size of Belgium). Days go on and on and on in surreal 
24-hour austral summer light, and a ubiquitous silence, interrupted 
only by the occasional avalanche or calving ice sheet, consecrates 
the place. It’s an immersion that will force you to place yourself in 
the context of the earth’s geological history. And for humans, the 
prognosis isn’t good.

Human impact 
Human civilisations have been around for a paltry 12,000 

years — barely a few seconds on the geological clock. In that 
short amount of time, we’ve managed to create quite a ruckus, 
etching our dominance over Nature with our villages, towns, cities, 
megacities. The rapid increase of human populations has left us 

battling with other species for limited resources, 
and the unmitigated burning of fossil fuels has 
now created a blanket of carbon dioxide around 
the world, which is slowly but surely increasing 
the average global temperature. 

Climate change is one of the most hotly 
What are the contested environmental debates of our time. Will 
indications for the West Antarctic ice sheet melt entirely? Will 
the future of the Gulf Stream ocean current be disrupted? Will 
humankind? it be the end of the world as we know it? Maybe. 

Maybe not. Either way, Antarctica is a crucial 
element in this debate — not just because it’s 

the only place in the world, which has never sustained a human 
population and therefore remains relatively ‘pristine’ in this respect; 
but more importantly, because it holds in its ice-cores half-million-
year-old carbon records trapped in its layers of ice. If we want to 
study and examine the Earth’s past, present and future, Antarctica 
is the place to go. 

Students on Ice, the programme I was working with on the 
Shokalskiy, aims to do exactly this by taking high school students to 
the ends of the world and providing them with inspiring educational 
opportunities which will help them foster a new understanding 
and respect for our planet. It’s been in operation for six years now, 
headed by Canadian Geoff Green, who got tired of carting celebrities 

20 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   20 12/16/2024   1:44:11 PM



and retired, rich, curiosity-seekers who could only ‘give’ back in a 
limited way. With Students on Ice, he offers the future generation 
of policy-makers a life-changing experience at an age when they’re 
ready to absorb, learn, and most importantly, act. 

The reason the programme has been so successful is because 
it’s impossible to go anywhere near the South Pole and not be 
affected by it. It’s easy to be blasé about polar ice-caps melting 
while sitting in the comfort zone of our respective latitude and 
longitude, but when you can visibly see glaciers retreating and ice 
shelves collapsing, you begin to realise that the threat of global 
warming is very real. 

Antarctica, because of her simple ecosystem and lack of 
biodiversity, is the perfect place to study how little changes in the 
environment can have big repercussions. Take the microscopic 
phytoplankton — those grasses of the sea that nourish and sustain 
the entire Southern Ocean’s food chain. These single-celled plants 
use the sun’s energy to assimilate carbon and synthesise organic 
compounds in that wondrous and most important of processes 

called photosynthesis. Scientists warn that a further depletion in 
the ozone layer will affect the activities of phytoplankton, which 
in turn will affect the lives of all the marine animals and birds 
of the region, and the global carbon cycle. In the parable of the 
phytoplankton, there is a great metaphor for existence: take care 
of the small things and the big things will fall into place. 

Journey to the end of the Earth 21

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   21 12/16/2024   1:44:12 PM



Walk on the ocean 
My Antarctic experience was full of such epiphanies, but the 

best occurred just short of the Antarctic Circle at 65.55 degrees 
south. The Shokalskiy had managed to wedge herself into a thick 
white stretch of ice between the peninsula and Tadpole Island which 
was preventing us from going any further. The Captain decided we 
were going to turn around and head back north, but before we did, 
we were all instructed to climb down the gangplank and walk on 
the ocean. So there we were, all 52 of us, kitted out in Gore-Tex 
and glares, walking on a stark whiteness that seemed to spread 
out forever. Underneath our feet was a metre-thick ice pack, and 
underneath that, 180 metres of living, breathing, salt water. In the 
periphery Crabeater seals were stretching and sunning themselves 
on ice floes much like stray dogs will do under the shade of a 
banyan tree. It was nothing short of a revelation: everything does 
indeed connect. 

Nine time zones, six checkpoints, three bodies of water and 
many ecospheres later, I was still wondering about the beauty of 
balance in play on our planet. How would it be if Antarctica were to 
become the warm place that it once used to be? Will we be around to 
see it, or would we have gone the way of the dinosaurs, mammoths 
and woolly rhinos? Who’s to say? But after spending two weeks with 
a bunch of teenagers who still have the idealism to save the world, 
all I can say is that a lot can happen in a million years, but what 
a difference a day makes! 

Reading with Insight
1. 	 ‘The world’s geological history is trapped in Antarctica.’ How 

is the study of this region useful to us?
2.  	What are Geoff Green’s reasons for including high school 

students in the Students on Ice expedition?

22 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   22 12/16/2024   1:44:12 PM



3. 	 ‘Take care of the small things and the big things will take care 
of themselves.’ What is the relevance of this statement in the 
context of the Antarctic  environment?

4. 	 Why is Antarctica the place to go to, to understand the earth’s 
present, past and future?

For more information on Students on Ice visit www.studentsonice.com

Journey to the end of the Earth 23

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 3.indd   23 12/16/2024   1:44:12 PM


##39##
4
The Enemy

Pearl S. Buck

Before you Read
It is the time of the World War. An American prisoner of war is 
washed ashore in a dying state and is found at the doorstep of a 
Japanese doctor. Should he save him as a doctor or hand him over to 
the Army as a patriot?

Dr Sadao Hoki’s house was built on a spot of 
the Japanese coast where as a little boy he had 
often played. The low, square stone house was 
set upon rocks well above a narrow beach that 
was outlined with bent pines. As a boy Sadao 

Who was  had climbed the pines, supporting himself on his 
Dr Sadao? bare feet, as he had seen men do in the South 

Where was his Seas when they climbed for coconuts. His father 
house? had taken him often to the islands of those seas, 

and never had he failed to say to the little brave 
boy at his side, ‘‘Those islands yonder, they are the stepping stones 
to the future for Japan.’’

‘‘Where shall we step from them?’’ Sadao had asked seriously.
‘‘Who knows?’’ his father had answered. ‘‘Who can limit our 

future? It depends on what we make it.’’
Sadao had taken this into his mind as he did everything his 

father said, his father who never joked or played with him but who 
spent infinite pains upon him who was his only son. Sadao knew 
that his education was his father’s chief concern. For this reason 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   24 12/18/2024   10:01:41 AM



he had been sent at twenty-two to America to learn all that could 
be learned of surgery and medicine. He had come back at thirty, 
and before his father died he had seen Sadao become famous not 
only as a surgeon but as a scientist. Because he was perfecting a 
discovery which would render wounds entirely clean, he had not 
been sent abroad with the troops. Also, he knew, there was some 
slight danger that the old General might need an operation for a 
condition for which he was now being treated medically, and for 
this possibility Sadao was being kept in Japan.

Clouds were rising from the ocean now. The unexpected warmth 
of the past few days had at night drawn heavy fog from the cold 
waves. Sadao watched mists hide outlines of a little island near 
the shore and then come creeping up the beach below the house, 
wreathing around the pines. In a few minutes fog would be wrapped 
about the house too. Then he would go into the room where Hana, 
his wife, would be waiting for him with the two children.

But at this moment the door opened and she looked out, a dark-
blue woollen haori1 over her kimono. She came to him affectionately 
and put her arm through his as he stood, smiled and said nothing. 
He had met Hana in America, but he had waited to fall in love with 
her until he was sure she was Japanese. His father would never have 
received her unless she had been pure in her race. He wondered 
often whom he would have married if he had not met Hana, and 
by what luck he had found her in the most casual way, by chance 
literally, at an American professor’s house. The professor and his 
wife had been kind people anxious to do something for their few 
foreign students, and the students, though bored, had accepted 
this kindness. Sadao had often told Hana how nearly he had not 
gone to Professor Harley’s house that night — the rooms were so 
small, the food so bad, the professor’s wife so voluble. But he had 
gone and there he had found Hana, a new student, and had felt he 
would love her if it were at all possible.

Now he felt her hand on his arm and was aware of the pleasure 
it gave him, even though they had been married years enough 
to have the two children. For they had not married heedlessly in 
America. They had finished their work at school and had come home 

1 haori: a loose outer garment worn over the kimono.

The Enemy 25

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   25 12/18/2024   10:01:41 AM



to Japan, and when his father had seen her the marriage had been 
arranged in the old Japanese way, although Sadao and Hana had 
talked everything over beforehand. They were perfectly happy. She 
laid her cheek against his arm.

It was at this moment that both of 
them saw something black come 
out of the mists. It was a man. 
He was flung up out of the ocean 
— flung, it seemed, to his feet 
by a breaker. He staggered a 
few steps, his body outlined 
against the mist, his arms 
above his head. Then the 

curled mists hid him again.
‘‘Who is that?’’ Hana cried. 

She dropped Sadao’s arm and 
they both leaned over the railing 

of the veranda. Now they saw him 
again. The man was on his hands 

and knees crawling. Then they 
saw him fall on his face and lie 

there. 
‘ ‘ A  f i s h e r m a n 

perhaps,’’ Sadao said, 
‘‘washed from his boat.’’ 

He ran quickly down the steps 
and behind him Hana came, her wide 

sleeves flying. A mile or two away on either 
side there were fishing villages, but here was 
only the bare and lonely coast, dangerous with 
rocks. The surf beyond the beach was spiked 

with rocks. Somehow the man had managed to come through them 
— he must be badly torn.

They saw when they came toward him that indeed it was so. The 
sand on one side of him had already a stain of red soaking through.

‘‘He is wounded,’’ Sadao exclaimed. He made haste to the man, 
who lay motionless, his face in the sand. An old cap stuck to his 

26 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   26 12/18/2024   10:01:41 AM



head soaked with sea water. He was in wet rags of garments. Sadao 
stopped, Hana at his side, and turned the man’s head. They saw 
the face.

“A white man!” Hana whispered.
Yes, it was a white man. The wet cap fell away and there was 

his wet yellow hair, long, as though for many weeks it had not been 
cut, and upon his young and tortured face was 
a rough yellow beard. He was unconscious and 
knew nothing that they did for him. 

Now Sadao remembered the wound, and 
with his expert fingers he began to search for 
it. Blood flowed freshly at his touch. On the 
right side of his lower back Sadao saw that a Will Dr Sadao 
gun wound had been reopened. The flesh was be arrested on 
blackened with powder. Sometime, not many the charge of 
days ago, the man had been shot and had not harbouring an 
been tended. It was bad chance that the rock enemy?
had struck the wound.

‘‘Oh, how he is bleeding!’’ Hana whispered again in a solemn 
voice. The mists screened them now completely, and at this time of 
day no one came by. The fishermen had gone home and even the 
chance beachcombers would have considered the day at an end.

‘‘What shall we do with this man?’’ Sadao muttered. But his 
trained hands seemed of their own will to be doing what they could 
to stanch the fearful bleeding. He packed the wound with the sea 
moss that strewed the beach. The man moaned with pain in his 
stupor but he did not awaken.

‘‘The best thing that we could do would be to put him back in 
the sea,’’ Sadao said, answering himself. 

Now that the bleeding was stopped for the moment he stood 
up and dusted the sand from his hands. 

‘‘Yes, undoubtedly that would be best,’’ Hana said steadily. But 
she continued to stare down at the motionless man.

‘‘If we sheltered a white man in our house we should be arrested 
and if we turned him over as a prisoner, he would certainly die,’’ 
Sadao said.

The Enemy 27

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   27 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



‘‘The kindest thing would be to put him back into the sea,’’ 
Hana said. But neither of them moved. They were staring with a 
curious repulsion upon the inert figure.

‘‘What is he?’’ Hana whispered.
‘‘There is something about him that looks American,’’ Sadao 

said. He took up the battered cap. Yes, there, almost gone, was the 
faint lettering. ‘‘A sailor,’’ he said, ‘‘from an American warship.’’ He 
spelled it out: ‘‘U.S. Navy.’’ The man was a prisoner of war!

‘‘He has escaped.’’ Hana cried softly, ‘‘and that is why he is 
wounded.’’

‘‘In the back,’’ Sadao agreed. 
They hesitated, looking at each other. Then Hana said with 

resolution: 
“Come, are we able to put him back into the sea?”
“If I am able, are you?” Sadao asked. 
“No,” Hana said, “But if you can do it alone...”
Sadao hesitated again. “The strange thing is,” he said, “that 

if the man were whole I could turn him over to the police without 
difficulty. I care nothing for him. He is my enemy. All Americans 
are my enemy. And he is only a common fellow. You see how foolish 
his face is. But since he is wounded…”

“You also cannot throw him back to the sea,” Hana said. “Then 
there is only one thing to do. We must carry him into the house.”

“But the servants?” Sadao inquired.
“We must simply tell them that we intend to give him to the 

police — as indeed we must, Sadao. We must think of the children 
and your position. It would endanger all of us if we did not give this 
man over as a prisoner of war.”

“Certainly,” Sadao agreed. “I would not think of doing anything 
else.”

Thus agreed, together they lifted the man. He was very light, 
like a fowl that had been half-starved for a long time until it is only 
feathers and skeleton. So, his arms hanging, they carried him up 
the steps and into the side door of the house. This door opened into 
a passage, and down the passage they carried the man towards an 

28 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   28 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



empty bedroom. It had been the bedroom of Sadao’s father, and 
since his death it had not been used. They laid the man on the 
deeply matted floor. Everything here had been Japanese to please 
the old man, who would never in his own home sit on a chair or 
sleep in a foreign bed. Hana went to the wall cupboards and slid 
back a door and took out a soft quilt. She hesitated. The quilt was 
covered with flowered silk and the lining was pure white silk.

“He is so dirty,” she murmured in distress.
“Yes, he had better be washed,” Sadao agreed. “If you will fetch 

hot water I will wash him.”
“I cannot bear for you to touch him,” she said. “We shall have 

to tell the servants he is here. I will tell Yumi now. She can leave 
the children for a few minutes and she can wash him.”

Sadao considered a moment. “Let it be so,” he agreed. “You tell 
Yumi and I will tell the others.”

But the utter pallor of the man’s unconscious face moved him 
first to stoop and feel his pulse. It was faint but it was there. He put 
his hand against the man’s cold breast. The heart too was yet alive.

“He will die unless he is operated on,” Sadao said, considering. 
“The question is whether he will not die anyway.”

Hana cried out in fear. “Don’t try to save him! What if he should 
live?”

“What if he should die?” Sadao replied. He stood gazing down 
on the motionless man. This man must have extraordinary vitality 
or he would have been dead by now. But then he was very young 
— perhaps not yet twenty-five. 

“You mean die from the operation?”
Hana asked.
“Yes,” Sadao said. 
Hana considered this doubtfully, and when she did not answer 

Sadao turned away. “At any rate something must be done with 
him,” he said, “and first he must be washed.” He went quickly out 
of the room and Hana came behind him. She did not wish to be left 
alone with the white man. He was the first she had seen since she 
left America and now he seemed to have nothing to do with those 

The Enemy 29

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   29 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



whom she had known there. Here he was her enemy, a menace, 
living or dead. 

She turned to the nursery and called, “Yumi!”
But the children heard her voice and she had to go in for a 

moment and smile at them and play with the baby boy, now nearly 
three months old. 

Over the baby’s soft black hair she motioned with her mouth, 
“Yumi — come with me!”

“I will put the baby to bed,” Yumi replied. “He is ready.”
She went with Yumi into the bedroom next to the nursery and 

stood with the boy in her arms while Yumi spread the sleeping 
quilts on the floor and laid the baby between them.

Then Hana led the way quickly and softly to the kitchen. The 
two servants were frightened at what their master had just told 
them. The old gardener, who was also a house servant, pulled the 
few hairs on his upper lip.

“The master ought not to heal the wound of this white man,” 
he said bluntly to Hana. “The white man ought to die. First he was 
shot. Then the sea caught him and wounded him with her rocks. 
If the master heals what the gun did and what the sea did they will 
take revenge on us.”

“I will tell him what you say,” Hana replied courteously. But she 
herself was also frightened, although she was not superstitious as the 
old man was. Could it ever be well to help an enemy? Nevertheless 
she told Yumi to fetch the hot water and bring it to the room where 
the white man was.

She went ahead and slid back the partitions. Sadao was not 
yet there. Yumi, following, put down her wooden bucket. Then she 
went over to the white man. When she saw him her thick lips folded 
themselves into stubbornness. “I have never washed a white man,” 
she said, “and I will not wash so dirty a one now.”

Hana cried at her severely. “You will do what your master 
commands you!”

There was so fierce a look of resistance upon Yumi’s round dull 
face that Hana felt unreasonably afraid. After all, if the servants 
should report something that was not as it happened?

30 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   30 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



“Very well,” she said with dignity. “You understand we only 
want to bring him to his senses so that we can turn him over as a 
prisoner?”

“I will have nothing to do with it,” Yumi said, “I am a poor 
person and it is not my business.”

“Then please,” Hana said gently, “return to your own work.”
At once Yumi left the room. But this left Hana with the white 

man alone. She might have been too afraid to stay had not her 
anger at Yumi’s stubbornness now sustained her.

“Stupid Yumi,” she muttered fiercely. “Is this anything but a 
man? And a wounded helpless man!”

In the conviction of her own superiority she 
bent impulsively and untied the knotted rugs that 
kept the white man covered. When she had his 
breast bare she dipped the small clean towel that 
Yumi had brought into the steaming hot water and 
washed his face carefully. The man’s skin, though 

Will Hana help rough with exposure, was of a fine texture and 
the wounded man  must have been very blond when he was a child. 

and wash him    While she was thinking these thoughts, 
herself? though not really liking the man better now that 

he was no longer a child, she kept on washing 
him until his upper body was quite clean. But she dared not turn 
him over. Where was Sadao? Now her anger was ebbing, and she 
was anxious again and she rose, wiping her hands on the wrong 
towel. Then lest the man be chilled, she put the quilt over him.

“Sadao!” she called softly. 
He had been about to come in when she called. His hand had 

been on the door and now he opened it. She saw that he had brought 
his surgeon’s emergency bag and that he wore his surgeon’s coat. 

“You have decided to operate!” she cried.
“Yes,” he said shortly. He turned his back to her and unfolded 

a sterilized towel upon the floor of the tokonoma2 alcove, and put 
his instruments out upon it.
2 tokonoma: a niche or an alcove in a Japanese home for displaying a flower 
arrangement, kakemono, or other piece of art.

The Enemy 31

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   31 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



“Fetch towels,” he said.
She went obediently, but how anxious now, to the linen shelves 

and took out the towels. There ought also to be old pieces of matting 
so that the blood would not ruin the fine floor covering. She went 
out to the back veranda where the gardener kept strips of matting 
with which to protect delicate shrubs on cold nights and took an 
armful of them.

But when she went back into the room, she saw this was useless. 
The blood had already soaked through the packing in the man’s wound 
and had ruined the mat under him.

“Oh, the mat!” she cried.
“Yes, it is ruined,” Sadao replied, as though he did not care. 

“Help me to turn him,” he commanded her.
She obeyed him without a word, and he began to wash the 

man’s back carefully.
“Yumi would not wash him,” she said.
“Did you wash him then?” Sadao asked, not stopping for a 

moment his swift concise movements.
“Yes,” she said.
He did not seem to hear her. But she was used to his absorption 

when he was at work. She wondered for a moment if it mattered 
to him what was the body upon which he worked so long as it was 
for the work he did so excellently.

“You will have to give the anesthetic if he needs it,” he said.
“I?” she repeated blankly. “But never have I!”
“It is easy enough,” he said impatiently.
He was taking out the packing now, and the blood began to flow 

more quickly. He peered into the wound with the bright surgeon’s 
light fastened on his forehead. “The bullet is still there,” he said 
with cool interest. “Now I wonder how deep this rock wound is. If it 
is not too deep it may be that I can get the bullet. But the bleeding 
is not superficial. He has lost much blood.”

At this moment Hana choked. He looked up and saw her face 
the colour of sulphur.

32 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   32 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



“Don’t faint,” he said sharply. He 
did not put down his exploring 
instrument. “If I stop now the man 
will surely die.” She clapped her 
hands to her mouth and leaped 
up and ran out of the room. 

Outside in the garden he 
heard her retching. 

But he went on with 
his work.

“It will be better for her to empty her stomach,” he thought. 
He had forgotten that of course she had never seen an operation. 
But her distress and his inability to go to her at once made him 
impatient and irritable with this man who lay like dead under his 
knife. 

“This man.” he thought, “there is no reason under heaven why 
he should live.”

Unconsciously this thought made him ruthless and he 
proceeded swiftly. In his dream the man moaned but Sadao paid 
no heed except to mutter at him.

“Groan,” he muttered, “groan if you like. I am not doing this for 
my own pleasure. In fact, I do not know why I am doing it.”

The door opened and there was Hana again.
“Where is the anesthetic?” she asked in a clear voice. 
Sadao motioned with his chin. “It is as well that you came 

back,” he said. “This fellow is beginning to stir.”
She had the bottle and some cotton in her hand.
“But how shall I do it?” she asked.

The Enemy 33

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   33 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



“Simply saturate the cotton and hold it near his nostrils,” Sadao 
replied without delaying for one moment the intricate detail of his 
work. “When he breathes badly move it away a little.”

She crouched close to the sleeping face of the young American. 
It was a piteously thin face, she thought, and the lips were twisted. 
The man was suffering whether he knew it or not. Watching him, 
she wondered if the stories they heard sometimes of the sufferings 
of prisoners were true. They came like flickers of rumour, told by 
word of mouth and always contradicted. In the newspapers the 
reports were always that wherever the Japanese armies went the 
people received them gladly, with cries of joy at their liberation. But 
sometimes she remembered such men as General Takima, who at 
home beat his wife cruelly, though no one mentioned it now that he 
had fought so victorious a battle in Manchuria. If a man like that 
could be so cruel to a woman in his power, would he not be cruel 
to one like this for instance?

She hoped anxiously that this young man had not been 
tortured. It was at this moment that she observed deep red scars 
on his neck, just under the ear. 

“Those scars,” she murmured, lifting her eyes to Sadao.
But he did not answer. At this moment he felt the tip of his 

instrument strike against something hard, dangerously near the 
kidney. All thought left him. He felt only the purest pleasure. He 
probed with his fingers, delicately, familiar with every atom of this 
human body. His old American professor of anatomy had seen to 
that knowledge. “Ignorance of the human body is the surgeon’s 
cardinal sin, sirs!” he had thundered at his classes year after year. 
“To operate without as complete knowledge of the body as if you had 
made it — anything less than that is murder.” 

“It is not quite at the kidney, my friend,” Sadao murmured. It 
was his habit to murmur to the patient when he forgot himself in 
an operation. “My friend,” he always called his patients and so now 
he did, forgetting that this was his enemy. 

Then quickly, with the cleanest and most precise of incisions, 
the bullet was out. The man quivered but he was still unconscious. 
Nevertheless he muttered a few English words.

“Guts,” he muttered, choking. “They got...my guts...”

34 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   34 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



“Sadao!” Hana cried sharply.
“Hush,” Sadao said. 
The man sank again into silence so profound that Sadao took up 

his wrist, hating the touch of it. Yes, there was still a pulse so faint, 
so feeble, but enough, if he wanted the man to live, to give hope.

“But certainly I do not want this man to live,” he thought. 
“No more anesthetic,” he told Hana. 
He turned as swiftly as though he had never paused and from 

his medicines he chose a small vial and from it filled a hypodermic 
and thrust it into the patient’s left arm. Then putting down the 

needle, he took the man’s wrist again. The pulse 
under his fingers fluttered once or twice and 
then grew stronger. 

“This man will live in spite of all,” he said 
to Hana and sighed.

The young man woke, so weak, his blue eyes 
What will  

Dr Sadao and his so terrified when he perceived where he was, that 
wife do with the Hana felt compelled to apologise. She herself 

man? served him, for none of the servants would enter 
the room.

When she came in the first time, she saw him summon his 
small strength to be prepared for some fearful thing. 

“Don’t be afraid,” she begged him softly.
“How come... you speak English…” he gasped.
“I was a long time in America,” she replied.
She saw that he wanted to reply to that but he could not, and 

so she knelt and fed him gently from the porcelain spoon. He ate 
unwillingly, but still he ate.

“Now you will soon be strong,” she said, not liking him and yet 
moved to comfort him.

He did not answer.
When Sadao came in the third day after the operation, he found 

the young man sitting up, his face bloodless with the effort.
“Lie down,” Sadao cried. “Do you want to die?”

The Enemy 35

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   35 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



He forced the man down gently and strongly and examined 
the wound. “You may kill yourself if you do this sort of thing,” he 
scolded.

“What are you going to do with me?” the boy muttered. He 
looked just now barely seventeen. “Are you going to hand me over?”

For a moment Sadao did not answer. He finished his examination 
and then pulled the silk quilt over the man. 

“I do not know myself what I shall do with you,” he said. “I 
ought of course to give you to the police. You are a prisoner of war 
— no, do not tell me anything.” He put up his hand as he saw the 
young man was about to speak. “Do not even tell me your name 
unless I ask it.”

They looked at each other for a moment, and then the young 
man closed his eyes and turned his face to the wall.

“Okay,” he whispered, his mouth a bitter line. 
Outside the door Hana was waiting for Sadao. He saw at once 

that she was in trouble.
“Sadao, Yumi tells me the servants feel they cannot stay if we 

hide this man here any more,” she said. “She tells me that they are 
saying that you and I were so long in America that we have forgotten 
to think of our own country first. They think we like Americans.”

“It is not true,” Sadao said harshly “Americans are our enemies. 
But I have been trained not to let a man die if I can help it.”

“The servants cannot understand that,” she said anxiously. 
“No,” he agreed.
Neither seemed able to say more, and somehow the household 

dragged on. The servants grew more watchful. Their courtesy was 
as careful as ever, but their eyes were cold upon the pair to whom 
they were hired.

“It is clear what our master ought to do,” the old gardener said 
one morning. He had worked with flowers all his life, and had been 
a specialist too in moss. For Sadao’s father he had made one of the 
finest moss gardens in Japan, sweeping the bright green carpet 
constantly so that not a leaf or a pine needle marred the velvet of 
its surface. “My old master’s son knows very well what he ought to 

36 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   36 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



do,” he now said, pinching a bud from a bush as he spoke. “When 
the man was so near death why did he not let him bleed?”

“That young master is so proud of his skill to save life that he 
saves any life,” the cook said contemptuously. She split a fowl’s 
neck skillfully and held the fluttering bird and let its blood flow into 
the roots of a wistaria vine. Blood is the best of fertilisers, and the 
old gardener would not let her waste a drop of it.

“It is the children of whom we must think,” Yumi said sadly. 
“What will be their fate if their father is condemned as a traitor?”

They did not try to hide what they said from the ears of Hana 
as she stood arranging the day’s flowers in the veranda near by, 
and she knew they spoke on purpose that she might hear. That 
they were right she knew too in most of her being. But there was 
another part of her which she herself could not understand. It was 
not sentimental liking of the prisoner. She had come to think of 
him as a prisoner. She had not liked him even yesterday when he 
had said in his impulsive way, “Anyway, let me tell you that my 
name is Tom.” She had only bowed her little distant bow. She saw 
hurt in his eyes but she did not wish to assuage it. Indeed, he was 
a great trouble in this house.

As for Sadao, every day he examined the wound carefully. The 
last stitches had been pulled out this morning, and the young man 
would, in a fortnight be nearly as well as ever. Sadao went back to 
his office and carefully typed a letter to the Chief of police reporting 
the whole matter. “On the twenty-first day of February an escaped 
prisoner was washed up on the shore in front of my house.” So far 
he typed and then he opened a secret drawer of his desk and put 
the unfinished report into it.

On the seventh day after that, two things happened. In the morning 
the servants left together, their belongings tied in large square cotton 
kerchiefs. When Hana got up in the morning nothing was done, the 
house not cleaned and the food not prepared, and she knew what it 
meant. She was dismayed and even terrified, but her pride as a mistress 
would not allow her to show it. Instead, she inclined her head gracefully 
when they appeared before her in the kitchen, and she paid them off 
and thanked them for all that they had done for her. They were crying, 
but she did not cry. The cook and the gardener had served Sadao since 

The Enemy 37

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   37 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



he was a little boy in his father’s house, and Yumi cried because of the 
children. She was so grieving that after she had gone she ran back to 
Hana.

“If the baby misses me too much tonight, send for me. I am 
going to my own house and you know where it is.”

“Thank you,” Hana said smiling. But she told herself she would 
not send for Yumi however the baby cried.

She made the breakfast and Sadao helped with the children. 
Neither of them spoke of the servants beyond the fact that they were 
gone. But after Hana had taken morning food to the prisoner, she 
came back to Sadao.

“Why is it we cannot see clearly what we ought to do?” she 
asked him. “Even the servants see more clearly than we do. Why 
are we different from other Japanese?”

Sadao did not answer. But a little later he went into the room 
where the prisoner was and said brusquely, “Today you may get 
up on your feet. I want you to stay up only five minutes at a time. 
Tomorrow you may try it twice as long. It would be well that you 
get back your strength as quickly as possible.”

He saw the flicker of terror on the young face that was still very 
pale. “Okay,” the boy murmured. Evidently he was determined to say 
more. “I feel I ought to thank you, Doctor, for having saved my life.”

“Don’t thank me too early,” Sadao said coldly. He saw the flicker 
of terror again in the boy’s eyes — terror as unmistakable as an 
animal’s. The scars on his neck were crimson for a moment. Those 
scars! What were they? Sadao did not ask.

In the afternoon the second thing happened. Hana, working 
hard on unaccustomed labour, saw a messenger come to the door 
in official uniform. Her hands went weak and she could not draw 
her breath. The servants must have told already. She ran to Sadao, 
gasping, unable to utter a word. But by then the messenger had 
simply followed her through the garden and there he stood. She 
pointed at him helplessly.

Sadao looked up from his book. He was in his office, the other 
partition of which was thrown open to the garden for the southern 
sunshine.

38 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   38 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



“What is it?” he asked the messenger and 
then he rose, seeing the man’s uniform.

“You are to come to the palace,” the man 
said. “The old General is in pain again.”

“Oh,” Hana breathed, “is that all?”
Will Dr Sadao “All?” the messenger exclaimed. 
be arrested on 
the charge of “Is it not enough?” 
harbouring an “Indeed it is,” she replied. “I am very sorry.”

enemy? When Sadao came to say goodbye, she 
was in the kitchen, but doing nothing. The 

children were asleep and she sat merely resting for a moment, more 
exhausted from her fright than from work. 

“I thought they had come to arrest you”, she said. 
He gazed down into her anxious eyes. “I must get rid of this man 

for your sake,” he said in distress. “Somehow I must get rid of him.”
(Sadao goes to see the General)

“Of course,” the General said weakly, “I understand fully. But 
that is because, I once took a degree in Princeton. So few Japanese 
have.”

“I care nothing for the man, Excellency,” Sadao said, “but 
having operated on him with such success…”

“Yes, yes” the General said. “It only makes me feel you more 
indispensable to me. Evidently you can save anyone — you are so 
skilled. You say you think I can stand one more such attack as I 
have had today?”

“Not more than one,” Sadao said.
“Then certainly I can allow nothing to happen to you,” the 

General said with anxiety. His long pale Japanese face became 
expressionless, which meant that he was in deep thought. “You 
cannot be arrested,” the General said, closing his eyes. “Suppose 
you were condemned to death and the next day I had to have my 
operation?”

“There are other surgeons, Excellency,” Sadao suggested.
“None I trust,” the General replied. “The best ones have been 

trained by Germans and would consider the operation successful 

The Enemy 39

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   39 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



even if I died. I do not care for their point of view.” He sighed. 
“It seems a pity that we cannot better combine the German 
ruthlessness with the American sentimentality. Then you could turn 
your prisoner over to execution and yet I could be sure you would 
not murder me while I was unconscious.” The General laughed. He 
had an unusual sense of humour. “As a Japanese, could you not 
combine these two foreign elements?” he asked.

Sadao smiled. “I am not quite sure,” he said, “but for your sake 
I would be willing to try, Excellency.”

The General shook his head. “I had rather not be the test case,” 
he said. He felt suddenly weak and overwhelmed with the cares of 
his life as an official in times such as these when repeated victory 
brought great responsibilities all over the south Pacific. “It is very 
unfortunate that this man should have washed up on your doorstep,” 
he said irritably.

“I feel it so myself,” Sadao said gently.
“It would be best if he could be quietly killed,” the General said. 

“Not by you, but by someone who does not know him. I have my 
own private assassins. Suppose I send two of them to your house 
tonight or better, any night. You need know nothing about it. It is 
now warm — what would be more natural than that you should 
leave the outer partition of the white man’s room open to the garden 
while he sleeps?”

“Certainly it would be very natural,” Sadao agreed. “In fact, it 
is so left open every night.”

“Good,” the General said, yawning. “They are very capable 
assassins — they make no noise and they know the trick of inward 
bleeding. If you like I can even have them remove the body.”

Sadao considered. “That perhaps would be best, Excellency,” 
he agreed, thinking of Hana.

He left the General’s presence then and went home, thinking 
over the plan. In this way the whole thing would be taken out of 
his hands. He would tell Hana nothing, since she would be timid at 
the idea of assassins in the house, and yet certainly such persons 
were essential in an absolute state such as Japan was. How else 
could rulers deal with those who opposed them?

40 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   40 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



He refused to allow anything but reason to be the atmosphere 
of his mind as he went into the room where the American was in 
bed. But as he opened the door, to his surprise he found the young 
man out of bed, and preparing to go into the garden.

“What is this!” he exclaimed. “Who gave you permission to 
leave your room?”

“I’m not used to waiting for permission,” Tom said gaily. “Gosh, 
I feel pretty good again! But will the muscles on this side always 
feel stiff?”

“Is it so?” Sadao inquired, surprised. He forgot all else. “Now I 
thought I had provided against that,” he murmured. He lifted the 
edge of the man’s shirt and gazed at the healing scar. “Massage 
may do it,” he said, “if exercise does not.”

“It won’t bother me much,” the young man said. His young 
face was gaunt under the stubbly blond beard. “Say, Doctor, I’ve 
got something I want to say to you. If I hadn’t met a Jap like you 
— well, I wouldn’t be alive today. I know that.”

Sadao bowed but he could not speak. 
“Sure, I know that,” Tom went on warmly. His big thin hands 

gripping a chair were white at the knuckles. “I guess if all the Japs 
were like you there wouldn’t have been a war.”

“Perhaps,” Sadao said with difficulty. “And now I think you had 
better go back to bed.”

He helped the boy back into bed and then bowed. “Good night,” 
he said.

Sadao slept badly that night. Time and time again he woke, 
thinking he heard the rustling of footsteps, the sound of a twig 
broken or a stone displaced in the garden — a noise such as men 
might make who carried a burden. 

The next morning he made the excuse to go first into the guest 
room. If the American were gone he then could simply tell Hana 
that so the General had directed. But when he opened the door he 
saw at once that there on the pillow was the shaggy blond head. 
He could hear the peaceful breathing of sleep and he closed the 
door again quietly.

The Enemy 41

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   41 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



“He is asleep,” he told Hana. “He is almost well to sleep like 
that.”

“What shall we do with him?” Hana whispered her old refrain.
Sadao shook his head. “I must decide in a day or two,” he 

promised. 
But certainly, he thought, the second night must be the night. 

There rose a wind that night, and he listened to the sounds of 
bending boughs and whistling partitions. 

Hana woke too. “Ought we not to go and close the sick man’s 
partition?” she asked.

“No,” Sadao said. “He is able now to do it for himself.” 
But the next morning the American was still there.
Then the third night of course must be the night. The wind 

changed to quiet rain and the garden was full of the sound of 
dripping eaves and running springs. Sadao slept a little better, but 
he woke at the sound of a crash and leaped to his feet.

“What was that?” Hana cried. The baby woke at her voice and 
began to wail. “I must go and see,”

But he held her and would not let her move.
“Sadao,” she cried, “what is the matter with you?”
“Don’t go,” he muttered, “don’t go!” 
His terror infected her and she stood breathless, waiting. There 

was only silence. Together they crept back into the bed, the baby 
between them.

Yet when he opened the door of the guest room in the morning 
there was the young man. He was very gay and had already washed 
and was now on his feet. He had asked for a razor yesterday and 
had shaved himself and today there was a faint colour in his cheeks.

“I am well,” he said joyously.
Sadao drew his kimono round his weary body. He could not, 

he decided suddenly, go through another night. It was not that 
he cared for this young man’s life. No, simply it was not worth 
the strain.

“You are well,” Sadao agreed. He lowered his voice. “You are 
so well that I think if I put my boat on the shore tonight, with food 

42 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   42 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



and extra clothing in it, you might be able to 
row to that little island not far from the coast. It 
is so near the coast that it has not been worth 
fortifying. Nobody lives on it because in storm 
it is submerged. But this is not the season of 
storm. You could live there until you saw a 

What will  Korean fishing boat pass by. They pass quite near 
Dr Sadao do the island because the water is many fathoms 

to get rid of the deep there.”
man?

The young man stared at him, slowly 
comprehending. “Do I have to?” he asked. 

“I think so,” Sadao said gently. “You understand — it is not 
hidden that you are here.”

The young man nodded in perfect comprehension. “Okay,” he 
said simply.

Sadao did not see him again until evening. As soon as it was 
dark he had dragged the stout boat down to the shore and in it he 
put food and bottled water that he had bought secretly during the 
day, as well as two quilts he had bought at a pawnshop. The boat 
he tied to a post in the water, for the tide was high. There was no 
moon and he worked without a flashlight. 

When he came to the house he entered as though he were 
just back from his work, and so Hana knew nothing. “Yumi was 
here today,” she said as she served his supper. Though she was so 
modern, still she did not eat with him. “Yumi cried over the baby,” 
she went on with a sigh. “She misses him so.”

“The servants will come back as soon as the foreigner is gone,” 
Sadao said.

He went into the guest room that night before he went to bed 
himself and checked carefully the American’s temperature, the state 
of the wound, and his heart and pulse. The pulse was irregular but 
that was perhaps because of excitement. The young man’s pale lips 
were pressed together and his eyes burned. Only the scars on his 
neck were red.

“I realise you are saving my life again,” he told Sadao. 
“Not at all,” Sadao said. “It is only inconvenient to have you 

here any longer.”

The Enemy 43

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   43 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



He had hesitated a good deal about giving the man a flashlight. 
But he had decided to give it to him after all. It was a small one, 
his own, which he used at night when he was called. 

“If your food runs out before you catch a boat,” he said, “signal 
me two flashes at the same instant the sun drops over the horizon. 
Do not signal in darkness, for it will be seen. If you are all right but 
still there, signal me once. You will find fresh fish easy to catch but 
you must eat them raw. A fire would be seen.”

“Okay,” the young man breathed. 
He was dressed now in the Japanese clothes which Sadao had 

given him, and at the last moment Sadao wrapped a black cloth 
about his blond head.

“Now,” Sadao said.
The young American, without a word, shook Sadao’s hand 

warmly, and then walked quite well across the floor and down the 
step into the darkness of the garden. Once — twice... Sadao saw 
his light flash to find his way. But that would not be suspected. 
He waited until from the shore there was one more flash. Then he 
closed the partition. That night he slept.

“You say the man escaped?” the General asked faintly. He had 
been operated upon a week before, an emergency operation to which 
Sadao had been called in the night. For twelve hours Sadao had 
not been sure the General would live. The gall bladder was much 
involved. Then the old man had begun to breathe deeply again and to 
demand food. Sadao had not been able to ask about the assassins. 
So far as he knew they had never come. The servants had returned 
and Yumi had cleaned the guest room thoroughly and had burned 
sulphur in it to get the white man’s smell out of it. Nobody said 
anything. Only the gardener was cross because he had got behind 
with his chrysanthemums.

But after a week Sadao felt the General was well enough to be 
spoken to about the prisoner.

“Yes, Excellency, he escaped,” Sadao now said. He coughed, 
signifying that he had not said all he might have said, but was 
unwilling to disturb the General further. But the old man opened 
his eyes suddenly.

44 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   44 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



“That prisoner,” he said with some energy, 
“did I not promise you I would kill him for 

you?”
“You did, Excellency,” Sadao 

said.

“Well, well!” the old man said in a tone of amazement, “so I did! 
But you see, I was suffering a good deal. The truth is, I thought of 
nothing but myself. In short, I forgot my promise to you.”

“I wondered, Your Excellency,” Sadao murmured.
“It was certainly very careless of me,” the General said. “But 

you understand it was not lack of patriotism or dereliction of duty.” 
He looked anxiously at his doctor. “If the matter should come out 
you would understand that, wouldn’t you?”

“Certainly, Your Excellency,” Sadao said. He suddenly 
comprehended that the General was in the palm of his hand and 
that as a consequence he himself was perfectly safe. “I can swear 
to your loyalty, Excellency,” he said to the old General, “and to your 
zeal against the enemy.”

“You are a good man,” the General murmured and closed his 
eyes.” “You will be rewarded.”

But Sadao, searching the spot of black in the twilighted sea 
that night, had his reward. There was no prick of light in the dusk. 
No one was on the island. His prisoner was gone — safe, doubtless, 
for he had warned him to wait only for a Korean fishing boat.

He stood for a moment on the veranda, gazing out to the sea 
from whence the young man had come that other night. And into 
his mind, although without reason, there came other white faces 
he had known — the professor at whose house he had met Hana, 
a dull man, and his wife had been a silly talkative woman, in spite 
of her wish to be kind. He remembered his old teacher of anatomy, 

The Enemy 45

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   45 12/18/2024   10:01:42 AM



who had been so insistent on mercy with the knife, and then he 
remembered the face of his fat and slatternly landlady. He had 
had great difficulty in finding a place to live in America because 
he was a Japanese. The Americans were full of prejudice and it 
had been bitter to live in it, knowing himself their superior. How 
he had despised the ignorant and dirty old woman who had at last 
consented to house him in her miserable home! He had once tried 
to be grateful to her because she had in his last year nursed him 
through influenza, but it was difficult, for she was no less repulsive 
to him in her kindness. Now he remembered the youthful, haggard 
face of his prisoner — white and repulsive.

“Strange,” he thought. “I wonder why I could not kill him?”

Reading with Insight
1. 	 There are moments in life when we have to make  hard choices 

between our roles as private  individuals and as citizens with 
a sense of  national loyalty. Discuss with reference to the story 
you have just read.

2. 	 Dr Sadao was compelled by his duty as a doctor to help the 
enemy soldier. What made Hana, his wife, sympathetic to him 
in the face of open defiance from the domestic staff? 

3. 	 How would you explain the reluctance of the soldier to leave 
the shelter of the doctor’s home even when he knew he couldn’t 
stay there without risk to the doctor and himself?

4. 	 What explains the attitude of the General in the matter of the 
enemy soldier? Was it human consideration, lack of national 
loyalty,  dereliction of duty or simply self-absorption?

5. 	 While hatred against a member of the enemy race is justifiable, 
especially during wartime, what makes a human being rise 
above narrow prejudices? 

6. 	 Do you think the doctor’s final solution to the problem was 
the best possible one in the circumstances?

7. 	 Does the story remind you of ‘Birth’ by A. J. Cronin that you 
read in Snapshots last year? What are the similarities?

8. 	 Is there any film you have seen or novel you have read with 
a similar theme?

46 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 4.indd   46 12/18/2024   10:01:43 AM



5
On The Face Of It

Susan Hill

Before you read
This is a play featuring an old man and a small boy meeting in the 
former’s garden. The old man strikes up a friendship with the boy 
who is very withdrawn and defiant. What is the bond that unites 
the two? 

Scene One

Mr Lamb’s garden [There is the occasional sound of birdsong and of 
tree leaves rustling. Derry’s footsteps are heard as he walks slowly and 
tentatively through the long grass. He pauses, then walks on again. 
He comes round a screen of bushes, so that when Mr Lamb speaks 
to him he is close at hand and Derry is startled]

Mr Lamb: 	 Mind the apples!
Derry: 	 What? Who’s that? Who’s there?
Mr Lamb: 	 Lamb’s my name. Mind the apples. 

Crab apples those are. Windfalls in 
the long grass. You could trip.

Who is Mr Lamb? Derry: 	 I....there....I thought this was an 
How does Derry empty place. I didn’t know there was 

get into his anybody here....
garden? Mr Lamb:	 That’s all right. I’m here. What are 

you afraid of, boy? That’s all right.

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   47 12/18/2024   9:58:48 AM



Derry: 	 I thought it was empty....an empty house.
Mr Lamb:	 So it is. Since I’m out here in the garden. It is empty. 

Until I go back inside. In the meantime, I’m out here and 
likely to stop. A day like this. Beautiful day. Not a day to 
be indoors.

Derry: 	 [Panic] I’ve got to go.
Mr Lamb: 	Not on my account. I don’t mind who comes into the 

garden. The gate’s always open. Only you climbed the 
garden wall.

Derry: 	 [Angry] You were watching me.
Mr Lamb: 	I saw you. But the gate’s open. All welcome. You’re 

welcome. I sit here. I like sitting.
Derry: 	 I’d not come to steal anything.
Mr Lamb: 	No, no. The young lads steal....scrump the apples. You’re 

not so young.
Derry: 	 I just....wanted to come in. Into the garden.
Mr Lamb:	 So you did. Here we are, then.
Derry: 	 You don’t know who I am.
Mr Lamb:	 A boy. Thirteen or so.
Derry: 	 Fourteen. [Pause] But I’ve got to go now. Good-bye.
Mr Lamb:	 Nothing to be afraid of. Just a garden. Just me.
Derry: 	 But I’m not....I’m not afraid. [Pause] People are afraid of 

me.
Mr Lamb: 	Why should that be?
Derry: 	 Everyone is. It doesn’t matter who they are, or what they 

say, or how they look. How they pretend. I know. I can 
see.

Mr Lamb: 	See what?
Derry: 	 What they think.
Mr Lamb: 	What do they think, then?
Derry: 	 You think.... ‘Here’s a boy.’ You look at me...and  then you 

see my face and you think. ‘That’s bad. That’s a terrible 
thing. That’s the ugliest thing I ever saw.’ You think, ‘Poor 
boy.’ But I’m not. Not poor. Underneath, you are afraid. 

48 Vistas 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   48 12/18/2024   9:58:49 AM



Anybody would be. I am. When I look in the mirror, and 
see it, I’m afraid of me.

Mr Lamb: 	No, Not the whole of you. Not of you.
Derry: 	 Yes! 
	 [Pause]
Mr Lamb: 	Later on, when it’s a bit cooler, I’ll get the ladder and a 

stick, and pull down those crab apples. They’re ripe for 
it. I make jelly. It’s a good time of year, September. Look 
at them....orange and golden. That’s magic fruit. I often 
say. But it’s best picked and made into jelly. You could 
give me a hand.

Derry: 	 What have you changed the subject for? People always do 
that. Why don’t you ask me? Why do you do what they all 
do and pretend it isn’t true and isn’t there? In case I see 
you looking and mind and get upset? I’ll tell....you don’t 
ask me because you’re afraid to.

Mr Lamb: 	You want me to ask....say so, then.
Derry: 	 I don’t like being with people. Any people.
Mr Lamb: 	I should say....to look at it.... I should say, you got burned 

in a fire.
##40##
On the Face of It 49

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   49 12/18/2024   9:58:49 AM



Derry: 	 Not in a fire. I got acid all down that side of my face and 
it burned it all away. It ate my face up. It ate me up. And 
now it’s like this and it won’t ever be any different.

Mr Lamb: 	No.
Derry:	 Aren’t you interested?
Mr Lamb: 	You’re a boy who came into the garden. Plenty do. I’m 

interested in anybody. Anything. There’s nothing God 
made that doesn’t interest me. Look over there....over 
beside the far wall. What can you see?

Derry: 	 Rubbish.
Mr Lamb:	 Rubbish ? Look, boy, look....what do you see?
Derry: 	 Just....grass and stuff. Weeds.
Mr Lamb: 	Some call them weeds. If you like, then....a weed garden, 

that. There’s fruit and there are flowers, and trees and 
herbs. All sorts. But over there....weeds. I grow weeds 
there. Why is one green, growing plant called a weed and 
another ‘flower’? Where’s the difference. It’s all life.... 
growing. Same as you and me.

Derry: 	 We’re not the same.
Mr Lamb:	 I’m old. You’re young. You’ve got a burned face, I’ve got a 

tin leg. Not important. You’re standing there.... I’m sitting 
here. Where’s the difference?

Derry: 	 Why have you got a tin leg?
Mr Lamb: 	Real one got blown off, years back. Lamey-Lamb, some 

kids say. Haven’t you heard them? You will. Lamey-Lamb. 
It fits. Doesn’t trouble me.

Derry: 	 But you can put on trousers and cover it up and no one 
sees, they don’t have to notice and stare.

Mr Lamb: 	Some do. Some don’t. They get tired of it, in the end. 
There’s plenty of other things to stare at.

Derry: 	 Like my face.
Mr Lamb:	 Like crab apples or the weeds or a spider climbing up a 

silken ladder, or my tall sun-flowers.
Derry: 	 Things.

50 Vistas 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   50 12/18/2024   9:58:49 AM



Mr Lamb: 	It’s all relative. Beauty and the beast.
Derry: 	 What’s that supposed to mean?
Mr Lamb: 	You tell me.
Derry: 	 You needn’t think they haven’t all told me that fairy story 

before. ‘It’s not what you look like, it’s what you are 
inside. Handsome is as handsome does. Beauty loved the 
monstrous beast for himself and when she kissed him he 
changed into a handsome prince.’ Only he wouldn’t, he’d 
have stayed a monstrous beast. I won’t change.

Mr Lamb: 	In that way? No, you won’t.
Derry: 	 And no one’ll kiss me, ever. Only my mother, and she 

kisses me on the other side of my face, and I don’t like my 
mother to kiss me, she does it because she has to. Why 
should I like that? I don’t care if nobody ever kisses me.

Mr Lamb: 	Ah, but do you care if you never kiss them.
Derry: 	 What?
Mr Lamb: 	Girls. Pretty girls. Long hair and large eyes. People you 

love.
Derry: 	 Who’d let me? Not one.
Mr Lamb: 	Who can tell?
Derry: 	 I won’t ever look different. When I’m as old as you, I’ll 

look the same. I’ll still only have half a face.
Mr Lamb: 	So you will. But the world won’t. The world’s got a whole 

face, and the world’s there to be looked at.
Derry: 	 Do you think this is the world? This old garden?
Mr Lamb:	 When I’m here. Not the only one. But the world, as much 

as anywhere.
Derry: 	 Does your leg hurt you?
Mr Lamb: 	Tin doesn’t hurt, boy!
Derry: 	 When it came off, did it?
Mr Lamb: 	Certainly.
Derry: 	 And now? I mean, where the tin stops, at the top?
Mr Lamb: 	Now and then. In wet weather. It doesn’t signify.

On the Face of It 51

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   51 12/18/2024   9:58:49 AM



Derry: 	 Oh, that’s something else they all say. ‘Look at all those 
people who are in pain and brave and never cry and never 
complain and don’t feel sorry for themselves.’

Mr Lamb: 	I haven’t said it.
Derry: 	 And think of all those people worse off than you. Think, 

you might have been blinded, or born deaf, or have to live 
in a wheelchair, or be daft in your head and dribble.

Mr Lamb: 	And that’s all true, and you know it.
Derry: 	 It won’t make my face change. Do you know, one day, a 

woman went by me in the street — I was at  a bus-stop 
— and she was with another woman, and she looked at 
me, and she said.... whispered....only I heard her.... she 
said, “Look at that, that’s a terrible thing. That’s a face 
only a mother could love.”

Mr Lamb:	 So you believe everything you hear, then?
Derry: 	 It was cruel.
Mr Lamb: 	Maybe not meant as such. Just something said between 

them.
Derry: 	 Only I heard it. I heard.
Mr Lamb: 	And is that the only thing you ever heard  anyone say, in 

your life?
Derry: 	 Oh no! I’ve heard a lot of things.
Mr Lamb: 	So now you keep your ears shut.
Derry: 	 You’re....peculiar. You say peculiar things. You ask 

questions I don’t understand.
Mr Lamb: 	I like to talk. Have company. You don’t have to answer 

questions. You don’t have to stop here at all. The gate’s 
open.

Derry: 	 Yes, but...
Mr Lamb: 	I’ve a hive of bees behind those trees over there. Some 

hear bees and they say, bees buzz. But when you listen 
to bees for a long while, they humm....and hum means 
‘sing’. I hear them singing, my bees.

Derry: 	 But....I like it here. I came in because I liked it....when I 
looked over the wall.

52 Vistas 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   52 12/18/2024   9:58:49 AM



Mr Lamb: 	If you’d seen me, you’d not have come in.
Derry: 	 No.
Mr Lamb: 	No.
Derry: 	 It’d have been trespassing.
Mr Lamb: 	Ah. That’s not why.
Derry: 	 I don’t like being near people. When they stare....when I 

see them being afraid of me.
Mr Lamb: 	You could lock yourself up in a room and never leave it. 

There was a man who did that. He was afraid, you see. Of 
everything. Everything in this world. A bus might run him 
over, or a man might breathe deadly germs onto him, or a 
donkey might kick him to death, or lightning might strike 
him down, or he might love a girl and the girl would leave 
him, and he might slip on a banana skin and fall and people 
who saw him would laugh their heads off. So he went into 
this room, and locked the door, and got into his bed, and 
stayed there.

Derry: 	 For ever?
Mr Lamb:	 For a while.
Derry: 	 Then what?
Mr Lamb:	 A picture fell off the wall on to his head 

and killed him.
	 [Derry laughs a lot] Do you think all 
Mr Lamb: 	You see? this will change 

Derry’s attitude 
Derry: 	 But....you still say peculiar things. towards
Mr Lamb: 	Peculiar to some. Mr Lamb?
Derry: 	 What do you do all day?
Mr Lamb: 	Sit in the sun. Read books. Ah, you thought it was an 

empty house, but inside, it’s full. Books and other things. 
Full.

Derry: 	 But there aren’t any curtains at the windows.
Mr Lamb:	 I’m not fond of curtains. Shutting things out, shutting things in. 

I like the light and the darkness, and the windows open, to hear 
the wind.

On the Face of It 53

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   53 12/18/2024   9:58:49 AM



Derry: 	 Yes. I like that. When it’s raining, I like to hear it on the 
roof.

Mr Lamb: 	So you’re not lost, are you? Not altogether? You do hear 
things. You listen.

Derry: 	 They talk about me. Downstairs, When I’m not there. 
‘What’ll he ever do? What’s going to happen to him when 
we’ve gone? How ever will he get on in this world? Looking 
like that? With that on his face?’ That’s what they say.

Mr Lamb: 	Lord, boy, you’ve got two arms, two legs and eyes and 
ears, you’ve got a tongue and a brain. You’ll get on the 
way you want, like all the rest. And if you chose, and 
set  your  mind to it, you could get on better than all 
the rest.

Derry: 	 How?
Mr Lamb: 	Same way as I do.
Derry: 	 Do you have any friends?
Mr Lamb: 	Hundreds.
Derry: 	 But you live by yourself in that house. It’s a big house, 

too.
Mr Lamb: 	Friends everywhere. People come in.... everybody knows 

me. The gate’s always open. They come and sit here. And 
in front of the fire in winter. Kids come for the apples and 
pears. And for toffee. I make toffee with honey. Anybody 
comes. So have you.

Derry: 	 But I’m not a friend.
Mr Lamb:	 Certainly you are. So far as I’m concerned. What have 

you done to make me think you’re not?
Derry: 	 You don’t know me. You don’t know where I come from 

or even what my name is.
Mr Lamb:	 Why should that signify? Do I have to write all your 

particulars down and put them in a filing box, before you 
can be a friend?

Derry: 	 I suppose...not. No.
Mr Lamb:	 You could tell me your name. If you chose. And not, if 

you didn’t.

54 Vistas 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   54 12/18/2024   9:58:49 AM



Derry: 	 Derry. Only it’s Derek....but I hate that. Derry. If I’m your 
friend, you don’t have to be mine. I choose that.

Mr Lamb: 	Certainly.
Derry: 	 I might never come here again, you might never see me 

again and then I couldn’t still be a friend.
Mr Lamb: 	Why not?
Derry: 	 How could I? You pass people in the street and you might 

even speak to them, but you never see them again. It 
doesn’t mean they’re friends.

Mr Lamb: 	Doesn’t mean they’re enemies, either, does it?
Derry: 	 No they’re just....nothing. People. That’s all.
Mr Lamb: 	People are never just nothing. Never.
Derry: 	 There are some people I hate.
Mr Lamb: 	That’d do you more harm than any bottle of acid. Acid 

only burns your face.
Derry: 	 Only....
Mr Lamb:	 Like a bomb only blew up my leg. There’s worse things 

can happen. You can burn yourself away inside.
Derry: 	 After I’d come home, one person said, “He’d have been 

better off stopping in there. In the hospital. He’d be better 
off with others like himself.” She thinks blind people only 
ought to be with other blind people and idiot boys with 
idiot boys.

Mr Lamb: 	And people with no legs altogether?
Derry: 	 That’s right.
Mr Lamb: 	What kind of a world would that be?
Derry: 	 At least there’d be nobody to stare at you because you 

weren’t like them.
Mr Lamb: 	So you think you’re just the same as all the other 

people with burned faces? Just by what you look like? 
Ah....everything’s different. Everything’s the same, but 
everything is different. Itself.

Derry: 	 How do you make all that out?
Mr Lamb: 	Watching. Listening. Thinking.

On the Face of It 55

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   55 12/18/2024   9:58:49 AM



Derry: 	 I’d like a place like this. A garden. I’d like a house with 
no curtains.

Mr Lamb:	 The gate’s always open.
Derry: 	 But this isn’t mine.
Mr Lamb: 	Everything’s yours if you want it. What’s mine is anybody’s.
Derry: 	 So I could come here again? Even if you were out....I could 

come here.
Mr Lamb:	 Certainly. You might find others here, of course.
Derry: 	 Oh....
Mr Lamb: 	Well, that needn’t stop you, you needn’t mind.
Derry:	 It’d stop them. They’d mind me. When they saw me here. 

They look at my face and run.
Mr Lamb:	 They might. They might not. You’d have to take the risk. 

So would they.
Derry: 	 No, you would. You might have me and lose all your other 

friends, because nobody wants to stay near me if they 
can help it.

Mr Lamb: 	I’ve not moved.
Derry: 	 No....
Mr Lamb: 	When I go down the street, the kids shout  ‘Lamey-Lamb.’ 

But they still come into the garden, into my house; it’s 
a game. They’re not afraid of me. Why should they be? 
Because I’m not afraid of them, that’s why not.

Derry: 	 Did you get your leg blown off in the war?
Mr Lamb:	 Certainly.
Derry:	 How will you climb on a ladder and get the crab apples 

down, then?   
Mr Lamb:	 Oh, there’s a lot of things I’ve learned to do, and plenty 

of time for it. Years. I take it steady.
Derry: 	 If you fell and broke your neck, you could lie on the grass 

and die. If you were on your own.
Mr Lamb: 	I could.
Derry: 	 You said I could help you.
Mr Lamb: 	If you want to.

56 Vistas 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   56 12/18/2024   9:58:49 AM



Derry: 	 But my mother’ll want to know where I am. It’s three 
miles home, across the fields. I’m fourteen. but they still 
want to know where I am.

Mr Lamb: 	People worry.
Derry: 	 People fuss.
Mr Lamb:	 Go back and tell them.
Derry: 	 It’s three miles.
Mr Lamb: 	It’s a fine evening. You’ve got legs.
Derry: 	 Once I got home, they’d never let me come back.
Mr Lamb: 	Once you got home, you’d never let yourself come back.
Derry: 	 You don’t know....you don’t know what I could do.
Mr Lamb: 	No. Only you know that.
Derry: 	 If I chose....
Mr Lamb: 	Ah....if you chose. I don’t know everything, boy. I can’t 

tell you what to do.
Derry: 	 They tell me.
Mr Lamb: 	Do you have to agree?
Derry: 	 I don’t know what I want. I want....something no one else 

has got or ever will have. Something just mine. Like this 
garden. I don’t know what it is.

Mr Lamb:	 You could find out.
Derry: 	 How?
Mr Lamb: 	Waiting. Watching. Listening. Sitting here or going there. 

I’ll have to see to the bees.    
Derry: 	 Those other people who come here....do they talk to you? 

Ask you things?
Mr Lamb: 	Some do, some don’t. I ask them. I like to learn.
Derry:	 I don’t believe in them. I don’t think anybody ever comes. 

You’re here all by yourself and miserable and no one would 
know if you were alive or dead and nobody cares.

Mr Lamb: 	You think what you please.
Derry: 	 All right then, tell me some of their names.
Mr Lamb:	 What are names? Tom, Dick or Harry.

On the Face of It 57

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   57 12/18/2024   9:58:49 AM



	 [Getting up] I’m off down to the bees.
Derry: 	 I think you’re daft....crazy....
Mr Lamb: 	That’s a good excuse.
Derry: 	 What for? You don’t talk sense.
Mr Lamb:	 Good excuse not to come back. And you’ve got a burned-

up face, and that’s other people’s excuse.
Derry:	 You’re like the others, you like to say things like that. If 

you don’t feel sorry for my face, you’re frightened of it, 
and if you’re not frightened, you think I’m ugly as a devil. 
I am a devil. Don’t you? [Shouts]

	 [Mr Lamb does not reply. He has gone to his bees.]
Derry: 	 [Quietly] No. You don’t. I like it here.
	 [Pause.  Derry gets up and shouts.]
	 I’m going. But I’ll come back. You see. You wait.
	 I can run. I haven’t got a tin leg. I’ll be back.

	 [Derry runs off. Silence. The sounds of the garden again.]

Mr Lamb:	 [To himself] There my dears. That’s you seen to. Ah....you 
know. We all know. I’ll come back. They never do, though. 
Not them. Never do come back.

	 [The garden noises fade.]

58 Vistas 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   58 12/18/2024   9:58:50 AM



Scene Two

Derry’s house.

Mother:	 You think I don’t know about him, you think. I haven’t 
heard things?

Derry: 	 You shouldn’t believe all you hear.
Mother: 	 Been told. Warned. We’ve not lived here three months, 

but I know what there is to know and you’re not to go 
back there.

Derry: 	 What are you afraid of? What do you think he is? An old 
man with a tin leg and he lives in a huge house without 
curtains and has a garden.  And I want to be there, and 
sit and....listen to things. Listen and look.

Mother: 	 Listen to what?
Derry: 	 Bees singing. Him talking.
Mother: 	 And what’s he got to say to you?
Derry: 	 Things that matter. Things nobody else has ever said. 

Things I want to think about.
Mother: 	 Then you stay here and do your thinking. You’re best off 

here.
Derry: 	 I hate it here.
Mother: 	 You can’t help the things you say. I forgive you. It’s bound 

to make you feel bad things....and say them. I don’t blame 
you.

Derry: 	 It’s got nothing to do with my face and what I look like. 
I don’t care about that and it isn’t important. It’s what I 
think and feel and what I want to see and find out and 
hear. And I’m going back there. Only to help him with 
the crab apples. Only to look at things and listen. But 
I’m going.

Mother: 	 You’ll stop here.
Derry: 	 Oh no, oh no. Because if I don’t go back there, I’ll never 

go anywhere in this world again.

On the Face of It 59

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   59 12/18/2024   9:58:50 AM



[The door slams. Derry runs, panting.]
	 And I want the world....I want it....I want it....

[The sound of his panting fades.]

Scene Three

Mr Lamb’s garden [Garden sounds: the noise of a branch shifting; apples 
thumping down; the branch shifting again.]

Mr Lamb:	 Steady....that’s....got it. That’s it... [More apples fall]
	 And again. That’s it....and....
	 [A creak. A crash. The ladder falls back, Mr Lamb with it. 

A thump. The branch swishes back. Creaks. Then silence. 
Derry opens the garden gate, still panting.]

Derry: 	 You see, you see! I came back. You said I wouldn’t and 
they said....but I came back, I wanted....   

	 [He stops dead. Silence.]

	 Mr Lamb,  Mr....You’ve.....
	 [He runs through the grass. Stops. Kneels]

	 Mr Lamb, It’s all right....You fell....I’m here,  
Mr Lamb, It’s all right. 

	 [Silence]

	 I came back. Lamey-Lamb. I did.....come back.
	 [Derry begins to weep.] 

	 The End

Reading with Insight
1.  	 What is it that draws Derry towards Mr Lamb inspite of 

himself? 

60 Vistas 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   60 12/18/2024   9:58:50 AM



2.  	 In which section of the play does Mr Lamb display signs of 
loneliness and disappointment? What are the ways in which 
Mr Lamb tries to overcome these feelings?

3.  	 The actual pain or inconvenience caused by a physical 
impairment is often much less than the sense of alienation 
felt by the person with disabilities. What is the kind of 
behaviour that the person expects from others? 

4.  	 Will Derry get back to his old seclusion or will 
Mr Lamb’s brief association effect a change in the kind of 
life he will lead in the future?

How about...
	 using your imagination to suggest another ending to the 

above story.

On the Face of It 61

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 5.indd   61 12/18/2024   9:58:50 AM


##41##
6
Memories of Childhood 

Zitkala-Sa and Bama

Before you read
This unit presents autobiographical episodes from the lives of two women 
from marginalised communities who look back on their childhood, and 
reflect on their relationship with the mainstream culture. The first account 
is by an American Indian woman born in the late nineteenth century; the 
second is by a contemporary Tamil Dalit writer. 

Gertrude Simmons Bonnin, born in 1876, was an extraordinarily talented 
and educated Native American woman who struggled and triumphed in 
a time when severe prejudice prevailed towards Native American culture 
and women. As a writer, she adopted the pen name ‘Zitkala-Sa’ and in 
1900 began publishing articles criticising the Carlisle Indian school. Her works 
criticised dogma, and her life as a Native American woman was dedicated 
against the evils of oppression.

Bama is the pen-name of a Tamil Dalit woman from a Roman Catholic family. 
She has published three main works: an autobiography, ‘Karukku’, 1992; a 
novel, ‘Sangati’, 1994; and a collection of short stories, ‘Kisumbukkaaran’, 
1996. The following excerpt has been taken from ‘Karukku’. ‘Karukku’ 
means ‘Palmyra’ leaves, which with their serrated edges on both sides, are 
like double-edged swords. By a felicitous pun, the Tamil word ‘Karukku’, 
containing the word ‘karu’, embryo or seed, also means freshness, newness. 

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   62 12/16/2024   1:53:21 PM



I.  The Cutting of My Long Hair	..........Zitkala-Sa 

The first day in the land of apples was a bitter-cold one; for 
the snow still covered the ground, and the trees were bare. A large 
bell rang for breakfast, its loud metallic voice crashing through the 
belfry overhead and into our sensitive ears. The annoying clatter 
of shoes on bare floors gave us no peace. The constant clash of 
harsh noises, with an undercurrent of many voices murmuring an 
unknown tongue, made a bedlam within which I was securely tied. 
And though my spirit tore itself in struggling for its lost freedom, 
all was useless.

A paleface woman, with white hair, came up after us. We 
were placed in a line of girls who were marching into the dining 
room. These were Indian girls, in stiff shoes and closely clinging 
dresses. The small girls wore sleeved aprons and shingled hair. 
As I walked noiselessly in my soft moccasins, I felt like sinking to 
the floor, for my blanket had been stripped from my shoulders. I 
looked hard at the Indian girls, who seemed not to care that they 
were even more immodestly dressed than I, in their tightly fitting 
clothes. While we marched in, the boys entered at an opposite 
door. I watched for the three young braves who came in our 
party. I spied them in the rear ranks, looking as uncomfortable 
as I felt. A small bell was tapped, and each of the pupils drew a 
chair from under the table. Supposing this act meant they were 
to be seated, I pulled out mine and at once slipped into it from 
one side. But when I turned my head, I saw that I was the only 
one seated, and all the rest at our table remained standing. Just 
as I began to rise, looking shyly around to see how chairs were to 
be used, a second bell was sounded. All were seated at last, and 
I had to crawl back into my chair again. I heard a man’s voice at 
one end of the hall, and I looked around to see him. But all the 
others hung their heads over their plates. As I glanced at the long 
chain of tables, I caught the eyes of a paleface woman upon me. 
Immediately I dropped my eyes, wondering why I was so keenly 
watched by the strange woman. The man ceased his mutterings, 
and then a third bell was tapped. Every one picked up his knife 
and fork and began eating. I began crying instead, for by this time 
I was afraid to venture anything more.

Memories of Childhood 63

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   63 12/16/2024   1:53:22 PM



But this eating by formula was not the hardest trial in that 
first day. Late in the morning, my friend Judewin gave me a terrible 
warning. Judewin knew a few words of English; and she had 
overheard the paleface woman talk about cutting our long, heavy 
hair. Our mothers had taught us that only unskilled warriors who 
were captured had their hair shingled by the enemy. Among our 
people, short hair was worn by mourners, and shingled hair by 
cowards!

We discussed our fate some moments, and when Judewin said, 
“We have to submit, because they are strong,” I rebelled.

“No, I will not submit! I will struggle first!” I answered.
I watched my chance, and when no one noticed, I disappeared. 

I crept up the stairs as quietly as I could in my squeaking shoes, 
— my moccasins had been exchanged for shoes. Along the hall I 
passed, without knowing whither I was going. Turning aside to an 
open door, I found a large room with three white beds in it. The 
windows were covered with dark green curtains, which made the 
room very dim. Thankful that no one was there, I directed my steps 

toward the corner farthest from the door. On 
my hands and knees I crawled under the bed, 
and huddled myself in the dark corner.

From my hiding place I peered out, 
shuddering with fear whenever I heard footsteps 
near by. Though in the hall loud voices were 
calling my name, and I knew that even Judewin 
was searching for me, I did not open my mouth 

to answer. Then the steps were quickened and 
the voices became excited. 

The sounds came nearer 
and nearer. Women and 
girls entered the room. 
I held my breath and 

watched them open 
closet doors and 
peep behind large 
t runks .  Some 
one threw up the 

64 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   64 12/16/2024   1:53:22 PM



curtains, and the room was filled with sudden light. What caused 
them to stoop and look under the bed I do not know. I remember 
being dragged out, though I resisted by kicking and scratching 
wildly. Inspite of myself, I was carried downstairs and tied fast in 
a chair.

I cried aloud, shaking my head all the while until I felt the cold 
blades of the scissors against my neck, and heard them gnaw off 
one of my thick braids. Then I lost my spirit. Since the day I was 
taken from my mother I had suffered extreme indignities. People 
had stared at me. I had been tossed about in the air like a wooden 
puppet. And now my long hair was shingled like a coward’s! In my 
anguish I moaned for my mother, but no one came to comfort me. 
Not a soul reasoned quietly with me, as my own mother used to do; 
for now I was only one of many little animals driven by a herder.

II.  We Too are Human Beings ..........Bama

When I was studying in the third class, I hadn’t yet heard 
people speak openly of untouchability. But I had already seen, felt, 
experienced and been humiliated by what it is.

 I was walking home from school one day, an old bag hanging 
from my shoulder. It was actually possible to walk the distance in 
ten minutes. But usually it would take me thirty minutes at the 
very least to reach home. It would take me from half an hour to an 
hour to dawdle along, watching all the fun and games that were 
going on, all the entertaining novelties and oddities is the streets, 
the shops and the bazaar.

The performing monkey; the snake which the snakecharmer 
kept in its box and displayed from time to time; the cyclist who had 
not got off his bike for three days, and who kept pedalling as hard as 
he could from break of day; the rupee notes that were pinned on to 
his shirt to spur him on; the spinning wheels; the Maariyaata temple, 
the huge bell hanging there; the pongal offerings being cooked in 
front of the temple; the dried fish stall by the statue of Gandhi; the 
sweet stall, the stall selling fried snacks, and all the other shops next 
to each other; the street light always demonstrating how it could 
change from blue to violet; the narikkuravan huntergypsy with his 
wild lemur in cages, selling needles, clay beads and instruments 

Memories of Childhood 65

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   65 12/16/2024   1:53:22 PM



for cleaning out the ears — Oh, I could go on and on. Each thing 
would pull me to a stand-still and not allow me to go any further.

At times, people from various political parties would arrive, put 
up a stage and harangue us through their mikes. Then there might 
be a street play, or a puppet show, or a “no magic, no miracle” stunt 
performance. All these would happen from time to time. But almost 
certainly there would be some entertainment or other going on.

Even otherwise, there were the coffee clubs in the bazaar: the 
way each waiter cooled the coffee, lifting a tumbler high up and 
pouring its contents into a tumbler held in his other hand. Or the 
way some people sat in front of the shops chopping up onion, their 
eyes turned elsewhere so that they would not smart. Or the almond 
tree growing there and its fruit which was occasionally blown down 
by the wind. All these sights taken together would tether my legs 
and stop me from going home.

And then, according to the season, there would be mango, 
cucumber, sugar-cane, sweet-potato, palm-shoots, gram, palm-
syrup and palm-fruit, guavas and jack-fruit. Every day I would 
see people selling sweet and savoury fried snacks, payasam, halva, 
boiled tamarind seeds and iced lollies.

Gazing at all this, one day, I came to my street, my bag slung 
over my shoulder. At the opposite corner, though, a threshing floor 
had been set up, and the landlord watched the proceedings, seated 
on a piece of sacking spread over a stone ledge. Our people were 
hard at work, driving cattle in pairs, round and round, to tread out 
the grain from the straw. The animals were muzzled so that they 
wouldn’t help themselves to the straw. I stood for a while there, 
watching the fun.

Just then, an elder of our street came along from the direction 
of the bazaar. The manner in which he was walking along made me 
want to double up. I wanted to shriek with laughter at the sight of 
such a big man carrying a small packet in that fashion. I guessed 
there was something like vadai or green banana bhajji in the packet, 
because the wrapping paper was stained with oil. He came along, 
holding out the packet by its string, without touching it. I stood 
there thinking to myself, if he holds it like that, won’t the package 
come undone, and the vadais fall out?

66 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   66 12/16/2024   1:53:22 PM



The elder went straight up to the 
landlord, bowed low and extended the 
packet towards him, cupping the 
hand that held the string with 
his other hand. The landlord 
opened the parcel and 
began to eat the vadais.

After I had watched all 
this, at last I went home. 
My elder brother was there. 
I told him the story in all its 
comic detail. I fell about with 
laughter at the memory of 
a big man, and an elder at 
that, making such a game 
out of carrying the parcel. 
But Annan was not amused. 
Annan told me the man wasn’t 
being funny when he carried 
the package like that. He said 
everybody believed that they were upper caste and therefore must 
not touch us. If they did, they would be polluted. That’s why he 
had to carry the package by its string. 

When I heard this, I didn’t want to laugh any more, and I felt 
terribly sad. How could they believe that it was disgusting if one 
of us held that package in his hands, even though the vadai had 
been wrapped first in a banana leaf, and then parcelled in paper? 
I felt so provoked and angry that I wanted to touch those wretched 
vadais myself straightaway. Why should we have to fetch and carry 
for these people, I wondered. Such an important elder of ours goes 
meekly to the shops to fetch snacks and hands them over reverently, 
bowing and shrinking, to this fellow who just sits there and stuffs 
them into his mouth. The thought of it infuriated me.

How was it that these fellows thought so much of themselves? 
Because they had scraped four coins together, did that mean they 
must lose all human feelings? But we too are human beings. Our 
people should never run these petty errands for these fellows. We 
should work in their fields, take home our wages, and leave it at that. 

Memories of Childhood 67

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   67 12/16/2024   1:53:22 PM



My elder brother, who was studying at a university, had come 
home for the holidays. He would often go to the library in our 
neighbouring village in order to borrow books. He was on his way 
home one day, walking along the banks of the irrigation tank. One 
of the landlord’s men came up behind him. He thought my Annan 
looked unfamiliar, and so he asked, “Who are you, appa, what’s your 
name?” Annan told him his name. Immediately the other man asked, 
“Thambi, on which street do you live?” The point of this was that 
if he knew on which street we lived, he would know our caste too.

Annan told me all these things. And he added, “Because we 
are born into this community, we are never given any honour or 
dignity or respect; we are stripped of all that. But if we study and 
make progress, we can throw away these indignities. So study with 
care, learn all you can. If you are always ahead in your lessons, 
people will come to you of their own accord and attach themselves 
to you. Work hard and learn.” The words that Annan spoke to me 
that day made a very deep impression on me. And I studied hard, 
with all my breath and being, in a frenzy almost. As Annan had 
urged, I stood first in my class. And because of that, many people 
became my friends. 

Reading with Insight
1.	 The two accounts that you read above are based in two 

distant cultures. What is the commonality of theme found 
in both of them?

2.	 It may take a long time for oppression to be resisted, but the 
seeds of rebellion are sowed early in life. Do you agree that 
injustice in any form cannot escape being noticed even by 
children?

3.	 Bama’s experience is that of a victim of the caste system. What 
kind of discrimination does Zitkala-Sa’s experience depict? 
What are their responses to their respective situations?

68 Vistas

Reprint 2025-26

Chap 6.indd   68 12/16/2024   1:53:22 PM