Textbook in History for Class XII

THEMES IN

INDIAN HISTORY
PART III

Reprint 2025-26



12125 – THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III ISBN 81-7450-651-9 (Part I)
81-7450-753-3 (Part II)

Textbook in History for Class XII
81-7450-770-1 (Part III)

First Edition
July 2007 Sravana 1929 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted,

Reprinted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise
without the prior permission of the publisher.

February 2008, January 2009,
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-sold,

January 2010, November 2010, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding

March 2013, November 2013, or cover other than that in which it is published.

q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised price
December 2014, January 2016, indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should
February 2017, December 2017, be unacceptable.

January 2019, November 2019,
August 2021 and December 2021

OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION

DIVISION, NCERT
Revised Edition

NCERT Campus
November 2022  Agrahayana 1944 Sri Aurobindo Marg

New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708

Reprinted 108, 100 Feet Road

March 2024  Chaitra 1946 Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage

June 2024  Jyeshtha 1946 Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740

August 2024 Shravan 1946 Navjivan Trust Building
January 2025 Pausha 1946 P.O.Navjivan

Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446

PD 42T BS CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati

© National Council of Educational Kolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454

Research and Training, 2007, 2022 CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869

Publication Team

Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan
Division

Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar

Chief Production : Jahan Lal
Officer (In charge)

Chief Business Manager : Amitabh Kumar
` 105.00

Editor : Vijayam
Sankaranarayanan

Production Officer : Sunil Sharma

Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark

Published at the Publication Division Cover and Layout

by the Secretary, National Council of Art Creations, New Delhi

Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 Cartography
and printed at Print Pack India, D-12,
Sector, B-3, Trans Delhi Signature City Cartographic Design Agency

(Tronica City) Industrial Area, Loni,
Ghaziabad (U.P.) 201101

Reprint 2025-26



FOREWORD

The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between
the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks
developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this
basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the
maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas.
We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the
direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in the
National Policy on Education (1986).

The success of this effort depends on the steps that school
principals and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect
on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and
questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom,
children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information
passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as
the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other
resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity
and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children
as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body
of knowledge.

These aims imply considerable change in school routines and
mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as
necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that
the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to
teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also
determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s
life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at
different stages with greater consideration for child psychology and
the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities
for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and
activities requiring hands-on experience.

The National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the textbook
development committee responsible for this book. We wish to
thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Social Sciences,
Professor Hari Vasudevan, and the Chief Advisor for this book,

Reprint 2025-26



iv

Professor Neeladri Bhattacharya, Centre for Historical Studies,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi for guiding the work of
this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development of
this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this
possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which
have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material
and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the
National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of
Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and
Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution.
As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous
improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes
comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinement.

Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 November 2006 Research and Training

Reprint 2025-26



RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE
TEXTBOOKS

In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce

content load on students. The National Education Policy

2020, also emphasises reducing the content load and

providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative
mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken

the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes.

Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across

classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise.

Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view

of the following:

• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject

areas in the same class

• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in
the same subject

• Difficulty level

• Content, which is easily accessible to students without

much interventions from teachers and can be learned

by children through self-learning or peer-learning

• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context

This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the
changes given above.

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26



DEFINING THE FOCUS OF STUDY

What defines the focus of this book? What does it seek to do? How
is it linked to what has been studied in earlier classes?

In Classes VI to VIII we looked at Indian history from early
beginnings to modern times, with a focus on one chronological
period in each year. Then in the books for Classes IX and X, the
frame of reference changed. We looked at a shorter period of time,
focusing specifically on a close study of the contemporary world.
We moved beyond territorial boundaries, beyond the limits of nation
states, to see how different people in different places have played
their part in the making of the modern world. The history of India
became connected to a wider inter-linked history. Subsequently in
Class XI we studied Themes in World History, expanding our
chronological focus, looking at the vast span of years from the
beginning of human life to the present, but selecting only a set of
themes for serious exploration. This year we will study Themes in
Indian History.

The book begins with Harappa and ends with the framing of the
Indian Constitution. What it offers is not a general survey of five
millennia, but a close study of select themes. The history books in
earlier years have already acquainted you with Indian history. It is
time we explored some themes in greater detail.

In choosing the themes we have tried to ensure that we learn
about developments in different spheres – economic, cultural, social,
political, and religious – even as we attempt to break the boundaries
between them. Some themes in the book will introduce you to the
politics of the times and the nature of authority and power; others
explore the way societies are organised, and the way they function
and change; still others tell us about religious life and ritual
practices, about the working of economies, and the changes within
rural and urban societies.

Each of these themes will also allow you to have a closer look at
the historians’ craft. To retrieve the past, historians have to find
sources that make the past accessible. But sources do not just reveal
the past; historians have to grapple with sources, interpret them,
and make them speak. This is what makes history exciting. The
same sources can tell us new things if we ask new questions, and
engage with them in new ways. So we need to see how historians
read sources, and how they discover new things in old sources.

But historians do not only re-examine old records. They discover
new ones. Sometimes these could be chance discoveries.

Reprint 2025-26



viii

Archaeologists may unexpectedly come across seals and mounds
that provide clues to the existence of a site of an ancient civilisation.
Rummaging through the dusty records of a district collectorate a
historian may trip over a bundle of records that contain legal cases
of local disputes, and these may open up a new world of village life
several centuries back. Yet are such discoveries only accidents? You
may bump into a bundle of old records in an archive, open it up
and see it, without discovering the significance of the source. The
source may mean nothing to you unless you have relevant questions
in mind. You have to track the source, read the text, follow the clues,
and make the inter-connections before you can reconstruct the past.
The physical discovery of a record does not simply open up the
past. When Alexander Cunningham first saw a Harappan seal, he
could make no sense of it. Only much later was the significance of
the seals discovered.

In fact when historians begin to ask new questions, explore new
themes, they have to often search for new types of sources. If we
wish to know about revolutionaries and rebels, official sources can
reveal only a partial picture, one that will be shaped by official
censure and prejudice. We need to look for other sources – diaries
of rebels, their personal letters, their writings and pronouncements.
And these are not always easy to come by. If we have to understand
experiences of people, then oral sources might reveal more than
written sources.

As the vision of history broadens, historians begin tracking new
sources, searching for new clues to understand the past. And when
that happens, the conception of what constitutes a source itself
changes. There was a time when only written records were
acknowledged as authentic. What was written could be verified,
cited, and cross-checked. Oral evidence was never considered a valid
source: who was to guarantee its authenticity and verifiability? This
mistrust of oral sources has not yet disappeared, but oral evidence
has been innovatively used to uncover experiences that no other
record could reveal.

Through the book this year, you will enter the world of historians,
accompany them in their search for new clues, and see how they
carry on their dialogues with the past. You will witness the way they
tease out meaning out of records, read inscriptions, excavate
archaeological sites, make sense of beads and bones, interpret the
epics, look at the stupas and buildings, examine paintings and
photographs, interpret police reports and revenue records, and listen
to the voices of the past. Each theme will explore the peculiarities
and possibilities of one particular type of source. It will discuss what
a source can tell and what it cannot.

This is the last part of Themes in Indian History.

NEELADRI BHATTACHARYA

Chief Advisor, History

Reprint 2025-26



TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta, Kolkata

CHIEF ADVISOR
Neeladri Bhattacharya, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,

Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi (Theme 9)

ADVISORS
Kumkum Roy, Associate Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,

Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi (Theme 2)
Monica Juneja, Guest Professor, Institut Furgeschichte, Viennna, Austria

TEAM MEMBERS
Jaya Menon, Associate Professor, Department of History, Aligarh Muslim
University, Aligarh, UP (Theme 1)
Kunal Chakrabarti, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,

Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi (Theme 3)
Uma Chakravarti, Formerly Associate Professor in History, Miranda House,

University of Delhi, Delhi (Theme 4)
Farhat Hassan, Associate Professor, Department of History,

Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, UP (Theme 5)
Meenakshi Khanna, Associate Professor in History, Indraprastha College,

University of Delhi, Delhi (Theme 6)
Vijaya Ramaswamy, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,

Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi (Theme 7)
Rajat Datta, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,

Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi (Theme 8)
Najaf Haider, Associate Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,

Jawaharlal Nehru University New Delhi
Rudrangshu Mukherjee, Executive Editor, The Telegraph, Kolkata (Theme 10)
Partho Dutta, Associate Professor, Department of History, Zakir Hussain College

(Evening Classes), University of Delhi, Delhi
Ramachandra Guha, freelance writer, anthropologist and historian,

Bangalore (Theme 11)
Sumit Sarkar, Formerly Professor of History, University of Delhi, Delhi (Theme 12)
Muzaffar Alam, Professor of South Asian History,

University of Chicago, Chicago, USA
C.N. Subramaniam, Eklavya, Kothi Bazar, Hoshangabad
Rashmi Paliwal, Eklavya, Kothi Bazar, Hoshangabad
Prabha Singh, P.G.T. History, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Old Cantt.,

Telliarganj, Allahabad, UP
Smita Sahay Bhattacharya, P.G.T. History, Blue Bells School,

Kailash Colony, New Delhi
Beeba Sobti, P.G.T. History, Modern School, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi

MEMBER-COORDINATORS
Anil Sethi, Professor, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi
Seema Shukla Ojha, Assistant Professor, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi

Reprint 2025-26



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Themes in Indian History, Part III is the result of a collective effort of
a large number of educationists, school teachers, historians, editors
and designers. Each chapter was discussed and revised over months
of intensive discussion. We thank all those who participated in
the process.

Several people read the chapters and provided support. We
thank in particular the members of the Monitoring Committee,
Prof. J. S. Grewal and Shobha Bajpai for their useful comments
on earlier drafts. Prof. Narayani Gupta, Prabhu Mohapatra and
Tarun Saint offered valuable suggestions. Mahmood Farooqi
suggested extracts for  Chapter 11. Partha Shil, Akhila Yachuri
and Sabyasachi Dasgupta gave research support.

Many institutions and individuals provided visual resources for
the book: Victoria Memorial Museum and Library, Kolkata; Indira
Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, New Delhi; Alkazi Foundation
for the Arts, New Delhi; The Osian’s Archive and Library Collection,
Mumbai; CIVIC Archives, New Delhi; Photo Division, Government
of India; South Asia Centre, University of Chicago. Chittaranjan
Panda, Kaushik Bhowmik, Pratik Chakrabarty, and Rahab Alkazi
took personal care in procuring visual material for illustrations.
Juta and Jyotindra Jain opened up their vast collection of images
with a generosity rare amongst collectors. We thank them all.

Shalini Advani and Shyama Warner did many rounds of editing
with care and enthusiasm. Ritu Topa of Arrt Creations designed
the book, working tirelessly to meet impossible deadlines. Albinus
Tirkey provided technical support.

The review committe members for the rationalisation of the
content of this textbook are Umesh Ashok Kadam, Professor, Centre
for Historical Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi; Sunil
Kumar Singh, PGT History, Kendriya Vidyalaya; Krishna Ranjan,
PGT History, Kendriya Vidyalaya;  Archana Verma, Department of
History, Hindu College, University of Delhi; Shruti Mishra, PGT
History and HoD, History, Delhi Public School; Gouri Srivastava,
Professor and Head, DESS; Pratyusa K. Mandal, Professor, DESS,
NCERT; Mily Roy Anand, Seema Ojha, Sharad Kumar Pandey,
DESS, NCERT.

We have made every effort to acknowledge credits, but we
apologise in advance for any omission that may have inadvertently
taken place.

Reprint 2025-26



CONTENTS

Foreword iii
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks v
Defining the Focus of Study vii
How to Use This Book xiii

PART III

THEME NINE 227

COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE
Exploring Official Archives

THEME TEN 258

REBELS AND THE RAJ
The Revolt of1857 and Its Representations

THEME ELEVEN 286

MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE
NATIONALIST MOVEMENT
Civil Disobedience and Beyond

THEME TWELVE 316

FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION
The Beginning of a New Era

Reprint 2025-26



xii

PART I  (Pages 1- 114)

THEME ONE

BRICKS, BEADS AND BONES
The Harappan Civilisation

THEME TWO

KINGS, FARMERS AND TOWNS
Early States and Economies
(c. 600 BCE -600 CE)

THEME THREE

KINSHIP, CASTE AND CLASS
Early Societies
(c. 600 BCE-600 CE)

THEME FOUR

THINKERS, BELIEFS AND BUILDINGS
Cultural Developments
(c. 600 BCE-600 CE)

PART II  (Pages 115 - 226 )

THEME FIVE

THROUGH THE EYES OF TRAVELLERS
Perceptions of Society
(c. tenth to seventeenth century)

THEME SIX

BHAKTI-SUFI TRADITIONS
Changes in Religious Beliefs
and Devotional Texts
(c. eighth to eighteenth century)

THEME SEVEN

AN IMPERIAL CAPITAL: VIJAYANAGARA
(c. fourteenth to sixteenth century)

THEME EIGHT

PEASANTS, ZAMINDARS AND THE STATE
Agrarian Society and the Mughal Empire
(c. sixteenth-seventeenth centuries)

Reprint 2025-26



How to use this book

This is the last part of Themes in Indian History.

R Each chapter is divided into numbered sections and
subsections to facilitate learning.

R You will also find other material enclosed in boxes.

These contain:

Short Additional More elaborate
meanings information definitions

These are meant to assist and enrich the learning process,
but are not intended for evaluation.

R Each chapter ends with a set of timelines. This is to be treated as
background information, and not for evaluation.

R There are figures, maps and sources numbered sequentially through
each chapter.

(a) Figures include illustrations of artefacts such as tools, pottery, seals,
coins, ornaments etc. as well as of inscriptions, sculptures, paintings,
buildings, archaeological sites, plans and photographs of people and
places; visual material that historians use as sources.

(b) Some chapters have maps.

(c)  Sources are enclosed within separate boxes: these contain
Sources

excerpts from a wide variety of texts and inscriptions. Both
visual and textual sources will help you acquire a feel for the
clues that historians use. You will also see how historians
analyse these clues. The final examination can include
excerpts from and/or illustrations of identical/similar
material, providing you with an opportunity to handle
these.

Reprint 2025-26



xiv

R There are two categories of intext questions:

(a) those within a yellow box, which may be used for practice for
evaluation.

(b) those with the caption Ü Discuss... which are not for evaluation

R There are four types of assignments at the end of each chapter:
These include:

short questions short essays

map work projects

These are meant to provide practice for the final assessment and evaluation.

Hope you enjoy using this book.

Reprint 2025-26



227
##9##
Colonialism and the
THEME Countryside
NINE Exploring Official Archives

In this chapter you will see what
colonial rule meant to those who lived
in the countryside. You will meet the
zamindars of Bengal, travel to the
Rajmahal hills where the Paharias
and the Santhals lived, and then move
west to the Deccan. You will look at
the way the English East India
Company (E.I.C.) established its raj in
the countryside, implemented its
revenue policies, what these policies
meant to different sections of people,
and how they changed everyday lives.

Laws introduced by the state
have consequences for people: they
determine to an extent who grows
richer and who poorer, who acquires
new land and who loses the land they
have lived on, where peasants go
when they need money. As you will see,
however, people were not only subject
to the working of laws, they also
resisted the law by acting according to
what they believed to be just. In doing
so people defined the way in which
laws operated, thereby modifying their
consequences.

You will also come to know about
the sources that tell us about these
histories, and the problems historians
face in interpreting them. You will read
about revenue records and surveys,
journals and accounts left by surveyors Fig. 9.1
and travellers, and reports produced Cotton being carried from the village to the mandi,

by enquiry commissions. Illustrated London News, 20 April 1861

Reprint 2025-26



228  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

1. Bengal and the Zamindars
As you know, colonial rule was first established in
Bengal. It is here that the earliest attempts were
made to reorder rural society and establish a new
regime of land rights and a new revenue system. Let
us see what happened in Bengal in the early years
of Company (E.I.C.) rule.

1.1 An auction in Burdwan
In 1797 there was an auction in Burdwan (present-
day Bardhaman). It was a big public event. A number
of mahals (estates) held by the Raja of Burdwan
were being sold. The Permanent Settlement had
come into operation in 1793. The East India

Raja (literally king) was a term Company had fixed the revenue that each zamindar
that was often used to designate had to pay. The estates of those who failed to pay
powerful zamindars. were to be auctioned to recover the revenue. Since

the raja had accumulated huge arrears, his estates
had been put up for auction.

Numerous purchasers came to the auction and
the estates were sold to the highest bidder. But the
Collector soon discovered a strange twist to the tale.
Many of the purchasers turned out to be servants

Fig. 9.2 and agents of the raja who had bought the lands
Burdwan raja’s City Palace on on behalf of their master. Over 95 per cent of the
Diamond Harbour Road, Calcutta sale at the auction was fictitious. The raja’s estates
By the late nineteenth century had been publicly sold, but he remained in control
many rich zamindars of Bengal of his zamindari.
had city palaces with ballrooms,

Why had the raja failed to pay the revenue? Who
large grounds, entrance porches
supported by Corinthian columns were the purchasers at the auction? What does the
like these. story tell us about what was happening in the rural

areas of eastern India at that time?

1.2 The problem of unpaid revenue
The estates of the Burdwan raj were not the only
ones sold during the closing years of the eighteenth
century. Over 75 per cent of the zamindaris changed
hands after the Permanent Settlement.

In introducing the Permanent Settlement, British
officials hoped to resolve the problems they had
been facing since the conquest of Bengal. By
the 1770s, the rural economy in Bengal was in
crisis, with recurrent famines and declining
agricultural output. Officials felt that agriculture,
trade and the revenue resources of the state could
all be developed by encouraging investment in
agriculture. This could be done by securing rights
of property and permanently fixing the rates of

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 229

revenue demand. If the revenue demand of the state
was permanently fixed, then the Company could
look forward to a regular flow of revenue, while
entrepreneurs could feel sure of earning a profit
from their investment, since the state would not
siphon it off by increasing its claim. The process,
officials hoped, would lead to the emergence of a
class of yeomen farmers and rich landowners who
would have the capital and enterprise to improve
agriculture. Nurtured by the British, this class
would also be loyal to the Company.

The problem, however, lay in identifying
individuals who could both improve agriculture and
contract to pay the fixed revenue to the state. After
a prolonged debate amongst Company officials, the
Permanent Settlement was made with the rajas
and taluqdars of Bengal. They were now classified

Fig. 9.3
as zamindars, and they had to pay the revenue

Charles Cornwallis (1738-1805),
demand that was fixed in perpetuity. In terms of painted by Thomas Gainsborough,
this definition, the zamindar was not a landowner 1785
in the village, but a revenue Collector of the state. He was the commander of the

Zamindars had several (sometimes as many as 400) British forces during the American

villages under them. In Company calculations the War of Independence and the
Governor General of Bengal when

villages within one zamindari formed one revenue
the Permanent Settlement was

estate. The Company fixed the total demand over the introduced there in 1793.
entire estate whose revenue the zamindar contracted
to pay. The zamindar collected rent from the different
villages, paid the revenue to the Company, and
retained the difference as his income. He was expected
to pay the Company regularly, failing which his estate
could be auctioned.

1.3 Why zamindars defaulted on payments Taluqdar literally means “one
Company officials felt that a fixed revenue demand who holds a taluq” or a
would give zamindars a sense of security and, connection. Taluq came to refer
assured of returns on their investment, encourage to a territorial unit.
them to improve their estates.  In the early decades
after the Permanent Settlement, however, zamindars
regularly failed to pay the revenue demand and
unpaid balances accumulated.

The reasons for this failure were various. First: the
initial demands were very high. This was because it
was felt that if the demand was fixed for all time to
come, the Company would never be able to claim a
share of increased income from land when prices
rose and cultivation expanded. To minimise this
anticipated loss, the Company pegged the revenue

Reprint 2025-26



230  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

demand high, arguing that the burden on zamindars
would gradually decline as agricultural production
expanded and prices rose.

Second: this high demand was imposed in the
1790s, a time when the prices of agricultural produce

Ryot is the way the term raiyat, were depressed, making it difficult for the ryots to
used to designate peasants pay their dues to the zamindar. If the zamindar could
(Chapter 8), was spelt in British not collect the rent, how could he pay the Company?
records. Ryots in Bengal did Third: the revenue was invariable, regardless of the
not always cultivate the land harvest, and had to be paid punctually. In fact,
directly, but leased it out to according to the Sunset Law, if payment did not come
under-ryots. in by sunset of the specified date, the zamindari was

liable to be auctioned. Fourth: the Permanent
Settlement initially limited the power of the zamindar
to collect rent from the ryot and manage his zamindari.

The Company had recognised the zamindars as
important, but it wanted to control and regulate them,
subdue their authority and restrict their autonomy.
The zamindars’ troops were disbanded, customs
duties abolished, and their “cutcheries” (courts)
brought under the supervision of a Collector appointed
by the Company. Zamindars lost their power to
organise local justice and the local police. Over time
the collectorate emerged as an alternative centre of
authority, severely restricting what the zamindar
could do. In one case, when a raja failed to pay the
revenue, a Company official was speedily dispatched
to his zamindari with explicit instructions “to take
charge of the District and to use the most effectual
means to destroy all the influence and the authority
of the raja and his officers”.

At the time of rent collection, an officer of the
zamindar, usually the amlah, came around to the
village. But rent collection was a perennial problem.
Sometimes bad harvests and low prices made
payment of dues difficult for the ryots. At other times
ryots deliberately delayed payment. Rich ryots and
village headmen – jotedars and mandals – were only
too happy to see the zamindar in trouble. The
zamindar could therefore not easily assert his power
over them. Zamindars could prosecute defaulters,
but the judicial process was long drawn. In Burdwan
alone there were over 30,000 pending suits for
arrears of rent payment in 1798.

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 231

1.4 The rise of the jotedars
While many zamindars were facing a crisis at the
end of the eighteenth century, a group of rich
peasants were consolidating their position in the
villages. In Francis Buchanan’s survey of the
Dinajpur district in North Bengal we have a vivid
description of this class of rich peasants known as
jotedars. By the early nineteenth century, jotedars
had acquired vast areas of land – sometimes as much
as several thousand acres. They controlled local trade
as well as moneylending, exercising immense power
over the poorer cultivators of the region. A large part
of their land was cultivated through sharecroppers
(adhiyars or bargadars) who brought their own
ploughs, laboured in the field, and handed over half
the produce to the jotedars after the harvest.

Within the villages, the power of jotedars was more Fig. 9.4
effective than that of zamindars. Unlike zamindars Bengal village scene, painted
who often lived in urban areas, jotedars were located by George Chinnery, 1820
in the villages and exercised direct control over a Chinnery stayed in India for

considerable section of poor villagers. They fiercely 23 years (1802-25), painting

resisted efforts by zamindars to increase the jama of portraits, landscapes and
scenes of the everyday life of

the village, prevented zamindari officials from
the common people. Jotedars and

executing their duties, mobilised ryots who were moneylenders in rural Bengal
dependent on them, and deliberately delayed lived in houses like the one you
payments of revenue to the zamindar. In fact, see on the right.
when the estates of
the zamindars were
auctioned for failure to
make revenue payment,
jotedars were often
amongst the purchasers.

The jotedars were
most powerful in North
Bengal, although rich
peasants and village
headmen were emerging
as commanding figures
in the countryside in
other parts of Bengal as
well. In some places they
were called haoladars,
elsewhere they were
known as gantidars
or mandals. Their rise
inevitably weakened
zamindari authority.

Reprint 2025-26



232  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Source 1

n Zamindars were
The jotedars of Dinajpur COMPANY

responsible for:
Ù (a) paying revenue to

the company

Buchanan described the ways in (b) distributing the
revenue demand

which the jotedars of Dinajpur ZAMINDAR
(jama) over villages.

in North Bengal resisted being (controls numerous
villages) × n Each village ryot, big

disciplined by the zamindar and or small, paid rent  to
undermined his power: Ù the zamindar.

Landlords do not like this JOTEDAR n Jotedars gave out

RYOT Ø (a rich ryot, also loans to other ryots and
class of men, but it is evident

× a trader and sold their produce.
that they are absolutely Ù moneylender)

n Ryots cultivated
necessary, unless the

Ù some land and gave out
landlords themselves would the rest to under-ryots

advance money to their UNDER-RYOT on rent.
UNDER-RYOT

necessitous tenantry … n Under- ryots paid
rent to the ryots.

The jotedars who cultivate
large portions of lands are Fig. 9.5

very refractory, and know Power in rural Bengal

that the zamindars have no
Ü Read the text accompanying Fig.9.5 carefully and

power over them. They pay
insert the following terms in appropriate places along

only a few rupees on account
of their revenue and then fall the arrows: rent, revenue, interest, loan, produce

in balance almost every kist
(instalment), they hold more
lands than they are entitled 1.5 The zamindars resist
to by their pottahs (deeds The authority of the zamindars in rural areas,
of contract). Should the however, did not collapse.  Faced with an exorbitantly
zamindar’s off icers, in high revenue demand and possible auction of their
consequence, summon them estates, they devised ways of surviving the pressures.
to the cutcherry, and detain New contexts produced new strategies.
them for one or two hours Fictitious sale was one such strategy. It involved a
with a view to reprimand

series of manoeuvres. The Raja of Burdwan, for
them, they immediately go
and complain at the instance, first transferred some of his zamindari to

Fouzdarry Thanna (police his mother, since the Company had decreed that the
station) for imprisonment and property of women would not be taken over. Then, as
at the munsiff ’s (a judicial a second move, his agents manipulated the auctions.
officer at the lower court) The revenue demand of the Company was deliberately
cutcherry for being withheld, and unpaid balances were allowed to
dishonoured and whilst the accumulate. When a part of the estate was auctioned,
causes continue unsettled, the zamindar’s men bought the property, outbidding
they instigate the petty ryots other purchasers. Subsequently they refused to pay
not to pay their revenue

up the purchase money, so that the estate had to be
consequently …

resold. Once again it was bought by the zamindar’s
Ü Describe the ways in agents, once again the purchase money was not paid,
which the jotedars and once again there was an auction. This process
resisted the authority of was repeated endlessly, exhausting the state, and
the zamindars. the other bidders at the auction. At last the estate

was sold at a low price back to the zamindar. The

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 233

zamindar never paid the full revenue demand; the
Company rarely recovered the unpaid balances that
had piled up.

Such transactions happened on a grand scale.
Between 1793 and 1801 four big zamindaris
of Bengal, including Burdwan, made benami
purchases that collectively yielded as much as
Rs 30 lakh. Of the total sales at the auctions,
over 15 per cent were fictitious.

There were other ways in which zamindars
circumvented displacement. When people from
outside the zamindari bought an estate at an
auction, they could not always take possession. At
times their agents would be attacked by lathyals of
the former zamindar. Sometimes even the ryots
resisted the entry of outsiders. They felt bound to
their own zamindar through a sense of loyalty and Fig. 9.6
perceived him as a figure of authority and themselves Maharaja Mehtab Chand (1820-79)
as his proja (subjects). The sale of the zamindari When the Permanent Settlement

disturbed their sense of identity, their pride. The was imposed, Tejchand was the

zamindars therefore were not easily displaced. Raja of Burdwan. Subsequently
under Mehtab Chand the estate

By the beginning of the nineteenth century the
prospered. Mehtab Chand helped

depression in prices was over. Thus those who had the British during the Santhal
survived the troubles of the 1790s consolidated their rebellion and the 1857 revolt.
power. Rules of revenue payment were also made
somewhat flexible. As a result, the zamindar’s power
over the villages was strengthened. It was only during
the Great Depression of the 1930s that they finally
collapsed and the jotedars consolidated their power
in the countryside.

1.6 The Fifth Report
Many of the changes we are discussing were
documented in detail in a report that was submitted Benami, literally  anonymous,
to the British Parliament in 1813. It was the fifth of a is a term used in Hindi and
series of reports on the administration and activities several other Indian languages

of the East India Company in India. Often referred to for transactions made in the

as the Fifth Report, it ran into 1002 pages, of which name of a fictitious or relatively

over 800 pages were appendices that reproduced insignificant person, whereas

petitions of zamindars and ryots, reports of collectors the real beneficiary remains

from different districts, statistical tables on revenue unnamed.

returns, and notes on the revenue and judicial
administration of Bengal and Madras (present-day
Tamil Nadu) written by officials. Lathyal, literally one who wields

From the time the Company established its rule the lathi or stick, functioned as
in Bengal in the mid-1760s, its activities were closely a strongman of the zamindar.
watched and debated in England. There were many

Reprint 2025-26



234  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

groups in Britain who were opposed to the monopoly
that the East India Company had over trade with
India and China. These groups wanted a revocation
of the Royal Charter that gave the Company this
monopoly. An increasing number of private traders
wanted a share in the India trade, and the
industrialists of Britain were keen to open up the
Indian market for British manufactures. Many
political groups argued that the conquest of Bengal
was benefiting only the East India Company but not
the British nation as a whole. Information about
Company misrule and maladministration was hotly
debated in Britain and incidents of the greed and
corruption of Company officials were widely
publicised in the press. The British Parliament
passed a series of Acts in the late eighteenth century
to regulate and control Company rule in India. It

Fig. 9.7 forced the Company to produce regular reports on
Andul Raj Palace the administration of India and appointed
The ruins of palaces are a visible committees to enquire into the affairs of the
sign of the end of an era. Satyajit Company. The Fifth Report was one such report
Ray’s famous film Jalshaghar, on

produced by a Select Committee. It became the basis
the decline of the aristocratic
zamindari style of living, of intense parliamentary debates on the nature of
was shot in Andul Raj Palace. the East India Company’s rule in India.

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 235

For over a century and a half, the Fifth Report
has shaped our conception of what happened in rural
Bengal in the late eighteenth century. The evidence
contained in the Fifth Report is invaluable. But
official reports like this have to be read carefully.
We need to know who wrote the reports and why
they were written. In fact, recent researches show
that the arguments and evidence offered by the Fifth
Report cannot be accepted uncritically.

Researchers have carefully examined the
archives of various Bengal zamindars and the local
records of the districts to write about the history
of colonial rule in rural Bengal. They indicate that,
intent on criticising the maladministration of
the company, the Fifth Report exaggerated the
collapse of traditional zamindari power, as also
overestimated the scale on which zamindars were
losing their land. As we have seen, even when
zamindaris were auctioned, zamindars were not
always displaced, given the ingenious methods
they used to retain their zamindaris.

Source 2

From the Fifth Report

Referring to the condition of zamindars and the auction
of lands, the Fifth Report stated:

The revenue was not realised with punctuality, and
lands to a considerable extent were periodically
exposed to sale by auction. In the native year 1203,
corresponding with 1796-97, the land advertised for Ü From the tone in which
sale comprehended a jumma or assessment of sicca evidence is recorded, what do
rupees 28,70,061, the extent of land actually sold bore you think is the attitude of the
a jumma or assessment of 14,18,756, and the amount report to the facts narrated?
of purchase money sicca rupees 17,90,416. In 1204, What is the Report trying to say
corresponding with 1797-98, the land advertised was through the figures? Can you
for sicca rupees 26,66,191, the quantity sold was for think of any problem in making
sicca rupees 22,74,076, and the purchase money long-term generalisations from
sicca rupees 21,47,580. Among the defaulters were these figures of two years?
some of the oldest families of the country. Such were
the rajahs of Nuddea, Rajeshaye, Bishenpore
(a l l  d i s t r ic t s  o f  Bengal ) ,  … and others ,  the
dismemberment of whose estates at the end of each
succeeding year, threatened them with poverty and

Ü Discuss...
ruin, and in some instances presented difficulties to
the revenue officers, in their efforts to preserve Compare the account of the
undiminished the amount of public assessment. zamindars you have just read

with that in Chapter 8.

Reprint 2025-26



236  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

2. The Hoe and the Plough
Let us now shift our focus from the wetlands of Bengal
to drier zones, from a region of settled cultivation to
one where shifting agriculture was practised. You
will see the changes that came about when the
frontiers of the peasant economy expanded outwards,
swallowing up pastures and forests in the Rajmahal
hills. You will also see how these changes created a
variety of conflicts within the region.

2.1 In the hills of Rajmahal
In the early nineteenth century, Buchanan travelled
through the Rajmahal hills. From his description,
the hills appeared impenetrable, a zone where few
travellers ventured, an area that signified danger.
Wherever he went, people were hostile, apprehensive
of officials and unwilling to talk to them. In many
instances they deserted their villages and absconded.

Who were these hill folk? Why were they so
apprehensive of Buchanan’s visit? Buchanan’s
journal gives us tantalising glimpses of these hill
folk in the early nineteenth century. His journal was

Who was Buchanan? written as a diary of places he visited, people he
encountered, and practices he saw. It raises

Francis Buchanan was a questions in our mind, but does not always help us
physician who came to India and

answer them. It tells us about a moment in time,
served in the Bengal Medical

but not about the longer history of people and places.
Service (from 1794 to 1815).

For that historians have to turn to other records.
For a few years he was surgeon
to the Governor-General of If we look at late-eighteenth-century revenue

India, Lord Wellesley. During his records, we learn that these hill folk were known as

stay in Calcutta (present-day Paharias. They lived around the Rajmahal hills,
Kolkata), he organised a zoo that subsisting on forest produce and practising shifting
became the Calcutta Alipore cultivation. They cleared patches of forest by cutting
Zoo; he was also in charge of the bushes and burning the undergrowth. On these
Botanical Gardens for a short patches, enriched by the potash from the ash, the
period. On the request of the Paharias grew a variety of pulses and millets for
Government of Bengal, he consumption. They scratched the ground lightly
undertook detailed surveys of with hoes, cultivated the cleared land for a few years,
the areas under the jurisdiction then left it fallow so that it could recover its fertility,
of the Brit ish East India and moved to a new area.
Company. In 1815 he fell ill and From the forests they collected mahua (a flower)
returned to England. Upon his

for food, silk cocoons and resin for sale, and wood
mother’s death, he inherited her

for charcoal production. The undergrowth that
property and assumed her family
name Hamilton. So he is often spread like a mat below the trees and the patches of

called Buchanan-Hamilton. grass that covered the lands left fallow provided
pasture for cattle.

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 237

Fig. 9.8
A view of a hill village in Rajmahal, painted by William Hodges, 1782
William Hodges was a British artist who accompanied Captain Cook on his second voyage
to the Pacific (1772-75), and then came to India. In 1781 he became a friend of Augustus
Cleveland, the Collector of Bhagalpur. On the invitation of Cleveland, Hodges accompanied
him to the Jangal Mahals in 1782, and painted a set of aquatints. Like many other
British painters of the time, Hodges searched for the picturesque. Artists in search of the
picturesque were inspired by the ideals of Romanticism, a tradition of thought that
celebrated nature and admired its magnificence and power. Romantics felt that to commune
with nature the artist had to represent nature as an idyll, uncorrupted by modern
civilisation, discover unknown landscapes, and appreciate the sublime play of light and
shade. It is in search of this unknown that Hodges went to the Rajmahal hills. He found
flat landscapes monotonous, and discovered beauty in roughness, irregularity and variety.
A landscape that colonial officials found dangerous and wild, peopled by turbulent tribes,
appears in the paintings of Hodges as exotic and idyllic.

Ü Look at the painting and identify the ways in which it represents the
 traditions of the picturesque.

Aquatint is a picture produced
The life of the Paharias – as hunters, shifting by cutting into a copper sheet

cultivators, food gatherers, charcoal producers, with acid and then printing it.
silkworm rearers – was thus intimately connected to
the forest. They lived in hutments within tamarind
groves, and rested in the shade of mango trees. They
considered the entire region as their land, the basis

Reprint 2025-26



238  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Fig. 9.9
A view of Jangal territory,
painted by William Hodges
Here you can see the forested
low hills and the rocky upper
ranges, nowhere actually above
2,000 feet. By centring the hills
and viewing them from below,
Hodges emphasises their
inaccessibility.

Ü Look at Figs. 9.8 and
9.9. Describe how the
pictures represent the
relationship between tribal
people and nature.

of their identity as well as survival; and they resisted
the intrusion of outsiders. Their chiefs maintained
the unity of the group, settled disputes, and led the
tribe in battles with other tribes and plainspeople.

With their base in the hills, the Paharias regularly
raided the plains where settled agriculturists lived.
These raids were necessary for survival, particularly
in years of scarcity; they were a way of asserting
power over settled communities; and they were a
means of negotiating political relations with
outsiders. The zamindars on the plains had to often
purchase peace by paying a regular tribute to the
hill chiefs. Traders similarly gave a small amount
to the hill folk for permission to use the passes
controlled by them. Once the toll was paid, the
Paharia chiefs protected the traders, ensuring that
their goods were not plundered by anyone.

This negotiated peace was somewhat fragile. It
broke down in the last decades of the eighteenth
century when the frontiers of settled agriculture were
being aggressively extended in eastern India. The
British encouraged forest clearance, and zamindars
and jotedars turned uncultivated lands into rice
fields. To the British, extension of settled agriculture
was necessary to enlarge the sources of land
revenue, produce crops for export, and establish
the basis of a settled, ordered society. They also
associated forests with wildness, and saw forest
people as savage, unruly, primitive, and difficult to
govern. So they felt that forests had to be cleared,

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 239

settled agriculture established, and forest people
tamed, civilised and persuaded to give up hunting
and take to plough agriculture.

As settled agriculture expanded, the area under
forests and pastures contracted. This sharpened the
conflict between hill folk and settled cultivators. The
former began to raid settled villages with increasing
regularity, carrying away food grains and cattle.
Exasperated colonial officials tried desperately to
control and subdue the Paharias. But they found
the task difficult.

In the 1770s the British embarked on a brutal
policy of extermination, hunting the Paharias down
and killing them. Then, by the 1780s, Augustus
Cleveland, the Collector of Bhagalpur, proposed a
policy of pacification. Paharia chiefs were given an
annual allowance and made responsible for the
proper conduct of their men. They were expected to
maintain order in their localities and discipline their
own people. Many Paharia chiefs refused the
allowances. Those who accepted, most often lost
authority within the community. Being in the pay of
the  colonial government, they came to be perceived
as subordinate employees or stipendiary chiefs.

As the pacification campaigns continued, the
Paharias withdrew deep into the mountains,
insulating themselves from hostile forces, and
carrying on a war with outsiders. So when Buchanan
travelled through the region in the winter of
1810 -11 the Paharias naturally viewed him with
suspicion and distrust. The experience of pacification
campaigns and memories of brutal repression
shaped their perception of British infiltration into
the area. Every white man appeared to represent a
power that was destroying their way of life and means
of survival, snatching away their control over their
forests and lands.

By this time in fact there were newer intimations
of danger. Santhals were pouring into the area,
clearing forests, cutting down timber, ploughing land
and growing rice and cotton. As the lower hills were
taken over by Santhal settlers, the Paharias receded
deeper into the Rajmahal hills. If Paharia life was
symbolised by the hoe, which they used for shifting
cultivation, the settlers came to represent the power
of the plough. The battle between the hoe and the
plough was a long one.

Reprint 2025-26



240  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

2.2 The Santhals: Pioneer settlers
At the end of 1810, Buchanan crossed Ganjuria Pahar,
which was part of the Rajmahal ranges, passed
through the rocky country beyond, and reached a
village. It was an old village but the land around had
been recently cleared to extend cultivation. Looking
at the landscape, Buchanan found evidence of the
region having been transformed through “proper
application of human labour”. He wrote: “Gunjuriya
is just sufficiently cultivated to show what a glorious
country this might be made. I think its beauty and
riches might be made equal to almost any in the
universe.” The soil here was rocky but “uncommonly
fine”, and nowhere had Buchanan seen finer tobacco
and mustard. On enquiry he discovered that the
frontiers of cultivation here had been extended by

Fig. 9.10
the Santhals. They had moved into this area around

Hill village in Santhal country,
Illustrated London News, 1800, displaced the hill folk who lived on these lower
23 February 1856 slopes, cleared the forests and settled the land.
This village in the lower Rajmahal How did the Santhals reach the Rajmahal hills?
hills was sketched by Walter The Santhals had begun to come into Bengal around
Sherwill in the early 1850s. the 1780s. Zamindars hired them to reclaim land
The village appears to be peaceful, and expand cultivation, and British officials invited
calm and idyllic. Life seems

them to settle in the Jangal Mahals. Having failed
unaffected by the outside world.

to subdue the Paharias and transform them into
Ü Contrast this image of the settled agriculturists, the British turned to the
Santhal village with Fig. 9.12. Santhals. The Paharias refused to cut forests,

resisted touching the plough, and continued to be

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 241

turbulent. The Santhals, by contrast, appeared to
be ideal settlers, clearing forests and ploughing the
land with vigour.

The Santhals were given land and persuaded to
settle in the foothills of Rajmahal. By 1832 a large
area of land was demarcated as Damin-i-Koh. This
was declared to be the land of the Santhals. They
were to live within it, practise plough agriculture,
and become settled peasants. The land grant to the
Santhals stipulated that at least one-tenth of the area
was to be cleared and cultivated within the first ten
years. The territory was surveyed and mapped.
Enclosed with boundary pillars, it was separated from
both the world of the settled agriculturists of the
plains and the Paharias of the hills.

After the demarcation of Damin-i-Koh, Santhal
settlements expanded rapidly. From 40 Santhal villages
in the area in 1838, as many as 1,473 villages had
come up by 1851. Over the same period, the Santhal
population increased from a mere 3,000 to over 82,000.
As cultivation expanded, an increased volume of
revenue flowed into the Company’s coffers.

Santhal myths and songs of the nineteenth century
refer very frequently to a long history of travel: they
represent the Santhal past as one of continuous
mobility, a tireless search for a place to settle. Here
in the Damin-i-Koh their journey seemed to have come
to an end.

When the Santhals settled on the peripheries of
the Rajmahal hills, the Paharias resisted but were
ultimately forced to withdraw deeper into the hills.
Restricted from moving down to the lower hills and
valleys, they were confined to the dry interior and
to the more barren and rocky upper hills. This
severely affected their lives, impoverishing them
in the long term. Shifting agriculture depended on
the ability to move to newer and newer land and
utilisation of the natural fertility of the soil. When
the most fertile soils became inaccessible to them,
being part of the Damin, the Paharias could not
effectively sustain their mode of cultivation. When
the forests of the region were cleared for cultivation
the hunters amongst them also faced problems. The
Santhals, by contrast, gave up their earlier life of
mobility and settled down, cultivating a range of
commercial crops for the market, and dealing with
traders and moneylenders.

Reprint 2025-26



242  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

The Santhals, however, soon found that the land
they had brought under cultivation was slipping
away from their hands. The state was levying heavy
taxes on the land that the Santhals had cleared,
moneylenders (dikus) were charging them high rates
of interest and taking over the land when debts
remained unpaid, and zamindars were asserting
control over the Damin area.

By the 1850s, the Santhals felt that the time had
come to rebel against zamindars, moneylenders and
the colonial state, in order to create an ideal world
for themselves where they would rule. It was after
the Santhal Revolt (1855-56 ) that the Santhal
Pargana was created, carving out 5,500 square miles
from the districts of Bhagalpur and Birbhum. The

Fig. 9.11 colonial state hoped that by creating a new territory
Sidhu Manjhi, the leader of the for the Santhals and imposing some special laws
Santhal rebellion within it, the Santhals could be conciliated.

Fig. 9.12
Santhals fight the sepoys of the British Raj, Illustrated London News, 23 February 1856
The rebellion changed the British perception of the Santhals. Villages that had earlier seemed
calm and peaceful (Fig. 9.10) now appeared to have become places of violent and savage deeds.

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 243

Ü Imagine you
are a reader of
the Illustrated
London News in
England. How will
you react to the
images depicted in
Figs. 9.12, 9.13
and  9.14?
What image of the
Santhals would
these pictures create
in your mind?

Fig. 9.13
Burning of Santhal villages, Illustrated London News, 23 February 1856
After the rebellion was crushed, the region was searched, suspects were picked up, and
villages set on fire. Images of the burning villages were shown to the public in England –
once again as a demonstration of the might of the British and their ability to crush
rebellion and impose colonial order.

Fig. 9.14
Santhal prisoners being taken away, Illustrated London News, 1856
Notice how images like this one seek to convey political messages. At the centre you
can see British officials triumphantly riding on an elephant. One officer on a horse is
smoking a hookah: a picture that emphasises that the time of trouble was over, the
rebellion had been crushed. The rebels are now in chains, being taken away to jail
escorted and surrounded by soldiers of the Company.

Reprint 2025-26



244  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Source 3 2.3 The accounts of Buchanan

Buchanan on the We have been drawing on Buchanan’s account,
but while reading his reports we should not forget

Santhals
that he was an employee of the British East India
Company. His journeys were not simply inspired

Buchanan wrote:
by the love of landscape and the desire to discover

They are very clever in clearing the unknown. He marched everywhere with a
new lands, but live meanly. large army of people – draughtsmen, surveyors,
Their huts have no fence, and palanquin bearers, coolies. The costs of the
the walls are made of small

travels were borne by the East India Company
sticks placed upright, close
together and plastered within since it needed the information that Buchanan

with clay. They are small and was expected to collect. Buchanan had specific
slovenly, and too flat-roofed, instructions about what he had to look for and
with very little arch. what he had to record. When he arrived at a

village with his army of people, he was
immediately perceived as an agent of the sarkar.

As the Company consolidated its power and
expanded its commerce, it looked for natural
resources it could control and exploit. It surveyed
landscapes and revenue sources, organised
voyages of discovery, and sent its geologists and
geographers, its botanists and medical men to
collect information. Buchanan, undoubtedly an
extraordinary observer, was one such individual.
Everywhere Buchanan went, he obsessively
observed the stones and rocks and the different

Source 4
strata and layers of soil. He searched for

The rocks near Kaduya minerals and stones that were commercially
valuable, he recorded all signs of iron ore and
mica, granite and saltpetre. He carefully

Buchanan’s journal is packed observed local practices of salt-making and iron-
with observations l ike the ore-mining.
following: When Buchanan wrote about a landscape, he

About a mile farther on, (I) most often described not just what he saw, what
came to a low ledge of rocks the landscape was like, but also how it could be
without any evident strata; transformed and made more productive – what
it is a small grained granite crops could be cultivated, which trees cut down,
with reddish feldspar, with

and which ones grown. And we must remember
quartz and black mica …

that his vision and his priorities were different
More than half a mile from
thence, I came to another from those of the local inhabitants: his
rock not stratif ied, and assessment of what was necessary was shaped
consisting of very fine- by the commercial concerns of the Company and
grained granite with modern Western notions of what constituted
yellowish feldspar, whitish progress. He was inevitably critical of the
quartz and black mica. lifestyles of forest dwellers and felt that forests

had to be turned into agricultural lands.

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 245

Source 5

On clearance and settled cultivation

Passing through one village in the lower Rajmahal hills,
Buchanan wrote:

The view of the country is exceedingly fine, the
cultivation, especially the narrow valleys of rice
winding in all directions, the cleared lands with
scattered trees, and the rocky hills are in perfection;
all that is wanted is some appearance of progress in Ü Discuss...
the area and a vastly extended and improved What does Buchanan’s
cultivation, of which the country is highly susceptible.

description tell us about his
Plantations of Asan and Palas, for Tessar (Tassar silk
worms) and Lac, should occupy the place of woods ideas of development?

to as great an extent as the demand will admit; the Illustrate your argument by
remainder might be all cleared, and the greater part quoting from the excerpts.
cultivated, while what is not fit for the purpose, might If you were a Paharia forest
rear Plamira  (palmyra) and Mowa (mahua). dweller how would you have

reacted to these ideas?

3. A Revolt in the Countryside
The Bombay Deccan

You have read about how the lives of peasants and
zamindars of colonial Bengal and the Paharias
and Santhals of the Rajmahal hills were changing.
Now let us move across to western India, and to a
later period, and explore what was happening in the
countryside in the Bombay Deccan.

One way of exploring such changes is by focusing
on a peasant revolt. In such climactic times rebels
express their anger and fury; they rise against what
they perceive to be injustice and the causes of their
suffering. If we try to understand the premises of
their resentment, and peel the layers of their anger,
we get a glimpse of their life and experience that is
otherwise hidden from us. Revolts also produce
records that historians can look at. Alarmed by the
actions of rebels and keen on restoring order, state
authorities do not simply repress a rebellion. They
try and understand it, enquire into its causes so
that policies can be formulated and peace
established. These enquiries produce evidence that
historians can explore.

Through the nineteenth century, peasants in
various parts of India rose in revolt against

Reprint 2025-26



246  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Source 6 moneylenders and grain dealers. One such revolt

On that day in Supa occurred in 1875 in the Deccan.

3.1 Account books are burnt
On 16 May 1875, the District The movement began at Supa, a large village in Poona
Magistrate of Poona wrote to (present-day Pune) district. It was a market centre
the Police Commissioner: where many shopkeepers and moneylenders lived.

On arrival at Supa on On 12 May1875, ryots from surrounding rural areas
Saturday 15 May I learnt gathered and attacked the shopkeepers, demanding
of the disturbance. their bahi khatas (account books) and debt bonds.

One house of  a They burnt the khatas, looted grain shops, and in
moneylender was burnt some cases set fire to the houses of sahukars.
down; about a dozen were From Poona the revolt spread to Ahmednagar.
forcibly broken into and Then over the next two months it spread even further,
completely gutted of their over an area of 6,500 square km. More than thirty
content. Account papers, villages were affected. Everywhere the pattern was
bonds,  grains,  country the same: sahukars were attacked, account books
cloth were burnt in the

burnt and debt bonds destroyed. Terrified of peasant
street where heaps of ashes
are still to be seen. attacks, the sahukars fled the villages, very often

leaving their property and belongings behind.
The chie f  constable

As the revolt spread, British officials saw the
apprehended 50 persons.

spectre of 1857 (see Chapter 11). Police posts were
Sto len property  worth
Rs 2000 was recovered. established in villages to frighten rebellious peasants
The estimated loss is over into submission. Troops were quickly called in; 951
Rs 25,000. Moneylenders people were arrested, and many convicted. But
claim it is over 1 lakh. it took several months to bring the countryside

DECCAN RIOTS COMMISSION under control.

Source 7

A newspaper report
A sahukar was someone who
acted as both a moneylender
and a trader. The fol lowing report,  t i t led ‘The ryot and the

moneylender’, appeared in the Native Opinion  (6 June
1876), and was quoted in Report of  the Native
Newspapers of Bombay:

They (the ryots) first place spies on the boundaries
of their villages to see if any Government officers

Ü The words and terms used come, and to give timely intimation of their arrival

by a writer often tell us to the offenders. They then assemble in a body and

something about his or her go to the houses of their creditors, and demand

prejudices. Read Source 7 from them a surrender of their bonds and other

carefully and pick out the terms documents, and threaten them in case of refusal with

that indicate any prejudices of assault and plunder. If any Government officer
happens to approach the villages where the above is

the writer. Discuss how a ryot of
taking place, the spies give intimation to the offenders

the area would have described
and the latter disperse in time.

the same situation.

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 247

Why the burning of bonds and deeds? Why this
revolt? What does it tell us about the Deccan
countryside and about agrarian changes under
colonial rule? Let us look at this longer history of
changes over the nineteenth century.

3.2 A new revenue system
As British rule expanded from Bengal to other parts
of India, new systems of revenue were imposed. The
Permanent Settlement was rarely extended to any
region beyond Bengal.

Why was this so? One reason was that after 1810,
agricultural prices rose, increasing the value of
harvest produce, and enlarging the income of the
Bengal zamindars. Since the revenue demand was
fixed under the Permanent Settlement, the colonial
state could not claim any share of this enhanced
income. Keen on expanding its financial resources,
the colonial government had to think of ways to
maximise its land revenue. So in territories annexed
in the nineteenth century, temporary revenue
settlements were made.

There were other reasons too. When officials devise
policies, their thinking is deeply shaped by economic
theories they are familiar with. By the 1820s, the
economist David Ricardo was a celebrated figure in
England. Colonial officials had learnt Ricardian ideas
during their college years. In Maharashtra when
British officials set about formulating the terms of
the early settlement in the 1820s, they operated with
some of these ideas.

According to Ricardian ideas, a landowner should
have a claim only to the “average rent” that prevailed
at a given time. When the land yielded more than
this “average rent”, the landowner had a surplus
that the state needed to tax. If tax was not levied, Rentier is a term used to

cultivators were likely to turn into rentiers, and their designate people who live on

surplus income was unlikely to be productively rental income from property.

invested in the improvement of the land. Many
British officials in India thought that the history of
Bengal confirmed Ricardo’s theory. There the
zamindars seemed to have turned into rentiers,
leasing out land and living on the rental incomes. It
was therefore necessary, the British officials now
felt, to have a different system.

The revenue system that was introduced in the
Bombay Deccan came to be known as the ryotwari

Reprint 2025-26



248  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

settlement. Unlike the Bengal system, the revenue
was directly settled with the ryot. The average
income from different types of soil was estimated,
the revenue-paying capacity of the ryot was assessed
and a proportion of it fixed as the share of the state.
The lands were resurveyed every 30 years and
the revenue rates increased. Therefore the revenue
demand was no longer permanent.

3.3 Revenue demand and peasant debt
The first revenue settlement in the Bombay Deccan
was made in the 1820s. The revenue that was
demanded was so high that in many places peasants
deserted their villages and migrated to new regions.
In areas of poor soil and fluctuating rainfall the
problem was particularly acute. When rains failed
and harvests were poor, peasants found it impossible
to pay the revenue. However, the collectors in charge
of revenue collection were keen on demonstrating
their efficiency and pleasing their superiors. So they
went about extracting payment with utmost severity.
When someone failed to pay, his crops were seized
and a fine was imposed on the whole village.

By the 1830s the problem became more severe.
Prices of agricultural products fell sharply after 1832
and did not recover for over a decade and a half.
This meant a further decline in peasants’ income.
At the same time the countryside was devastated by
a famine that struck in the years 1832-34. One-
third of the cattle of the Deccan were killed, and
half the human population died. Those who survived
had no agricultural stocks to see them through the
crisis. Unpaid balances of revenue mounted.

How did cultivators live through such years?
How did they pay the revenue, procure their
consumption needs, purchase their ploughs and
cattle, or get their children married?

Inevitably, they borrowed. Revenue could rarely
be paid without a loan from a moneylender. But
once a loan was taken, the ryot found it difficult to
pay it back. As debt mounted, and loans remained
unpaid, peasants’ dependence on moneylenders
increased. They now needed loans even to buy their
everyday needs and meet their production
expenditure. By the 1840s, officials were finding
evidence of alarming levels of peasant indebtedness
everywhere.

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 249

By the mid-1840s there were signs of an economic
recovery of sorts. Many British officials had begun
to realise that the settlements of the 1820s had been 500

harsh. The revenue demanded was exorbitant, the
system rigid, and the peasant economy on the verge 400

of collapse. So the revenue demand was moderated
300

to encourage peasants to expand cultivation.
After 1845 agricultural prices recovered steadily. 200

Cultivators were now extending their acreage, moving
into new areas, and transforming pastureland into 100

cultivated fields. But to expand cultivation peasants
0

needed more ploughs and cattle. They needed money 1860 1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 1866 1867 1868 1869
1860 1862 1864 1866 1868

to buy seeds and land. For all this they had to turn
Y E A R S

once again to moneylenders for loans.
Fig. 9.15

3.4 Then came the cotton boom The cotton boom
Before the 1860s, three-fourths of raw cotton imports The line in the graph indicates
into Britain came from America. British cotton the rise and fall in cotton prices.

manufacturers had for long been worried about
this dependence on American supplies. What would
happen if this source was cut off? Troubled by this
question, they eagerly looked for alternative sources
of supply.

In 1857 the Cotton Supply Association was founded Fig. 9.16
Carts transporting cotton halting

in Britain, and in 1859 the Manchester Cotton
under a banyan tree,

Company was formed. Their objective was “to Illustrated London News,
encourage cotton production in every part of the world 13 December 1862

Reprint 2025-26

I N D E X



250  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

suited for its growth”. India was seen as a country
that could supply cotton to Lancashire if the American
supply dried up. It possessed suitable soil, a climate
favourable to cotton cultivation, and cheap labour.

When the American Civil War broke out in 1861,
a wave of panic spread through cotton circles in
Britain. Raw cotton imports from America fell to less
than three per cent of the normal: from over 2,000,000
bales (of 400 lbs each) in 1861 to 55,000 bales in
1862. Frantic messages were sent to India and
elsewhere to increase cotton exports to Britain. In
Bombay, cotton merchants visited the cotton

Ü The three panels in districts to assess supplies and encourage
Fig. 9.17 depict different cultivation. As cotton prices soared (see Fig. 10.15),
modes of transporting export merchants in Bombay were keen to secure
cotton.  Notice the bullocks

as much cotton as possible to meet the British
collapsing under the weight

demand. So they gave advances to urban sahukars
of the cotton, the boulders

who in turn extended credit to those rural
on the road, and the huge

moneylenders who promised to secure the produce.
pile of bales on the boat.
What is the artist suggesting When there is a boom in the market credit flows

through these images? easily, for those who give out loans feel secure about
recovering their money.

Fig. 9.17
Transporting cotton before the railway era, Illustrated London News, 20 April 1861
When cotton supplies from America were cut off during the Civil War, Britain hoped that
India would supply all the cotton that British industries needed. It began assessing the
supply, examining the quality of cotton and studying the methods of production and
marketing. This interest was reflected in the pages of the Illustrated London News.

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 251

These developments had a
profound impact on the Deccan
countryside. The ryots in the
Deccan villages suddenly found
access to seemingly limitless
credit. They were being given
Rs 100 as advance for every acre
they planted with cotton. Sahukars
were more than willing to extend
long-term loans.

While the American crisis
continued, cotton production in
the Bombay Deccan expanded.
Between 1860 and 1864 cotton acreage doubled. Fig. 9.18
By 1862 over 90 per cent of cotton imports into A fleet of boats carrying cotton bales

Britain were coming from India. down the Ganges from Mirzapur,

But these boom years did not bring prosperity to Illustrated London News,
13 December 1862

all cotton producers. Some rich peasants did gain,
Before the railway age, the town of

but for the large majority, cotton expansion meant Mirzapur was a collection centre
heavier debt. for cotton from the Deccan.

Fig. 9.19
Cotton bales lying at the Bombay terminus of the Great Indian Peninsula Railway ready for
shipment to England, Illustrated London News, 23 August 1862
Once the railways came up cotton supplies were not carried only on carts and boats. River traffic
declined over time. But older modes of transport were not fully displaced. The loaded bullock cart
in the foreground on the right is waiting to carry cotton bales from the railway station to the port.

Reprint 2025-26



252  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

3.5 Credit dries up
While the boom lasted, cotton merchants in India
had visions of capturing the world market in raw
cotton, permanently displacing America. The editor
of the Bombay Gazette had asked in 1861, “What can
prevent India from supplanting the Slave States (of
U.S.A.) as the feeder of Lancashire?” By 1865 these
dreams were over. As the Civil War ended, cotton

Source 8 production in America revived and Indian cotton
exports to Britain steadily declined.

A ryot petitions Export merchants and sahukars in Maharashtra
were no longer keen on extending long-term credit.

This is an example of a petition They could see the demand for Indian cotton fall
from a ryot of the village of and cotton prices slide downwards. So they decided
Mirajgaon, Taluka Karjat, to the

to close down their operations, restrict their
Collector, Ahmednagar, Deccan

advances to peasants, and demand repayment of
Riots Commission:

outstanding debts.
The sowkars  (sahukars ) … While credit dried up, the revenue demand
have of late begun to increased. The first revenue settlement, as we have
oppress us. As we cannot

seen, was in the 1820s and 1830s. Now it was time
earn enough to defray our
household expenses, we are for the next. And in the new settlement, the demand

actually forced to beg of was increased dramatically: from 50 to 100 per cent.
them to provide us with How could ryots pay this inflated demand at a time
money, clothes and grain, when prices were falling and cotton fields
which we obtain from disappearing? Yet again they had to turn to the
them not without great moneylender. But the moneylender now refused
difficulty, nor without their loans. He no longer had confidence in the ryots’
compelling us to enter into capacity to repay.
hard conditions in the bond.
Moreover the necessary 3.6 The experience of injustice
clothes and grain are not The refusal of moneylenders to extend loans enraged
sold to us at cash rates. The the ryots. What infuriated them was not simply that
prices asked from us are they had got deeper and deeper into debt, or that
generally twenty-five or they were utterly dependent on the moneylender
fifty per cent more than for survival, but that moneylenders were being
demanded from customers

insensitive to their plight. The moneylenders were
making ready money

violating the customary norms of the countryside.
payments … The produce of
our fields is also taken by the Moneylending was certainly widespread before
sowkars, who at the time colonial rule and moneylenders were often powerful
of removing it assure us
that it will be credited to
our account, but they do not

Ü Explain the complaints that the ryot is making in the
actually make any mention

petition. Why was the harvest taken by the
of it in the accounts. They

moneylenders not credited to the peasants’ account?
also refuse to pass us any
receipts for the produce so Why were peasants not given any receipts? If you

removed by them. were a moneylender what reasons would you give for
these practices?

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 253

figures. A variety of customary norms regulated the
relationship between the moneylender and the ryot.
One general norm was that the interest charged
could not be more than the principal. This was meant
to limit the moneylender’s exactions and defined what
could be counted as “fair interest”. Under colonial
rule this norm broke down. In one of the many cases
investigated by the Deccan Riots Commission, the
moneylender had charged over Rs 2,000 as interest
on a loan of Rs 100. In petition after petition, ryots
complained of the injustice of such exactions and
the violation of custom.

Source 9

Deeds of hire

When debts mounted the peasant was unable to pay
back the loan to the moneylender. He had no option
but to give over all his possessions – land, carts, and
animals – to the moneylender. But without animals he
could not continue to cultivate. So he took land on rent
and animals on hire. He now had to pay for the animals
which had originally belonged to him. He had to sign a
deed of hire stating very clearly that these animals and
carts did not belong to him. In cases of conflict, these
deeds could be enforced through the court.

The following is the text of a deed that a peasant signed
in November 1873, from the records of the Deccan Riots

Ü List all the commitments that
Commission: the peasant is making in this

I have sold to you, on account of the debt due to you, deed. What does such a deed
my two carriages having iron axles, with their of hire tell us about the
appurtenances and four bullocks … I have taken from relationship between the
you on hire under (this) deed the very same two peasant and the moneylender?
carriages and four bullocks. I shall pay every month How would it change the
the hire thereof at Rupees four a month, and obtain a relationship between the
receipt in your own handwriting. In the absence of a peasant and the bullocks he
receipt I shall not contend that the hire had been paid. previously owned?

The ryots came to see the moneylender as devious
and deceitful. They complained of moneylenders
manipulating laws and forging accounts. In 1859
the British passed a Limitation Law that stated
that the loan bonds signed between moneylenders
and ryots would have validity for only three years.
This law was meant to check the accumulation of
interest over time. The moneylender, however, turned

Reprint 2025-26



254  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

the law around, forcing the ryot to sign a new bond
every three years. When a new bond was signed, the
unpaid balance – that is, the original loan and the
accumulated interest – was entered as the principal
on which a new set of interest charges was calculated.
In petitions that the Deccan Riots Commission
collected, ryots described how this process worked
(see Source 10) and how moneylenders used a variety
of other means to short-change the ryot : they refused
to give receipts when loans were repaid, entered
fictitious figures in bonds, acquired the peasants’
harvest at low prices, and ultimately took over
peasants’ property.

Deeds and bonds appeared as symbols of the new
oppressive system. In the past such deeds had been
rare. The British, however, were suspicious of
transactions based on informal understanding, as
was common in the past. The terms of transactions,
they believed, had to be clearly, unambiguously and
categorically stated in contracts, deeds and bonds,
and regulated by law. Unless the deed or contract
was legally enforceable, it had no value.

Over time, peasants came to associate the misery
of their lives with the new regime of bonds and deeds.
They were made to sign and put thumb impressions
on documents, but they did not know what they were
actually signing. They had no idea of the clauses
that moneylenders inserted in the bonds. They feared
the written word. But they had no choice because to
survive they needed loans, and moneylenders were
unwilling to give loans without legal bonds.

Source 10

How debts mounted

In a petition to the Deccan Riots Commission a ryot explained how the
system of loans worked:

A sowkar  lends his debtor Rs 100 on bond at Rs 3-2 annas per cent
per mensem. The latter agrees to pay the amount within eight days
from the passing of the bond. Three years after the stipulated time for
repaying the amount, the sowkar takes from his debtor another bond
for the principal and interest together at the same rate of interest,
and allows him 125 days’ time to liquidate the debt. After the lapse of

Ü Calculate the rate
of interest that the 3 years and 15 days a third bond is passed by the debtor … (this process

is repeated) at the end of 12 years … his interest on Rs 1000 amounts
ryot was paying

to Rs 2028 -10 annas -3 paise.
over the years.

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 255

4. The Deccan Riots Commission
When the revolt spread in the Deccan, the
Government of Bombay was initially unwilling to
see it as anything serious. But the Government of
India, worried by the memory of 1857, pressurised
the Government of Bombay to set up a commission
of enquiry to investigate into the causes of the riots. Ü Discuss...
The commission produced a report that was Check what rates of interest
presented to the British Parliament in 1878. are charged in the region

This report, referred to as the Deccan Riots Report, where you live at present.
provides historians with a range of sources for the Find out whether these rates
study of the riot. The commission held enquiries have changed over the last
in the districts where the riots spread, recorded 50 years. Is there a variation
statements of ryots, sahukars and eyewitnesses, in the rates paid by different
compiled statistical data on revenue rates, prices groups of people? What are
and interest rates in different regions, and collated the reasons for the
the reports sent by district collectors. differences?

In looking at such sources we have to again
remember that they are official sources and reflect
official concerns and interpretations of events. The
Deccan Riots Commission, for instance, was
specifically asked to judge whether the level of
government revenue demand was the cause of the
revolt. And after presenting all the evidence, the
commission reported that the government demand
was not the cause of peasant anger. It was the
moneylenders who were to blame. This argument is
found very frequently in colonial records. This shows
that there was a persistent reluctance on the part
of the colonial government to admit that popular
discontent was ever on account of government action.

Official reports, thus, are invaluable sources for
the reconstruction of history. But they have to be
always read with care and juxtaposed with evidence
culled from newspapers, unofficial accounts, legal
records and, where possible, oral sources.

Reprint 2025-26



256  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

TIMELINE

1765 English East India Company acquires Diwani of Bengal

1773 Regulating Act passed by the British Parliament to
regulate the activities of the East India Company

1793 Permanent Settlement in Bengal

1800s Santhals begin to come to the Rajmahal hills and
settle there

1818 First revenue settlement in the Bombay Deccan

1820s Agricultural prices begin to fall

1840s-50s A slow process of agrarian expansion in the Bombay Deccan

1855-56 Santhal rebellion

1861 Cotton boom begins

1875 Ryots in Deccan villages rebel

ANSWER IN 100 -150 WORDS

1. Why was the jotedar a powerful figure in many areas
of rural Bengal?

2. How did zamindars manage to retain control over
their zamindaris?

3. How did the Paharias respond to the coming of
outsiders?

4. Why did the Santhals rebel against British rule?

5. What explains the anger of the Deccan ryots against
Fig. 9.20 the moneylenders?
A rural scene, painted by William
Prinsep, 1820

Reprint 2025-26



COLONIALISM AND THE COUNTRYSIDE 257

Write a short essay
(250 -300 words) on the following:

If you would like to know
more, read:

6. Why were many zamindaris auctioned after the Sugata Bose. 1986.
Permanent Settlement? Agrarian Bengal.

Cambridge University Press,
7. In what way was the livelihood of the Paharias Cambridge.

different from that of the Santhals?
Francis Buchanan.1930.

8. How did the American Civil War affect the lives Journal of Francis Buchanan
of ryots in India? Kept During the Survey of the

District of Bhagalpur.
9. What are the problems of using official sources Superintendent, Government

in writing about the history of peasants? Printing, Bihar and Orissa, Patna.

Ramachandra Guha. 1989.

Map work The Unquiet Woods: Ecological
Change and Peasant Resistance
in the Himalayas.
Oxford University Press,

10. On an outline map of the subcontinent, mark out
New Delhi.

the areas described in this chapter. Find out
whether there were other areas where the Sumit Guha. 1985.
Permanent Settlement and the ryotwari system The Agrarian Economy of the

were prevalent and plot these on the map as well. Bombay Deccan, 1818-1941.
Oxford University Press,
New Delhi.

Projects (choose one) Ravinder Kumar. 1968.
Western India in the Nineteenth
Century: A Study in the Social
History of Maharashtra.

11. Francis Buchanan published reports on several Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.
districts of eastern India. Read one report and
collate the information available about rural Ratnalekha Ray. 1979.

Change in Bengal Agrarian
society, focusing on the themes discussed in this

Society, c. 1760-1850.
chapter. Highlight the ways in which historians Manohar, New Delhi.
can use such texts.

Kumar Suresh Singh. 1966.
12. In the region where you live, talk to the older Dust-storm and the Hanging

people within a rural community and visit the Mist: A Study of Birsa Munda
fields they now cultivate. Find out what they and His Movement in
produce, how they earn their livelihoods, what Chhotanagpur (1874-1901).
their parents did, what their sons and Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay,

daughters do now, and how their lives have Calcutta.

changed over the last 75 years. Write a report
based on your findings.

Reprint 2025-26



258  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III
##10##
Rebels and the Raj
THEME

The Revolt of 1857
TEN

and Its Representations

Late in the afternoon of 10 May 1857, the sepoys in the cantonment
of Meerut broke out in mutiny. It began in the lines of the native
infantry, spread very swiftly to the cavalry and then to the city.
The ordinary people of the town and surrounding villages joined
the sepoys. The sepoys captured the bell of arms where the arms
and ammunition were kept and proceeded to attack white people,
and to ransack and burn their bungalows and property.
Government buildings – the record office, jail, court, post office,
treasury, etc. – were destroyed and plundered. The telegraph line
to Delhi was cut. As darkness descended, a group of sepoys rode
off towards Delhi.

The sepoys arrived at the gates of the Red
Fort early in the morning on 11 May. It was
the month of Ramzan, the Muslim holy month
of prayer and fasting. The old Mughal emperor,
Bahadur Shah, had just finished his prayers
and meal before the sun rose and the fast
began. He heard the commotion at the gates.
The sepoys who had gathered under his window
told him: “We have come from Meerut after
killing all the Englishmen there, because they
asked us to bite bullets that were coated with
the fat of cows and pigs with our teeth. This
has corrupted the faith of Hindus and Muslims
alike.’’ Another group of sepoys also entered
Delhi, and the ordinary people of the city joined
them. Europeans were killed in large numbers;
the rich of Delhi were attacked and looted. It
was clear that Delhi had gone out of British
control. Some sepoys rode into the Red Fort,
without observing the elaborate court etiquette
expected of them. They demanded that the
emperor give them his blessings. Surrounded
by the sepoys, Bahadur Shah had no other
option but to comply. The revolt thus acquired
a kind of legitimacy because it could now be

Fig. 10.1
carried on in the name of the Mughal emperor.

Portrait of Bahadur Shah

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 259

Through 12 and 13 May, North India remained quiet. Once
word spread that Delhi had fallen to the rebels and Bahadur
Shah had blessed the rebellion, events moved swiftly.
Cantonment after cantonment in the Gangetic valley and some
to the west of Delhi rose in mutiny.

1.  Pattern of the Uprising
If one were to place the dates of these mutinies in

Bell of arms is a storeroom in
chronological order, it would appear that as the news

which weapons are kept.
of the mutiny in one town travelled to the next the
sepoys there took up arms. The sequence of events
in every cantonment followed a similar pattern.

1.1 How the mutinies began
The sepoys began their action with a signal: in many

Firangi, a term of Persian origin,
places it was the firing of the evening gun or the

possibly derived from Frank
sounding of the bugle. They first seized the bell

(from which France gets its
of arms and plundered the treasury. They then name), is used in Urdu and
attacked government buildings – the jail, treasury, Hindi, often in a derogatory
telegraph office, record room, bungalows – burning sense, to designate foreigners.
all  records. Everything and everybody connected
with the white man became a target. Proclamations
in Hindi, Urdu and Persian were put up in the cities
calling upon the population, both Hindus and Fig. 10.2
Muslims, to unite, rise and exterminate the firangis. Ordinary people join the sepoys in

When ordinary people began joining the revolt, attacking the British in Lucknow.

the targets of attack
widened. In major towns
like Lucknow, Kanpur
and Bareilly, money-
lenders and the rich
also became the objects
of rebel wrath. Peasants
not only saw them
as oppressors but also
as allies of the British.
In most places their
houses were looted and
destroyed. The mutiny
in the sepoy  ranks quickly
became a rebellion.
There was a general
defiance of all kinds of
authority and hierarchy.

Reprint 2025-26



260  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

 In the months of May and June, the British had no
answer to the actions of the rebels. Individual Britons
tried to save their own lives and the lives of their
families. British rule, as one British officer noted,
“collapsed like a house made of cards’’.

Source 1

Ordinary life in extraordinary times

What happened in the cities during the months of the revolt?
How did people live through those months of tumult? How
was normal life affected? Reports from different cities tell us
about the breakdown in routine activities. Read these
reports from the Delhi Urdu Akhbar, 14 June 1857:

The same thing is true for vegetables and saag (spinach).
People have been found to complain that even kaddu
(pumpkin) and baingan (brinjal) cannot be found in the
bazaars. Potatoes and arvi (yam) when available are of
stale and rotten variety, stored from before by farsighted
kunjras (vegetable growers). From the gardens inside the
city some produce does reach a few places but the poor
and the middle class can only lick their lips and watch
them (as they are earmarked for the select).

... There is something else that needs attention which is
Ü Read the two reports causing a lot of damage to the people which is that the
and the descriptions of water-carriers have stopped filling water. Poor Shurfas

what was happening in (gentility) are seen carrying water in pails on their shoulders

Delhi provided in the and only then the necessary household tasks such as

chapter. Remember that cooking, etc. can take place. The halalkhors (righteous) have

newspaper reports often become haramkhors (corrupt), many mohallas have not
been able to earn for several days and if this situation

express the prejudices of
continues then decay, death and disease will combine

the reporter. How did
together to spoil the city’s air and an epidemic will spread

Delhi Urdu Akhbar view
all over the city and even to areas adjacent and around.

the actions of the people?

1.2 Lines of communication
The reason for the similarity in the pattern of the revolt
in different places lay partly in its planning and
coordination. It is clear that there was communication
between the sepoy lines of various cantonments. After
the 7th Awadh Irregular Cavalry had refused to accept
the new cartridges in early May, they wrote to the 48th
Native Infantry that “they had acted for the faith and
awaited the 48th’s orders”. Sepoys or their emissaries
moved from one station to another. People were thus
planning and talking about the rebellion.

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 261

Source 2

Sisten and the tahsildar

In the context of the communication of the message of
revolt and mutiny, the experience of François Sisten, a
native Christian police inspector in Sitapur, is telling.
He had gone to Saharanpur to pay his respects to the
magistrate. Sisten was dressed in Indian clothes and
sitting cross-legged. A Muslim tahsildar from Bijnor
entered the room; upon learning that Sisten was from
Awadh, he enquired, “What news from Awadh? How
does the work progress, brother?” Playing safe, Sisten

Ü What does this conversation
replied, “If we have work in Awadh, your highness will

suggest about the ways in
know it.” The tahsildar said, “Depend upon it, we will

which plans were communicated
succeed this time. The direction of the business is in

and discussed by the rebels?
able hands.” The tahsildar was later identified as the

Why did the tahsildar regard
principal rebel leader of Bijnor.

Sisten as a potential rebel?

The pattern of the mutinies and the pieces of
Mutiny –  a collective disobedience

evidence that suggest some sort of planning and
of rules and regulations within

coordination raise certain crucial questions. How
the armed forces

were the plans made? Who were the planners? It is
Revolt – a rebellion of people

difficult on the basis of the available documents to against established authority
provide direct answers to such questions. But one and power. The terms ‘revolt’
incident provides clues as to how the mutinies came and ‘rebellion’ can be used
to be so organised. Captain Hearsey of the Awadh synonymously.
Military Police had been given protection by his
Indian subordinates during the mutiny. The 41st In the context of the revolt of

Native Infantry, which was stationed in the same 1857 the term revolt refers

place, insisted that since they had killed all their primarily to the uprising of the

white officers, the Military Police should also kill civilian population (peasants,

Hearsey or deliver him as prisoner to the 41st. The zamindars, rajas, jagirdars)
while the mutiny was of the

Military Police refused to do either, and it was
sepoys.

decided that the matter would be settled by a
panchayat composed of native officers drawn from
each regiment. Charles Ball, who wrote one of the
earliest histories of the uprising, noted that
panchayats were a nightly occurrence in the Kanpur
sepoy lines. What this suggests is that some of the
decisions were taken collectively. Given the fact that
the sepoys lived in lines and shared a common
lifestyle and that many of them came from the same
caste, it is not difficult to imagine them sitting
together to decide their own future. The sepoys were
the makers of their own rebellion.

Reprint 2025-26



262  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

1.3 Leaders and followers
To fight the British, leadership and organisation
were required. For these the rebels sometimes
turned to those who had been leaders before the
British conquest. One of the first acts of the
sepoys of Meerut, as we saw, was to rush to Delhi
and appeal to the old Mughal emperor to accept
the leadership of the revolt. This acceptance of
leadership took its time in coming. Bahadur
Shah’s first reaction was one of horror and
rejection. It was only when some sepoys had
moved into the Mughal court within the Red Fort,
in defiance of normal court etiquette, that the
old emperor, realising he had very few options,
agreed to be the nominal leader of the rebellion.

Elsewhere, similar scenes were enacted
though on a minor scale. In Kanpur, the sepoys
and the people of the town gave Nana Sahib,
the successor to Peshwa Baji Rao II, no choice

Fig. 10.3
save to join the revolt as their leader. In Jhansi,

Rani Lakshmi Bai, a popular image
the rani was forced by the popular pressure
around her to assume the leadership of the
uprising. So was Kunwar Singh, a local
zamindar in Arrah in Bihar. In Awadh, where
the displacement of the popular Nawab Wajid
Ali Shah and the annexation of the state were
still very fresh in the memory of the people,
the populace in Lucknow celebrated the fall of
British rule by hailing Birjis Qadr, the young
son of the Nawab, as their leader.

Not everywhere were the leaders people of the
court – ranis, rajas, nawabs and taluqdars.
Often the message of rebellion was carried by
ordinary men and women and in places by
religious men too. From Meerut, there were
reports that a fakir had appeared riding on an
elephant and that the sepoys were visiting him
frequently. In Lucknow, after the annexation of
Awadh, there were many religious leaders and
self-styled prophets who preached the
destruction of British rule.

Fig. 10.4 Elsewhere, local leaders emerged, urging
Nana Sahib peasants, zamindars and tribals to revolt. Shah
At the end of 1858, when the Mal mobilised the villagers of pargana Barout in
rebellion collapsed, Nana Sahib

Uttar Pradesh; Gonoo, a tribal cultivator of
escaped to Nepal. The story of his
escape added to the legend of Singhbhum in Chotanagpur, became a rebel
Nana Sahib’s courage and valour. leader of the Kol tribals of the region.

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 263

Two rebels of 1857

Shah Mal

Shah Mal lived in a large village in pargana Barout in Uttar Pradesh. He belonged
to a clan of Jat cultivators whose kinship ties extended over chaurasee des
(eighty-four villages). The lands in the region were irrigated and fertile, with
rich dark loam soil. Many of the villagers were prosperous and saw the British
land revenue system as oppressive: the revenue demand was high and its
collection inflexible. Consequently cultivators were losing land to outsiders, to
traders and moneylenders who were coming into the area.

Shah Mal mobilised the headmen and cultivators of chaurasee des, moving
at night from village to village, urging people to rebel against the British. As
in many other places, the revolt against the British turned into a general
rebellion against all signs of oppression and injustice. Cultivators left their
fields and plundered the houses of moneylenders and traders. Displaced
proprietors took possession of the lands they had lost. Shah Mal’s men
attacked government buildings, destroyed the bridge over the river, and
dug up metalled roads – partly to prevent  government forces from coming
into the area, and partly because bridges and roads were seen as symbols
of British rule. They sent supplies to the sepoys who had mutinied in Delhi
and stopped all official communication between British headquarters and
Meerut. Locally acknowledged as the Raja, Shah Mal took over the bungalow
of an English officer, turned it into a “hall of justice”, settling disputes and
dispensing judgments. He also set up an amazingly effective network of
intelligence. For a period the people of the area felt that firangi raj was
over, and their raj had come.

Shah Mal was killed in battle in July 1857.

Maulvi Ahmadullah Shah

Maulvi Ahmadullah Shah was one of the many maulvis who played an
important part in the revolt of 1857. Educated in Hyderabad, he became a
preacher when young. In 1856, he was seen moving from village to village
preaching jehad (religious war) against the British and urging people to
rebel. He moved in a palanquin, with drumbeaters in front and followers at
the rear. He was therefore popularly called Danka Shah – the maulvi with
the drum (danka). British officials panicked as thousands began following
the maulvi and many Muslims began seeing him as an inspired prophet.
When he reached Lucknow in 1856, he was stopped by the police from
preaching in the city. Subsequently, in 1857, he was jailed in Faizabad.
When released, he was elected by the mutinous 22nd Native Infantry as
their leader. He fought in the famous Battle of Chinhat in which the British
forces under Henry Lawrence were defeated. He came to be known for his
courage and power. Many people in fact believed that he was invincible,
had magical powers, and could not be killed by the British. It was this belief
that partly formed the basis of his authority.

Reprint 2025-26



264  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

1.4 Rumours and prophecies
Rumours and prophecies played a part in moving
people to action. As we saw, the sepoys who had
arrived in Delhi from Meerut had told Bahadur Shah
about bullets coated with the fat of cows and pigs
and that biting those bullets would corrupt their
caste and religion. They were referring to the
cartridges of the Enfield rifles which had just been
given to them. The British tried to explain to the
sepoys that this was not the case but the rumour
that the new cartridges were greased with the fat of
cows and pigs spread like wildfire across the sepoy
lines of North India.

This is one rumour whose origin can be traced.
Captain Wright, commandant of the Rifle Instruction
Depot, reported that in the third week of January
1857 a “low-caste” khalasi who worked in the
magazine in Dum Dum had asked a Brahmin sepoy
for a drink of water from his lota. The sepoy had
refused saying that the “lower caste’s” touch would
defile the lota. The khalasi had reportedly retorted,
“You will soon lose your caste, as ere long you will
have to bite cartridges covered with the fat of cows

Fig. 10.5
Henry Hardinge, by Francis Grant, and pigs.” We do not know the veracity of the report,
1849 but once this rumour started no amount of
As Governor General, Hardinge assurances from British officers could stop its
attempted to modernise the circulation and the fear it spread among the sepoys.
equipment of the army. The Enfield This was not the only rumour that was circulating
rifles that were introduced initially in North India at the beginning of 1857. There was
used the greased cartridges the

the rumour that the British government had hatched
sepoys rebelled against.

a gigantic conspiracy to destroy the caste and religion
of Hindus and Muslims. To this end, the rumours
said, the British had mixed the bone dust of cows
and pigs into the flour that was sold in the market.
In towns and cantonments, sepoys and the common
people refused to touch the atta. There was fear and
suspicion that the British wanted to convert Indians
to Christianity. Panic spread fast. British officers
tried to allay their fears, but in vain. These fears
stirred men to action. The response to the call for
action was reinforced by the prophecy that British
rule would come to an end on the centenary of the
Battle of Plassey, on 23 June 1857.

Rumours were not the only thing circulating at
the time. Reports came from various parts of North
India that chapattis were being distributed from
village to village. A person would come at night and

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 265

give a chapatti to the watchman of the village and ask
him to make five more and distribute to the next village,
and so on. The meaning and purpose of the distribution
of the chapattis was not clear and is not clear even
today. But there is no doubt that people read it as an
omen of an upheaval.

1.5 Why did people believe in the rumours?
We cannot understand the power of rumours and
prophecies in history by checking whether they are
factually correct or not.  We need to see what they reflect
about the minds of people who believed them – their
fears and apprehensions, their faiths and convictions.
Rumours circulate only when they resonate with the
deeper fears and suspicions of people.

The rumours in 1857 begin to make sense when seen
in the context of the policies the British pursued from
the late 1820s. As you know, from that time, under the
leadership of Governor General Lord William Bentinck,
the British adopted policies aimed at “reforming” Indian
society by introducing Western education, Western ideas
and Western institutions. With the cooperation of
sections of Indian society they set up English-medium
schools, colleges and universities which taught Western
sciences and the liberal arts. The British established
laws to abolish customs like sati (1829) and to permit
the remarriage of Hindu widows.

On a variety of pleas, like misgovernment and the
refusal to recognise adoption, the British annexed
not only Awadh, but many other kingdoms and
principalities like Jhansi and Satara. Once these
territories were annexed, the British introduced their
own system of administration, their own laws and their
own methods of land settlement and land revenue
collection. The cumulative impact of all this on the
people of North India was profound.

It seemed to the people that all that they cherished Ü Discuss...
and held sacred – from kings and socio-religious customs Read the section once
to patterns of landholding and revenue payment – was more and explain the
being destroyed and replaced by a system that was similarities and
more impersonal, alien and oppressive. This perception differences you notice
was aggravated by the activities of Christian in the ways in which
missionaries. In such a situation of uncertainty, leaders emerged during
rumours spread with remarkable swiftness. the revolt. For any two

To explore the basis of the revolt of 1857 in some leaders, discuss why
detail, let us look at Awadh – one of the major centres ordinary people were
where the drama of 1857 unfolded. drawn to them.

Reprint 2025-26



266  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

2. Awadh in Revolt

2.1 “A cherry that will drop into our mouth
one day”

In 1851 Governor General Lord Dalhousie described
the kingdom of Awadh as “a cherry that will drop into
our mouth one day”. Five years later, in 1856, the
kingdom was formally annexed to the British Empire.

The conquest happened in stages. The Subsidiary
Alliance had been imposed on Awadh in 1801. By
the terms of this alliance the Nawab had to disband
his military force, allow the British to position their

Resident was the designation troops within the kingdom, and act in accordance
of a representative of the with the advice of the British Resident who was now
Governor General who lived in to be attached to the court. Deprived of his armed
a state which was not under forces, the Nawab became increasingly dependent
direct British rule. on the British to maintain law and order within the

kingdom. He could no longer assert control over the
rebellious chiefs and taluqdars.

In the meantime the British became increasingly
interested in acquiring the territory of Awadh. They
felt that the soil there was good for producing indigo
and cotton, and the region was ideally located to be
developed into the principal market of Upper India.

Subsidiary Alliance By the early 1850s, moreover, all the major areas of

Subsidiary Alliance was a India had been conquered: the Maratha lands, the
sys tem devised by Lord Doab, the Carnatic, the Punjab and Bengal. The
Wellesley in 1798. All those takeover of Awadh in 1856 was expected to complete
who entered into such an a process of territorial annexation that had begun
alliance with the British had with the conquest of Bengal almost a century earlier.
to accept certain terms and 2.2 “The life was gone out of the body”
conditions:

Lord Dalhousie’s annexations created disaffection
(a) The British would be

in all the areas and principalities that were annexed
responsible for protecting their

but nowhere more so than in the kingdom of Awadh
ally from external and internal

in the heart of North India. Here, Nawab Wajid Ali
threats to their power.

(b) In the territory of the Shah was dethroned and exiled to Calcutta on the

ally, a British armed contingent plea that the region was being misgoverned. The

would be stationed. British government also wrongly assumed that Wajid
(c) The ally would have Ali Shah was an unpopular ruler. On the contrary,

to provide the resources for he was widely loved, and when he left his beloved
maintaining this contingent. Lucknow, there were many who followed him all the

(d) The ally could enter way to Kanpur singing songs of lament.
into agreements with other The widespread sense of grief and loss at the
rulers   or engage in warfare Nawab’s exile was recorded by many contemporary
only with the permission of observers. One of them wrote: “The life was gone out
the British. of the body, and the body of this town had been left

lifeless …  there was no street or market and house

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 267

Map 1
Territories under British
control in 1857

Source 3

Sketch map not to scale
The Nawab has left

Another song mourned the
which did not wail out the cry of agony in separation plight of the ruler who had to
of Jan-i-Alam.” One folk song bemoaned that “the leave his motherland:
honourable English came and took the country’’ Noble and peasant all wept
(Angrez Bahadur ain, mulk lai linho ). together

This emotional upheaval was aggravated by and all the world wept and
immediate material losses. The removal of the Nawab wailed
led to the dissolution of the court and its culture.

Alas! The chief has bidden
Thus a whole range of people – musicians, dancers,

adieu to
poets, artisans, cooks, retainers, administrative
officials and so on – lost their livelihood. his country and gone

abroad.
2.3 Firangi raj and the end of a world
A chain of grievances in Awadh linked prince, Ü Read the entire section
taluqdar, peasant and sepoy. In different ways they and discuss why people
came to identify firangi raj with the end of their mourned the departure of
world – the breakdown of things they valued, Wajid Ali Shah.
respected and held dear. A whole complex of emotions

Reprint 2025-26



268  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

and issues, traditions and loyalties worked
themselves out in the revolt of 1857. In Awadh, more
than anywhere else, the revolt became an expression
of popular resistance to an alien order.

The annexation displaced not just the Nawab. It
also dispossessed the taluqdars of the region. The
countryside of Awadh was dotted with the estates
and forts of taluqdars who for many generations had
controlled land and power in the countryside. Before
the coming of the British, taluqdars maintained armed
retainers, built forts, and enjoyed a degree of
autonomy, as long as they accepted the suzerainty of
the Nawab and paid the revenue of their taluqs. Some
of the bigger taluqdars had as many as 12,000 foot-
soldiers and even the smaller ones had about 200.
The British were unwilling to tolerate the power of
the taluqdars. Immediately after the annexation, the
taluqdars were disarmed and their forts destroyed.

The British land revenue policy further undermined
the position and authority of the taluqdars. After
annexation, the first British revenue settlement,

Fig. 10.6
known as the Summary Settlement of 1856, was based

A zamindar from Awadh, 1880
on the assumption that the taluqdars were interlopers
with no permanent stakes in land: they had
established their hold over land through force and
fraud.  The Summary Settlement proceeded to remove
the taluqdars wherever possible. Figures show that
in pre-British times, taluqdars had held 67 per cent
of the total number of villages in Awadh; by the
Summary Settlement this number had come down to
38 per cent. The taluqdars of southern Awadh were
the hardest hit and some lost more than half of the
total number of villages they had previously held.

British land revenue officers believed that by
removing taluqdars they would be able to settle the
land with the actual owners of the soil and thus
reduce the level of exploitation of peasants while
increasing revenue returns for the state. But this
did not happen in practice: revenue flows for the
state increased but the burden of demand on the
peasants did not decline. Officials soon found that
large areas of Awadh were actually heavily
overassessed: the increase of revenue demand in
some places was from 30 to 70 per cent. Thus neither
taluqdars nor peasants had any reasons to be happy
with the annexation.

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 269

The dispossession of taluqdars meant the
breakdown of an entire social order. The ties of loyalty
and patronage that had bound the peasant to the
taluqdar were disrupted. In pre-British times, the
taluqdars were oppressors but many of them also
appeared to be generous father figures: they exacted
a variety of dues from the peasant but were often
considerate in times of need. Now, under the British, Source 4

the peasant was directly exposed to overassessment What taluqdars thought
of revenue and inflexible methods of collection. There
was no longer any guarantee that in times of hardship The attitude of the taluqdars was
or crop failure the revenue demand of the state would best expressed by Hanwant
be reduced or collection postponed; or that in times Singh, the Raja of Kalakankar,
of festivities the peasant would get the loan and near Rae Bareli. During the
support that the taluqdar had earlier provided. mutiny, Hanwant Singh had

In areas like Awadh where resistance during 1857 given shelter to a British officer,
was intense and long lasting, the fighting was carried and conveyed him to safety.
out by taluqdars and their peasants. Many of these While taking leave of the officer,
taluqdars were loyal to the Nawab of Awadh, and Hanwant Singh told him:
they joined Begum Hazrat Mahal (the wife of the Sahib, your countrymen
Nawab) in Lucknow to fight the British; some even came into this country and
remained with her in defeat. drove out our King. You

The grievances of the peasants were carried over sent your officers round the
into the sepoy lines since a vast majority of the districts to examine the

sepoys were recruited from the villages of Awadh. titles to the estates. At one

For decades the sepoys had complained of low levels blow you took from me
lands which from t ime

of pay and the difficulty of getting leave. By the 1850s
immemorial had been in

there were other reasons for their discontent. my family.  I  submit ted.
The relationship of the sepoys with their superior Suddenly misfortune fell

white officers underwent a significant change in upon you. The people of
the years preceding the uprising of 1857. In the the land rose against you.
1820s, white officers made it a point to maintain You came to me whom you
friendly relations with the sepoys. They would take had despoiled. I have saved
part in their leisure activities – they wrestled with you. But now – now I march

them, fenced with them and went out hawking with at the head of my retainers

them. Many of them were fluent in Hindustani and to Lucknow to try and drive
you from the country.

were familiar with the customs and culture of the
country. These officers were disciplinarian and
father figure rolled into one. Ü What does this excerpt

In the 1840s, this began to change. The officers tell you about the attitude

developed a sense of superiority and started of the taluqdars? Who did

treating the sepoys as their racial inferiors, riding Hanwant Singh mean by

roughshod over their sensibilities. Abuse and the people of the land?

physical violence became common and thus the What reason does

distance between sepoys and officers grew. Trust Hanwant Singh give for
the anger of the people?

was replaced by suspicion. The episode of the
greased cartridges was a classic example of this.

Reprint 2025-26



270  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

It is also important to
remember that close links existed
between the sepoys and the rural
world of North India. The large
majority of the sepoys of the
Bengal Army were recruited from
the villages of Awadh and eastern
Uttar Pradesh. Many of them were
Brahmins or from the “upper”
castes. Awadh was, in fact, called
the “nursery of the Bengal Army’’.
The changes that the families of

Fig. 10.7 the sepoys saw around them and
Bengal sepoys in European-style the threats they perceived were quickly transmitted
uniform to the sepoy lines. In turn, the fears of the sepoys

about the new cartridge, their grievances about
leave, their grouse about the increasing
misbehaviour and racial abuse on the part of their
white officers were communicated back to the
villages. This link between the sepoys and the rural
world had important implications in the course of

Ü Discuss... the uprising. When the sepoys defied their superior
Find out whether people in officers and took up arms they were joined very
your state participated in the swiftly by their brethren in the villages. Everywhere,
revolt of 1857. If they did, find peasants poured into towns and joined the soldiers
out why they did so.  If they and the ordinary people of the towns in collective
did not, try and explain this. acts of rebellion.

3. What the Rebels Wanted
As victors, the British recorded their own trials and
tribulations as well as their heroism. They dismissed
the rebels as a bunch of ungrateful and barbaric
people. The repression of the rebels also meant
silencing of their voice. Few rebels had the
opportunity of recording their version of events.
Moreover, most of them were sepoys and ordinary
people who were not literate. Thus, other than a few
proclamations and ishtahars (notifications) issued
by rebel leaders to propagate their ideas and
persuade people to join the revolt, we do not have
much that throws light on the perspective of the
rebels. Attempts to reconstruct what happened in
1857 are thus heavily and inevitably dependent on
what the British wrote. While these sources reveal
the minds of officials, they tell us very little about
what the rebels wanted.

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 271

3.1 The vision of unity
The rebel proclamations in 1857 repeatedly appealed
to all sections of the population, irrespective of their
caste and creed. Many of the proclamations were
issued by Muslim princes or in their names but
even these took care to address the sentiments of
Hindus. The rebellion was seen as a war in which
both Hindus and Muslims had equally to lose or
gain. The ishtahars harked back to the pre-British
Hindu-Muslim past and glorified the coexistence of
different communities under the Mughal Empire.
The proclamation that was issued under the name
of Bahadur Shah appealed to the people to join the
fight under the standards of both Muhammad and
Mahavir. It was remarkable that during the uprising
religious divisions between Hindus and Muslim
were hardly noticeable despite British attempts to
create such divisions. In Bareilly in western Uttar
Pradesh, in December 1857, the British spent
Rs 50,000 to incite the Hindu population against
the Muslims. The attempt failed.

Source 5

The Azamgarh Proclamation, 25 August 1857

This is one of the main sources of our knowledge about what the rebels wanted:

It is well known to all, that in this age the people of Hindostan, both Hindoos and
Mohammedans, are being ruined under the tyranny and the oppression of the infidel and
treacherous English. It is therefore the bounden duty of all the wealthy people of India,
especially those who have any sort of connection with the Mohammedan royal families,
and are considered the pastors and masters of their people, to stake their lives and property
for the well-being of the public. …

Several of the Hindoo and Mussalman Chiefs, who have long since quitted their homes
for the preservation of their religion, and have been trying their best to root out the English
in India, have presented themselves to me, and taken part in the reigning Indian crusade,
and it is more than probable that I shall very shortly receive succours from the West. Therefore
for the information of the public, the present Ishtahar, consisting of several sections, is put in
circulation and it is the imperative duty of all to take into their careful consideration, and
abide by it. Parties anxious to participate in the common cause, but having no means to
provide for themselves, shall receive their daily subsistence from me; and be it known to all,
that the ancient works, both of the Hindoos and Mohammedans, the writings of miracle
workers, and the calculation of the astrologers, pundits, …  all agree in asserting that the
English will no longer have any footing in India or elsewhere. Therefore it is incumbent on
all to give up the hope of the continuation of the British sway, side with me, and deserve the
consideration of the Badshahi, or imperial government, by their individual exertion in

contd

Reprint 2025-26



272  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Source 5 (contd)

promoting the common good, and thus attain their respective ends; otherwise if this
golden opportunity slips away, they will have to repent for their folly, … .

Section I – Regarding Zemindars. It is evident, that the British Government in making
zemindary settlements have imposed exorbitant Jumas (revenue demand) and have
disgraced and ruined several zemindars, by putting up their estates for public auction for
arrears of rent, in so much, in the institution of a suit by a common Ryot, a maid servant, or
a slave, the respectable zemindars are summoned into court, arrested, put in goal and
disgraced. In litigation regarding zemindaries, the immense value of stamps, and other
unnecessary expenses of the civil courts, … are all calculated to impoverish the litigants.
Besides this, the coffers of the zemindars are annually taxed with the subscription for schools,
hospitals, roads, etc. Such extortions will have no manner of existence in the Badshahi
Government; but on the contrary the Jumas will be light, the dignity and honour of the
zemindars safe, and every zemindar will have absolute rule in his own zemindary …

Section II – Regarding Merchants. It is plain that the infidel and treacherous British
Government have monopolised the trade of all the fine and valuable merchandise, such as
indigo, cloth, and other articles of shipping, leaving only the trade of trifles to the people, …
Besides this, the profits of the traders are taxed, with postages, tolls and subscriptions for
schools, etc. Notwithstanding all these concessions, the merchants are liable to
imprisonment and disgrace at the instance or complaint of a worthless man. When the
Badshahi Government is established all these aforesaid fraudulent practices shall be
dispensed with, and the trade of every article, without exception, both by land and water
will be opened to the native merchants of India, … It is therefore the duty of every merchant
to take part in the war, and aid the Badshahi Government with his men and money, … .

Section III – Regarding  Public Servants. It is not a secret thing, that under the British
Government, natives employed in the civil and military services have little respect, low pay,
and no manner of influence; and all the posts of dignity and emolument in both the
departments are exclusively bestowed on Englishmen, … Therefore, all the natives in the
British service ought to be alive to their religion and interest, and abjuring their loyalty to
the English, side with the Badshahi Government, and obtain salaries of 200 and 300 rupees
a month for the present, and be entitled to high posts in the future. …

Section IV – Regarding Artisans. It is evident that the Europeans, by the introduction of
English articles into India, have thrown the weavers, the cotton dressers, the carpenters,
the blacksmiths, and the shoemakers, etc., out of employ, and have engrossed their
occupations, so that every description of native artisan has been reduced to beggary. But
under the Badshahi Government the native artisans  will exclusively be employed in the
service of the kings, the rajahs, and the rich; and this will no doubt ensure their prosperity.
Therefore these artisans ought to renounce the English services, … .

Section V – Regarding Pundits, Fakirs and Other Learned Persons. The pundits and
fakirs being the guardians of the Hindoo and Mohammadan religions respectively, and
the Europeans being the enemies of both the religions, and as at present a war is raging
against the English on account of religion, the pundits and fakirs are bound to present
themselves to me, and take their share in the holy war… .

Ü What are the issues against British rule highlighted in this proclamation?
Read the section on each social group carefully. Notice the language in which
the proclamation is formulated and the variety of sentiments it appeals to.

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 273

Source 6

 What the sepoys thought

This is one of the arzis (petition or application) of rebel sepoys that have survived:

A century ago the British arrived in Hindostan and gradually entertained troops in
their service, and became masters of every state. Our forefathers have always served
them, and we also entered their service … By the mercy of God and with our assistance
the British also conquered every place they liked, in which thousands of us, Hindostani
men were sacrificed, but we never made any excuses or pretences nor revolted …

But in the year eighteen fifty seven the British issued an order that new cartridges
and muskets which had arrived from England were to be issued; in the former of
which the fats of cows and pigs were mixed; and also that attah of wheat mixed
with powdered bones was to be eaten; and even distributed them in every
Regiment of infantry, cavalry and artillery …

They gave these cartridges to the sowars (mounted soldiers) of the 3 rd Light
Cavalry, and ordered them to bite them; the troopers objected to it, and said that
they would never bite them, for if they did, their religion and faith would be
destroyed … upon this the British officers paraded the men of the 3 Regiments
and having prepared 1,400 English soldiers, and other Battalions of European
troops and Horse Artillery, surrounded them, and placing six guns before each of
the infantry regiments, loaded the guns with grape and made 84 new troopers
prisoners, and put them in jail with irons on them … The reason that the sowars of
the Cantonment were put into jail was that we should be frightened into biting the
new cartridges. On this account we and all our country-men having united
together, have fought the British for the preservation of our faith … we have been
compelled to make war for two years and the Rajahs and Chiefs who are with us in
faith and religion, are still so, and have undergone all sorts of trouble; we have
fought for two years in order that our faith and religion may not be polluted. If the
religion of a Hindoo or Mussalman is lost, what remains in the world?

Ü Compare the reasons for the mutiny as stated in the arzi with those
mentioned by the taluqdar (Source 3).

3.2 Against the symbols of oppression
The proclamations completely rejected everything
associated with British rule or firangi raj as they called
it. They condemned the British for the annexations they
had carried out and the treaties they had broken. The
British, the rebel leaders said, could not be trusted.

What enraged the people was how British land
revenue settlements had dispossessed landholders, both
big and small, and foreign commerce had driven artisans
and weavers to ruin. Every aspect of British rule was
attacked and the firangi accused of destroying a way of
life that was familiar and cherished. The rebels wanted
to restore that world.

Reprint 2025-26



274  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

The proclamations expressed the widespread fear
that the British were bent on destroying the caste
and religions of Hindus and Muslims and converting
them to Christianity – a fear that led people to
believe many of the rumours that circulated at the
time. People were urged to come together and fight
to save their livelihood, their faith, their honour,
their identity – a fight which was for the “greater
public good”.

As noted earlier, in many places the rebellion
against the British widened into an attack on all those
who were seen as allies of the British or local
oppressors. Often the rebels deliberately sought to
humiliate the elites of a city. In the villages they burnt
account books and ransacked moneylenders’ houses.
This reflected an attempt to overturn traditional
hierarchies, rebel against all oppressors. It presents
a glimpse of an alternative vision, perhaps of a more
egalitarian society. Such visions were not articulated
in the proclamations which sought to unify all social
groups in the fight against firangi raj.

3.3 The search for alternative power
Once British rule had collapsed, the rebels in  places
like Delhi, Lucknow and Kanpur tried to establish
some kind of structure of authority and
administration. This was, of course, short-lived but
the attempts show that the rebel leadership wanted
to restore the pre-British world of the eighteenth
century. The leaders went back to the culture of the
court. Appointments were made to various posts,
arrangements made for the collection of land revenue
and the payment of troops, orders issued to stop loot
and plunder. Side by side plans were made to fight
battles against the British. Chains of command were
laid down in the army. In all this the rebels harked
back to the eighteenth-century Mughal world – a
world that became a symbol of all that had been lost.

The administrative structures established by the
rebels were primarily aimed at meeting the demands
of war. However, in most cases these structures
could not survive the British onslaught. But in

Ü Discuss... Awadh, where resistance to the British lasted
What do you think are the longest, plans of counter-attack were being drawn
major problems faced by up by the Lucknow court and hierarchies of
historians in reconstructing command were in place as late as the last months
the point of view of the rebels? of 1857 and the early part of 1858.

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 275

Source 7

4. Repression
 Villagers as rebels

It is clear from all accounts that we have of 1857
that the British did not have an easy time in putting
down the rebellion. An officer reporting from rural

Before sending out troops to reconquer North Awadh (spelt as Oude in the
India, the British passed a series of laws to help following account) noted:
them quell the insurgency. By a number of Acts, The Oude people are
passed in May and June 1857, not only was the gradually pressing down on
whole of North India put under martial law but the line of communication
military officers and even ordinary Britons were from the North … the Oude
given the power to try and punish Indians people are vi l lagers  …

suspected of rebellion. In other words, the ordinary these villagers are nearly

processes of law and trial were suspended and it intangible to Europeans
melting away before them

was put out that rebellion would have only one
and collecting again. The

punishment – death.
Civi l  Authori t ies  report

Armed with these newly enacted special laws these villagers to amount
and the reinforcements brought in from Britain, the to a very large number of
British began the task of suppressing the revolt. men, with a number of guns.
They, like the rebels, recognised the symbolic value
of Delhi. The British thus mounted a two-pronged

Ü What, according to
attack. One force moved from Calcutta into North

this account, were the
India and the other from the Punjab – which problems faced by the
was largely peaceful – to reconquer Delhi. British British in dealing with

these villagers?

Map 2
The map shows
the important
centres of revolt
and the lines of
British attack

Sketch map not to scale
against the rebels.

Reprint 2025-26



276  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

attempts to recover Delhi began in earnest in early
June 1857 but it was only in late September that
the city was finally captured. The fighting and losses
on both sides were heavy. One reason for this was
the fact that rebels from all over North India had
come to Delhi to defend the capital.

In the Ganegtic plain too the progress of British
reconquest was slow. The forces had to reconquer
the area village by village. The countryside and the
people around were entirely hostile. As soon as they

Fig. 10.8 began their counter-insurgency operations, the
A mosque on the Delhi Ridge, British realised that they were not dealing with a
photograph by Felice Beato, 1857-58 mere mutiny but an uprising that had huge popular
After 1857, British photographers support. In Awadh, for example, a British official
recorded innumerable images of called Forsyth estimated that three-fourths of the
desolation and ruin.

adult male population was in rebellion. The area
was brought under control only in March 1858 after
protracted fighting.

The British used military power on a gigantic
scale. But this was not the only instrument they
used. In large parts of present-day Uttar Pradesh,
where big landholders and peasants had offered
united resistance, the British tried to break up the
unity by promising to give back to the big landholders
their estates. Rebel landholders were dispossessed
and the loyal rewarded. Many landholders died
fighting the British or they escaped into Nepal where
they died of illness or starvation.

Fig. 10.9
Secundrah Bagh, Lucknow,
photograph by Felice Beato,
1858
Here we see four solitary
figures within a desolate
place that was once the
pleasure garden built by
Nawab Wajid Ali Shah.
British forces led by
Campbell killed over 2000
rebel sepoys who held the
place in 1857. The skeletons
strewn on the ground are
meant to be a cold warning
of the futility of rebellion.

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 277

5. Images of the Revolt
How do we know about the revolt, about the activities
of the rebels and the measures of repression that
we have been discussing?

As we have seen, we have very few records on
the rebels’ point of view. There are a few rebel
proclamations and notifications, as also some
letters that rebel leaders wrote. But historians till
now have continued to discuss rebel actions
primarily through accounts written by the British.

Official accounts, of course, abound: colonial
administrators and military men left their versions
in letters and diaries, autobiographies and official
histories. We can also gauge the official mindset
and the changing British attitudes through the
innumerable memos and notes, assessments of
situations, and reports that were produced. Many
of these have now been collected in a set of volumes
on mutiny records. These tell us about the fears
and anxieties of officials and their perception of
the rebels. The stories of the revolt that were
published in British newspapers and magazines
narrated in gory detail the violence of the mutineers
– and these stories inflamed public feelings and
provoked demands of retribution and revenge.

One important record of the mutiny is the pictorial
images produced by the British and Indians:
paintings, pencil drawings, etchings, posters,
cartoons, bazaar prints. Let us look at some of them
and see what they tell us.

5.1 Celebrating the saviours
British pictures offer a variety of images that were
meant to provoke a range of different emotions and
reactions. Some of them commemorate the British
heroes who saved the English and repressed the
rebels. “Relief of Lucknow”, painted by Thomas Jones
Barker in 1859, is an example of this type. When
the rebel forces besieged Lucknow, Henry Lawrence,
the Commissioner of Lucknow, collected the
Christian population and took refuge in the heavily
fortified Residency. Lawrence was killed  but the
Residency continued to be defended under the
command of Colonel Inglis. On 25 September James
Outram and Henry Havelock arrived, cut through
the rebel forces, and reinforced the British
garrisons. Twenty days later Colin Campbell, who

Reprint 2025-26



278  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Fig. 10.10 was appointed as the new Commander of British
“Relief of Lucknow”, painted by

forces in India, came with his forces and rescued
Thomas Jones Barker, 1859

the besieged British garrison. In British accounts
the siege of Lucknow became a story of survival,
heroic resistance and the ultimate triumph of
British power.

Barker’s painting celebrates the moment of
Campbell’s entry. At the centre of the canvas are
the British heroes – Campbell, Outram and Havelock.
The gestures of the hands of those around lead the
spectator’s eyes towards the centre. The heroes stand
on a ground that is well lit, with shadows in the
foreground and the damaged Residency in the
background. The dead and injured in the foreground
are testimony to the suffering during the siege, while
the triumphant figures of horses in the middle ground
emphasise the fact that British power and control
had been re-established. To the British public such
paintings were reassuring. They created a sense that
the time of trouble was past and the rebellion was
over; the British were the victors.

5.2 English women and the honour of Britain
Newspaper reports have a power over public
imagination; they shape feelings and attitudes to
events. Inflamed particularly by tales of violence

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 279

against women and children, there were public
demands in Britain for revenge and retribution. The
British government was asked to protect the honour
of innocent women and ensure the safety of helpless
children. Artists expressed as well as shaped these
sentiments through their visual representations of
trauma and suffering.

“In Memoriam” (Fig. 10.11) was painted by Joseph
Noel Paton two years after the mutiny. You can see
English women and children huddled in a circle,
looking helpless and innocent, seemingly waiting
for the inevitable – dishonour, violence and death.
“In Memoriam” does not show gory violence; it only
suggests it. It stirs up the spectator’s imagination,
and seeks to provoke anger and fury. It represents
the rebels as violent and brutish, even though
they remain invisible in the picture. In the background
you can see the British rescue forces arriving
as saviours.

Fig. 10.11
“In Memoriam”,
by Joseph Noel Paton, 1859

Reprint 2025-26



280  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Fig. 10.12
Miss Wheeler defending herself
against sepoys in Kanpur

In another set of sketches and paintings we see
women in a different light. They appear heroic,
defending themselves against the attack of rebels.
Miss Wheeler in Figure 10.12 stands firmly at the
centre, defending her honour, single-handedly
killing the attacking rebels. As in all such British
representations, the rebels are demonised. Here,
four burly males with swords and guns are shown
attacking a woman. The woman’s struggle to save
her honour and her life, in fact, is represented as
having a deeper religious connotation: it is a battle
to save the honour of Christianity. The book lying
on the floor is the Bible.

5.3 Vengeance and retribution
As waves of anger and shock spread in Britain,
demands for retribution grew louder. Visual
representations and news about the revolt created a
milieu in which violent repression and vengeance were
seen as both necessary and just. It was as if justice
demanded that the challenge to British honour and
power be met ruthlessly. Threatened by the rebellion,
the British felt that they had to demonstrate their
invincibility. In one such image (Fig. 10.13) we see
an allegorical female figure of justice with a sword in

Fig. 10.13 one hand and a shield in the other. Her posture is
Justice, Punch, 12 September 1857 aggressive; her face expresses rage and the desire for
The caption at the bottom reads revenge. She is trampling sepoys under her feet while
“The news of the terrible massacre a mass of Indian women with children cower with fear.
at Cawnpore (Kanpur) produced
an outburst of fiery indignation There were innumerable other pictures and
and wild desire for revenge cartoons in the British press that sanctioned brutal
throughout the whole of England.” repression and violent reprisal.

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 281

Fig. 10.14
The caption at the bottom reads
“The British Lion’s Vengeance on
the Bengal Tiger”, Punch, 1857.

Ü What idea is the picture
projecting? What is being
expressed through the images
of the lion and the tiger? What
do the figures of the woman
and the child depict?

5.4 The performance of terror
The urge for vengeance and retribution was expressed
in the brutal way in which the rebels were executed.
They were blown from guns, or hanged from the
gallows. Images of these executions were widely
circulated through popular journals.

Fig. 10.15
Execution of mutineers in Peshawar: Blowing from the guns,
Illustrated London News, 3 October 1857
The scene of execution here appears to be a stage where a drama is being performed – an enactment
of brutal power. Mounted soldiers and sepoys in uniform dominate the scene. They have to watch the
execution of their fellow sepoys, and experience the chilling consequences of rebellion.

Reprint 2025-26



282  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Fig. 10.16
Execution of mutinous sepoys in Peshawar, Illustrated London News, 3 October 1857
In this scene of execution 12 rebels hang in a row, with cannons all around them.
What you see is not routine punishment: it is the performance of terror. For it to instil
fear among people, punishment could not be discreetly meted out in enclosed spaces.
It had to be theatrically performed in the open.

5.5 No time for clemency
At a time when the clamour was for vengeance, pleas
for moderation were ridiculed. When Governor
General Canning declared that a gesture of leniency
and a show of mercy would help in winning back
the loyalty of the sepoys, he was mocked in the
British press.

In one of the cartoons published in the pages of
Punch, a British journal of comic satire, Canning is
shown as a looming father figure, with his protective
hand over the head of a sepoy who still holds an
unsheathed sword in one hand and a dagger in the
other, both dripping with blood (Fig.10.17) – an
imagery that recurs in a number of British pictures
of the time.

Fig. 10.17
“The Clemency of Canning”, Punch, 24 October 1857
The caption at the bottom of the cartoon reads: “Governor
General: ‘Well, then they shan’t blow him from nasty guns;
but he must promise to be a good little sepoy’.”

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 283

5.6 Nationalist imageries
The national movement in the twentieth century drew
its inspiration from the events of 1857. A whole world
of nationalist imagination was woven around
the revolt. It was celebrated as the First War of
Independence in which all sections of the people of
India came together to fight against imperial rule.

Art and literature, as much as the writing of history,
have helped in keeping alive the memory of 1857.
The leaders of the revolt were presented as heroic
figures leading the country into battle, rousing the
people to righteous indignation against oppressive
imperial rule. Heroic poems were written about the
valour of the queen who, with a sword in one hand
and the reins of her horse in the other, fought for the
freedom of her motherland. Rani of Jhansi was
represented as a masculine figure chasing the enemy,
slaying British soldiers and valiantly fighting till her Fig. 10.18
last. Children in many parts of India grow up reading Films and posters have helped
the lines of Subhadra Kumari Chauhan: “Khoob lari create the image of Rani Lakshmi

mardani woh to Jhansi wali rani thi” (Like a man she Bai as a masculine warrior

fought, she was the Rani of Jhansi). In popular prints
Rani Lakshmi Bai is usually portrayed in battle
armour, with a sword in hand and riding a horse – a
symbol of the determination to resist injustice and
alien rule.

The images indicate how the painters who produced
them perceived those events, what they felt, and what
they sought to convey. Through the paintings and
cartoons we know about the public that looked at
the paintings, appreciated or criticised the images,
and bought copies and reproductions to put up in
their homes.

These images did not only reflect the emotions
and feelings of the times in which they were
produced. They also shaped sensibilities. Fed by the
images that circulated in Britain, the public
sanctioned the most brutal forms of repression of
the rebels. On the other hand, nationalist imageries
of the revolt helped shape the nationalist imagination. Ü Discuss...

Examine the elements in each
of the visuals in this section
and discuss how they allow
you to identify the perspective
of the artist.

Reprint 2025-26



284  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

TIMELINE

1801 Subsidiary Alliance introduced by Wellesley in Awadh

1856 Nawab Wajid Ali Shah deposed; Awadh annexed

1856-57 Summary revenue settlements introduced in Awadh
by the British

1857

10 May Mutiny starts in Meerut

11-12 May Delhi garrisons revolt; Bahadur Shah accepts nominal
leadership

20-27 May Sepoys mutiny in Aligarh, Etawah, Mainpuri, Etah

30 May Rising in Lucknow

May-June Mutiny turns into a general revolt of the people

30 June British suffer defeat in the battle of Chinhat

25 Sept British forces under Havelock and Outram enter the
Residency in Lucknow

July Shah Mal killed in battle

1858

June Rani Jhansi killed in battle

ANSWER IN 100 -150 WORDS

Fig. 10.19
Faces of rebels

1. Why did the mutinous sepoys in many places turn to
erstwhile rulers to provide leadership to the revolt?

2. Discuss the evidence that indicates planning and
coordination on the part of the rebels.

3. Discuss the extent to which religious beliefs shaped
the events of 1857.

4. What were the measures taken to ensure unity among
the rebels?

5. What steps did the British take to quell the uprising?

Reprint 2025-26



REBELS AND THE RAJ 285

Write a short essay
(250-300 words) on the following:

6. Why was the revolt particularly widespread in
Awadh? What prompted the peasants, taluqdars
and zamindars to join the revolt?

7. What did the rebels want? To what extent did the
vision of different social groups differ?

8. What do visual representations tell us about the
revolt of 1857? How do historians analyse these
representations?

9. Examine any two sources presented in the
chapter, choosing one visual and one text, and
discuss how these represent the point of view of

If you would like to know
the victor and the vanquished.

more, read:

Gautam Bhadra. 1987.
Map work ‘Four Rebels of Eighteen-Fifty-

Seven’, Subaltern Studies, IV.
Oxford University Press,  Delhi.

10. On an outline map of India, mark Calcutta
(Kolkata), Bombay (Mumbai) and Madras Rudrangshu Mukherjee. 1984.
(Chennai), three major centres of British power in Awadh in Revolt, 1857-58.
1857. Refer to Maps 1 and 2 and plot the areas Oxford University Press, Delhi.
where the revolt was most widespread. How close
or far were these areas from the colonial cities? Tapti Roy. 2006.

Raj of the Rani.
Penguin, New Delhi.

Projects (choose one)
Eric Stokes. 1980.
Peasants and the Raj.

11. Read a biography of any one of the leaders of the Oxford University Press, Delhi.

revolt of 1857. Check the sources used by the
biographer. Do these include government reports,
newspaper accounts, stories in regional
languages, visual material, anything else? Do
all the sources say the same thing, or are there
differences? Prepare a report on your findings.

You could visit:
12. See a film made on the revolt of 1857 and write http://books.google.com

about the way it represents the revolt. How does
(for accounts of 1857 by British officials)

it depict the British, the rebels, and those
who remained loyal to the British? What does it www.copsey-family.org/allenc/
say about peasants, city dwellers, tribals, lakshmibai/links.html
zamindars and taluqdars? What kind of a (for letters of Rani Lakshmibai)
response does the film seek to evoke?

Reprint 2025-26



286  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III
##11##
Mahatma Gandhi and
THEME the Nationalist Movement

ELEVEN
Civil Disobedience and Beyond

In the history of nationalism a single individual is often identified with
the making of a nation. Thus, for example, we associate Garibaldi
with the making of Italy, George Washington with the American War
of Independence, and Ho Chi Minh with the struggle to free Vietnam
from colonial rule. In the same manner, Mahatma Gandhi has been
regarded as the ‘Father’ of the Indian nation.
     In so far as Gandhiji was the most influential and revered of all the
leaders who participated in the freedom struggle, that characterisation
is not misplaced. However, like Washington or Ho Chi-Minh, Mahatma
Gandhi’s political career was shaped and constrained by the society
in which he lived. For individuals, even great ones, are made by history
even as they make history.
     This chapter analyses Gandhiji’s activities in India during the
crucial period 1915-1948. It explores his interactions with different
sections of the Indian society and the popular struggles that he
inspired and led. It introduces the student to the different kinds of
sources that historians use in reconstructing the career of a leader
and of the social movements that he was associated with.

Fig. 11.1
People gather on the banks of the Sabarmati River to hear Mahatma Gandhi speak before starting
out on the Salt March in 1930

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 287

1. A Leader Announces Himself
In January 1915, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi
returned to his homeland after two decades of
residence abroad. These years had been spent for
the most part in South Africa, where he went as a
lawyer, and in time became a leader of the Indian
community in that territory. As the historian
Chandran Devanesan has remarked, South Africa was
“the making of the Mahatma”. It was in South Africa
that Mahatma Gandhi first forged the distinctive
techniques of non-violent protest known as
satyagraha, first promoted harmony between religions,
and first alerted upper -caste Indians to their
discriminatory treatment of low castes and women.

The India that Mahatma Gandhi came back to in
1915 was rather different from the one that he had
left in 1893. Although still a colony of the British,
it was far more active in a political sense. The Indian
National Congress now had branches in most major
cities and towns. Through the Swadeshi movement
of 1905-07 it had greatly broadened its appeal
among the middle classes. That movement had
thrown up some towering leaders – among them
Bal Gangadhar T ilak of Maharashtra, Bipin
Chandra Pal of Bengal, and Lala Lajpat Rai of
Punjab. The three were known as “Lal, Bal and Pal”,

Fig. 11.2
the alliteration conveying the all-India character

Mahatma Gandhi in Johannesburg,
of their struggle, since their native provinces were South Africa, February 1908
very distant from one another. Where
these leaders advocated militant
opposition to colonial rule,  there was
a group of  “Moderates” who preferred
a more gradual and persuasive
approach. Among  these Moderates
was Gandhiji’s acknowledged political
mentor, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, as
well as Mohammad Ali Jinnah, who,
like Gandhiji, was a lawyer of Gujarati
extraction trained in London.

On Gokhale’s advice, Gandhiji spent
a year travelling around British India,
getting to know the land and its
peoples. His first major public
appearance was at the opening of the
Banaras Hindu University (BHU) in
February 1916. Among the invitees to

Reprint 2025-26



288  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

this event  were the princes and philanthropists whose
donations had contributed to the founding of the
BHU. Also present were important leaders of the
Congress, such as Annie Besant. Compared to these
dignitaries, Gandhiji was relatively unknown. He had
been invited on account of his work in South Africa,
rather than his status within India.

When his turn came to speak, Gandhiji charged
the Indian elite with a lack of concern for the
labouring poor. The opening of the BHU, he said,
was “certainly a most gorgeous show”. But he worried
about the contrast between the “richly bedecked
noblemen” present and “millions of the poor” Indians
who were absent. Gandhiji told the privileged invitees
that “there is no salvation for India unless you strip
yourself of this jewellery and hold it in trust for your
countrymen in India”. “There can be no spirit of self-
government about us,” he went on, “if we take away
or allow others to take away from the peasants almost
the whole of the results of their labour. Our salvation
can only come through the farmer. Neither the
lawyers, nor the doctors, nor the rich landlords are
going to secure it.”

The opening of the BHU was an occasion for
celebration, marking as it did the opening of a
nationalist university, sustained by Indian money
and Indian initiative. But rather than adopt a tone

Fig. 11.3
of self-congratulation, Gandhiji chose instead to

Mahatma Gandhi in Karachi,
March 1916 remind those present of the peasants and workers

who constituted a majority
of the Indian population,
yet were unrepresented in
the audience.

Gandhiji’s speech at
Banaras in February 1916
was, at one level, merely a
statement of fact – namely,
that Indian nationalism
was an elite phenomenon,
a creation of lawyers and
doctors and landlords.
But, at  another level, it
was also a statement of
intent – the first public
announcement of Gandhiji’s
own desire to make Indian
nationalism more properly

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 289

representative of the Indian people as a whole. In the
last month of that year, Gandhiji was presented with Ü Discuss...
an opportunity to put his precepts into practice. At the Find out more about the
annual Congress, held in Lucknow in December 1916, national movement in India
he was approached by a peasant from Champaran in before 1915 and see whether
Bihar, who told him about the harsh treatment of Mahatma Gandhi’s comments
peasants by British indigo planters. are justified.

2. The Making and Unmaking of
Non-cooperation

Mahatma Gandhi was to spend much of 1917 in
Champaran, seeking to obtain for the peasants security
of tenure as well as the freedom to cultivate the crops
of their choice. The following year, 1918, Gandhiji was
involved in two campaigns in his home state of
Gujarat. First, he intervened in a labour dispute in
Ahmedabad, demanding better working conditions for
the textile mill workers. Then he joined peasants in
Kheda in asking the state for the remission of taxes
following the failure of their harvest.

These initiatives in Champaran, Ahmedabad and
Kheda marked Gandhiji out as a nationalist with
a deep sympathy for the poor. At the same time,
these were all localised struggles. Then, in 1919,
the colonial rulers delivered into Gandhiji’s lap
an issue from which he could construct a much
wider movement. During the Great War of 1914-18,
the British had instituted censorship of the press
and permitted detention without trial. Now, on
the recommendation of a committee chaired by
Sir Sidney Rowlatt, these tough measures were
continued. In response, Gandhiji called for a
countrywide campaign against the “Rowlatt Act”.
In towns across North and West India, life came to
a standstill, as shops shut down and schools closed
in response to the bandh call. The protests were
particularly intense in the Punjab, where many men
had served on the British side in the War –
expecting to be rewarded for their service. Instead
they were given the Rowlatt Act. Gandhiji was
detained while proceeding to the Punjab, even as
prominent local Congressmen were arrested. The
situation in the province grew progressively more
tense, reaching a bloody climax in Amritsar in
April 1919, when a British Brigadier ordered his
troops to open fire on a nationalist meeting. More

Reprint 2025-26



290  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

than four hundred people were killed in what is
known as the Jallianwala Bagh massacre.

It was the Rowlatt satyagraha that made Gandhiji
a truly national leader. Emboldened by its success,
Gandhiji called for a campaign of “non-cooperation”
with British rule. Indians who wished colonialism to
end were asked to stop attending schools, colleges
and law courts, and not pay taxes. In sum, they were
asked to adhere to a “renunciation of (all) voluntary
association with the (British) Government”. If non-
cooperation was effectively carried out, said Gandhiji,
India would win swaraj within a year. To further
broaden the struggle he had joined hands with the
Khilafat Movement that sought to restore the
Caliphate, a symbol of Pan-Islamism which had
recently been abolished by the Turkish ruler
Kemal Attaturk.

2.1 Knitting a popular movement
Gandhiji hoped that by coupling non-cooperation with
Khilafat, India’s two major religious communities,
Hindus and Muslims, could collectively bring an
end to colonial rule. These movements certainly
unleashed a surge of popular action that was

What was the altogether unprecedented in colonial India.
Students stopped going to schools and colleges

Khilafat Movement? run by the government. Lawyers refused to attend

The Khi la fa t  Movement , court. The working class went on strike in many

(1919-1920) was a movement towns and cities: according to official figures, there

of Indian Muslims, led by were 396 strikes in 1921, involving 600,000
Muhammad Ali and Shaukat Ali, workers and a loss of seven million workdays. The
that demanded the following: countryside was seething with discontent too. Hill
The Turkish Sultan or Khalifa tribes in northern Andhra violated the forest laws.
must retain control over the Farmers in Awadh did not pay taxes. Peasants in
Muslim sacred places in the Kumaun refused to carry loads for colonial officials.
erstwhile Ottoman empire; the These protest movements were sometimes carried
jazirat-ul-Arab (Arabia, Syria, out in defiance of the local nationalist leadership.
Iraq, Palestine) must remain Peasants, workers, and others interpreted and acted
under Muslim sovereignty; and upon the call to “non-cooperate” with colonial rule
the Khalifa must be left with in ways that best suited their interests, rather than
sufficient territory to enable conform to the dictates laid down from above.
him to defend the Islamic faith. “Non-cooperation,” wrote Mahatma Gandhi’s
The Congress supported the American biographer Louis Fischer, “became the name
movement and Mahatma Gandhi of an epoch in the life of India and of Gandhiji.
sought  to conjoin it to the

Non-cooperation was negative enough to be peaceful
Non-cooperation Movement.

but positive enough to be effective. It entailed denial,
renunciation, and self-discipline. It was training for

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 291

self-rule.” As a consequence of the
Non-Cooperation Movement the
British Raj was shaken to its
foundations for the first time
since the Revolt of 1857. Then,
in February 1922, a group of
peasants attacked and torched a
police station in the hamlet of
Chauri Chaura, in the United
Provinces  (now, Uttar Pradesh and
Uttaranchal). Several constables
perished in the conflagration. This
act of violence prompted Gandhiji
to call off the movement altogether.
“No provocation,” he insisted,
“can possibly justify (the) brutal
murder of men who had been rendered defenceless Fig. 11.4

and who had virtually thrown themselves on the Non-cooperation Movement,

mercy of the mob.” July 1922
Foreign cloth being collected to

During the Non-Cooperation Movement thousands be burnt in bonfires.
of Indians were put in jail. Gandhiji himself
was arrested in March 1922, and charged with
sedition. The judge who presided over his trial,
Justice C.N. Broomfield, made a remarkable speech
while pronouncing his sentence. “It would be
impossible to ignore the fact,” remarked the judge,
“that you are in a different category from any person
I have ever tried or am likely to try. It would be
impossible to ignore the fact that, in the eyes of
millions of your countrymen, you are a great patriot
and a leader. Even those who differ from you in politics
look upon you as a man of high ideals and of even
saintly life.” Since Gandhiji had violated the law it
was obligatory for the Bench to sentence him to six
years’ imprisonment, but, said Judge Broomfield, “If
the course of events in India should make it possible
for the Government to reduce the period and release
you, no one will be better pleased than I”.

2.2 A people’s leader
By 1922, Gandhiji had transformed Indian
nationalism, thereby redeeming the promise he made
in his BHU speech of February 1916. It was no longer
a movement of professionals and intellectuals; now,
hundreds of thousands of peasants, workers and
artisans also participated in it. Many of them
venerated Gandhiji, referring to him as their

Reprint 2025-26



292  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

“Mahatma”. They appreciated the fact that he
dressed like them, lived like them, and spoke their
language. Unlike other leaders he did not stand apart
from the common folk, but empathised and even
identified with them.

This identification was strikingly reflected in his
dress: while other nationalist leaders dressed
formally, wearing a Western suit or an Indian
bandgala, Gandhiji went among the people in a

Fig. 11.5 simple dhoti or loincloth. Meanwhile, he spent part
Mahatma Gandhi with the charkha

of each day working on the charkha (spinning wheel),
has become the most abiding image
of Indian nationalism. and encouraged other nationalists to do likewise.
In 1921, during a tour of South The act of spinning allowed Gandhiji to break the
India, Gandhiji shaved his head boundaries that prevailed within the traditional caste
and began wearing a loincloth system, between mental labour and manual labour.
in order to identify with the poor. In a fascinating study, the historian Shahid Amin
His new appearance also came

has traced the image of Mahatma Gandhi among
to symbolise asceticism and
abstinence – qualities he the peasants of eastern Uttar Pradesh, as conveyed
celebrated in opposition to the by reports and rumours in the local press. When he
consumerist culture of the travelled through the region in February 1921,
modern world. Gandhiji was received by adoring crowds everywhere.

Source 1

Charkha

Mahatma Gandhi was profoundly critical of the modern age in which machines
enslaved humans and displaced labour. He saw the charkha as a symbol of a
human society that would not glorify machines and technology. The spinning
wheel, moreover, could provide the poor with supplementary income and
make them self-reliant.

What I object to, is the craze for machinery as
such. The craze is for what they call labour-
saving machinery. Men go on “saving labour”,
till thousands are without work and thrown
on the open streets to die of starvation. I want
to save time and labour, not for a fraction of
mankind, but for all; I want the concentration
of wealth, not in the hands of few, but in
the hands of all.

YOUNG INDIA, I3 NOVEMBER 1924

Khaddar does not seek to destroy al l
machinery but it does regulate its use and
check its weedy growth. It uses machinery
for the service of the poorest in their own
cottages. The wheel is itself an exquisite
piece of machinery.

Fig. 11.5 YOUNG INDIA, 17 MARCH 1927

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 293

This is how a Hindi newspaper in Gorakhpur
reported the atmosphere during his speeches:

At Bhatni Gandhiji addressed the local public
and then the train started for Gorakhpur. There
were not less than 15,000 to 20,000 people at
Nunkhar, Deoria, Gauri Bazar, Chauri Chaura
and Kusmhi (stations) …  Mahatmaji was very
pleased to witness the scene at Kusmhi, as
despite the fact that the station is in the middle
of a jungle there were not less than 10,000
people here. Some, overcome with their love,
were seen to be crying. At Deoria people wanted
to give bhent (donations) to Gandhiji, but he
asked them to give these at Gorakhpur. But
at Chauri Chaura one Marwari gentleman
managed to hand over something to him. Then Source 2
there was no stopping. A sheet was spread and

The miraculous and
currency notes and coins started raining. It
was a sight …   Outside the Gorakhpur station the unbelievable
the Mahatma was stood on a high carriage
and people had a good darshan of him for a Local newspapers in the United
couple of minutes. Provinces recorded many of the

rumours that circulated at that
Wherever Gandhiji went, rumours spread of his

time. There were rumours that
miraculous powers. In some places it was said that

every person who wanted to test
he had been sent by the King to redress the

the power of the Mahatma had
grievances of the farmers, and that he had the power

been surprised:
to overrule all local officials. In other places it was
claimed that Gandhiji’s power was superior to that 1. Sikandar Sahu from a

vi l lage in Bast i  said on
of the English monarch, and that with his arrival

15 February that he would
the colonial rulers would flee the district. There were

believe in the Mahatmaji
also stories reporting dire consequences for those when the karah (boiling
who opposed him; rumours spread of how  villagers pan) full of sugar cane juice
who criticised Gandhiji found their houses in his karkhana (where gur
mysteriously falling apart or their crops failing. was produced) split into

Known variously as “Gandhi baba”, “Gandhi two. Immediately the karah

Maharaj”, or simply as “Mahatma”, Gandhiji appeared actually split into two from

to the Indian peasant as a saviour, who would rescue the middle.

them from high taxes and oppressive officials and 2. A cultivator in Azamgarh
restore dignity and autonomy to their lives. Gandhiji’s said that he would

appeal among the poor, and  peasants in particular, believe in the Mahatmaji’s

was enhanced by his ascetic lifestyle, and by his authenticity i f  sesamum

shrewd use of symbols such as the dhoti and the sprouted on his field planted
with wheat. Next day all

charkha. Mahatma Gandhi was by caste a merchant,
the wheat in that f ield

and by profession a lawyer; but his simple lifestyle became sesamum.
and love of working with his hands allowed him to
empathise more fully with the labouring poor and for contd

them, in turn, to empathise with him. Where most

Reprint 2025-26



294  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Source 2 (contd) other politicians talked down to them, Gandhiji
appeared not just to look like them, but to

There were rumours understand them and relate to their lives.
that those who opposed While Mahatma Gandhi’s mass appeal was
Mahatma Gandhi invariably

undoubtedly genuine – and in the context of Indian
met with some tragedy.

politics, without precedent – it must also be stressed
1. A gentleman from that his success in broadening the basis of nationalism
Gorakhpur city questioned was based on careful organisation. New branches of
the need to ply the charkha.

the Congress were set up in various parts of India.
His house caught fire.

A series of “Praja Mandals” were established to promote
2. In Apri l  1921 some the nationalist creed in the princely states. Gandhiji
people were gambling in a

encouraged the communication of the nationalist
village of Uttar Pradesh.

message in the mother tongue, rather than in the
Someone told them to stop.
Only one from amongst the language of the rulers, English. Thus the provincial
group refused to stop and committees of the Congress were based on linguistic
abused Gandhiji. The next regions, rather than on the artificial boundaries of
day his goat was bitten by British India. In these different ways nationalism was
four of his own dogs. taken to the farthest corners of the country and
3. In a village in Gorakhpur, embraced by social groups previously untouched by it.
the peasants resolved to give By now, among the supporters of the Congress
up drinking l iquor. One were some very prosperous businessmen and
person did not keep his industrialists. Indian entrepreneurs were quick to
promise. As soon as he recognise that, in a free India, the favours enjoyed
started for the liquor shop by their British competitors would come to an end.
brickbats started to rain in his Some of these entrepreneurs, such as G.D. Birla,
path. When he spoke the

supported the national movement openly; others did
name of Gandhiji the brick-

so tacitly. Thus, among Gandhiji’s admirers were
bats stopped flying.

both poor peasants and rich industrialists, although
FROM SHAHID AMIN , “GANDHI AS

the reasons why peasants followed Gandhiji were
MAHATMA”, SUBALTERN STUDIES III,

somewhat different from, and perhaps opposed to,
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, DELHI.

the reasons of the industrialists.
While Mahatma Gandhi’s own role was vital, the

growth of what we might call “Gandhian nationalism”
Ü You have read about also depended to a very substantial extent on his
rumours in Chapter 10 and followers. Between 1917 and 1922,  a group of highly
seen that the circulation of talented Indians attached themselves to Gandhiji.
rumours tells us about the They included Mahadev Desai, Vallabh Bhai Patel,
structure of the belief of a J.B. Kripalani, Subhas Chandra Bose, Abul Kalam
time:  they tell us about the Azad, Jawaharlal Nehru, Sarojini Naidu, Govind
mind of the people who Ballabh Pant and C. Rajagopalachari. Notably, these
believe in the rumours and close associates of Gandhiji came from different
the circumstances that regions as well as different religious traditions. In
make this belief possible. turn, they inspired countless other Indians to join
What do you think these the Congress and work for it.
rumours about Gandhiji

Mahatma Gandhi was released from prison in
reflect?

February 1924, and now chose to devote his attention
to the promotion of home-spun cloth (khadi ), and

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 295

the abolition of untouchability. For, Gandhiji was as
much a social reformer as he was a politician. He Ü Discuss...
believed that in order to be worthy of freedom, Indians What was Non-cooperation?
had to get rid of social evils such as child marriage Find out about the variety
and untouchability. Indians of one faith had also to of ways in which different
cultivate a genuine tolerance for Indians of another – social groups participated
hence his emphasis on Hindu-Muslim harmony. in the movement.
Meanwhile, on the economic front Indians had to learn
to become self-reliant – hence his stress on the
significance of wearing khadi rather than mill-made
cloth imported from overseas.

3. The Salt Satyagraha
A Case Study

For several years after the Non-cooperation Movement
ended, Mahatma Gandhi focused on his social reform
work.  In 1928, however, he began to think of re-entering
politics. That year there was an all-India campaign in
opposition to the all-White Simon Commission, sent
from England to enquire into conditions in the colony.
Gandhiji did not himself participate in this movement,
although he gave it his blessings, as he also did to a
peasant satyagraha in Bardoli in the same year.

In the end of December 1929, the Congress held its
annual session in the city of Lahore. The meeting was
significant for two things: the election of Jawaharlal
Nehru as President, signifying the passing of the baton
of leadership to the younger generation; and the
proclamation of commitment to “Purna Swaraj”, or
complete independence. Now the pace of politics picked
up once more. On 26 January 1930, “Independence
Day” was observed, with the national flag being hoisted
in different venues, and patriotic songs being sung.
Gandhiji himself issued precise instructions as to how
the day should be observed. “It would be good,” he
said, “if the declaration [of Independence] is made by
whole villages, whole cities even ... It would be well if
all the meetings were held at the identical minute in
all the places.”

Gandhiji suggested that the time of the meeting be
advertised in the traditional way, by the beating of
drums. The celebrations would begin with the hoisting
of the national flag. The rest of the day would be spent
“in doing some constructive work, whether it is spinning,
or service of ‘untouchables’, or reunion of Hindus and
Mussalmans, or prohibition work, or even all these

Reprint 2025-26



296  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

together, which is not impossible”. Participants would
take a pledge affirming that it was “the inalienable right
of the Indian people, as of any other people, to have
freedom and to enjoy the fruits of their toil”, and that “if
any government deprives a people of these rights and
oppresses them, the people have a further right to alter
it or abolish it”.

3.1 Dandi
Soon after the observance of this “Independence Day”,
Mahatma Gandhi announced that he would lead a
march to break one of the most widely disliked laws in
British India, which gave the state a monopoly in the
manufacture and sale of salt. His picking on the salt
monopoly was another illustration of Gandhiji’s tactical
wisdom. For in every Indian household, salt was
indispensable; yet people were forbidden from making
salt even for domestic use, compelling them to buy it
from shops at a high price. The state monopoly over
salt was deeply unpopular; by making it his target,
Gandhiji hoped to mobilise a wider discontent against
British rule.

Fig. 11.6
On the Dandi March,
March 1930

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 297

Where most Indians understood the
significance of Gandhiji’s challenge,
the British Raj apparently did not.
Although Gandhiji had given advance
notice of his “Salt March” to the
Viceroy Lord Irwin, Irwin failed to grasp
the significance of the action. On 12
March 1930, Gandhiji began walking
from his ashram at Sabarmati towards
the ocean. He reached his destination
three weeks later, making a fistful of
salt as he did and thereby making
himself a criminal in the eyes of the

Fig. 11.7
law. Meanwhile, parallel salt marches Satyagrahis picking up natural salt at the end
were being conducted in other parts of of the Dandi March, 6 April 1930
the country.

Source 3

Why the Salt Satyagraha?

Why was salt the symbol of protest? This is what Mahatma Gandhi wrote:

The volume of information being gained daily shows how wickedly the salt tax has
been designed. In order to prevent the use of salt that has not paid the tax which is at
times even fourteen times its value, the Government destroys the salt it cannot sell
profitably. Thus it taxes the nation’s vital necessity; it prevents the public from
manufacturing it and destroys what nature manufactures without effort. No adjective
is strong enough for characterising this wicked dog-in-the-manger policy. From
various sources I hear tales of such wanton destruction of the nation’s property in all
parts of India. Maunds if not tons of salt are said to be destroyed on the Konkan coast.
The same tale comes from Dandi. Wherever there is likelihood of natural salt being
taken away by the people living in the neighbourhood of such areas for their personal
use, salt officers are posted for the sole purpose of carrying on destruction. Thus
valuable national property is destroyed at national expense and salt taken out of the
mouths of the people.

The salt monopoly is thus a fourfold curse. It deprives the people of a valuable easy
village industry, involves wanton destruction of property that nature produces in
abundance, the destruction itself means more national expenditure, and fourthly, to
crown this folly, an unheard-of tax of more than 1,000 per cent is exacted from a
starving people.

This tax has remained so long because of the apathy of the general public. Now that
it is sufficiently roused, the tax has to go. How soon it will be abolished depends upon
the strength the people.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI (CWMG), VOL. 49

Ü Why was salt destroyed by the colonial government? Why did Mahatma Gandhi
consider the salt tax more oppressive than other taxes?

Reprint 2025-26



298  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Source 4

“Tomorrow we shall break the salt tax law”

On 5 April 1930, Mahatma Gandhi spoke at Dandi:

When I left Sabarmati with my companions for this seaside hamlet of Dandi, I
was not certain in my mind that we would be allowed to reach this place. Even
while I was at Sabarmati there was a rumour that I might be arrested. I had
thought that the Government might perhaps let my party come as far as Dandi,
but not me certainly. If someone says that this betrays imperfect faith on my
part, I shall not deny the charge. That I have reached here is in no small measure
due to the power of peace and non-violence: that power is universally felt. The
Government may, if it wishes, congratulate itself on acting as it has done, for it
could have arrested every one of us. In saying that it did not have the courage
to arrest this army of peace, we praise it. It felt ashamed to arrest such an army.
He is a civilised man who feels ashamed to do anything which his neighbours
would disapprove. The Government deserves to be congratulated on not
arresting us, even if it desisted only from fear of world opinion.

Tomorrow we shall break the salt tax law. Whether the Government will tolerate
that is a different question. It may not tolerate it, but it deserves congratulations on
the patience and forbearance it has displayed in regard to this party. …

What if I and all the eminent leaders in Gujarat and in the rest of the country
are arrested? This movement is based on the faith that when a whole nation is
roused and on the march no leader is necessary.

CWMG, VOL. 49

Ü What does the
speech tell us about
how Gandhiji saw the As with Non-cooperation, apart from the officially
colonial state? sanctioned nationalist campaign, there were numerous

other streams of protest. Across large parts of India,
peasants breached the hated colonial forest laws that kept
them and their cattle out of the woods in which they had
once roamed freely. In some towns, factory workers went
on strike while lawyers boycotted British courts and
students refused to attend government-run educational
institutions. As in 1920-22, now too Gandhiji’s call had
encouraged Indians of all classes to make manifest their
own discontent with colonial rule. The rulers responded
by detaining the dissenters. In the wake of the Salt March,
nearly 60,000 Indians were arrested, among them, of
course, Gandhiji himself.

The progress of Gandhiji’s march to the seashore can
be traced from the secret reports filed by the police officials
deputed to monitor his movements. These reproduce the
speeches he gave at the villages en route, in which he
called upon local officials to renounce government
employment and join the freedom struggle. In one village,

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 299

Wasna, Gandhiji told the upper castes that “if you are
out for Swaraj you must serve untouchables. You won’t
get Swaraj merely by the repeal of the salt taxes or
other taxes. For Swaraj you must make amends for the
wrongs which you did to the untouchables. For Swaraj,
Hindus, Muslims, Parsis and Sikhs will have to unite.
These are the steps towards Swaraj.” The police spies
reported that Gandhiji’s meetings were very well
attended, by villagers of all castes, and by women as
well as men. They observed that thousands of volunteers
were flocking to the nationalist cause. Among them
were many officials, who had resigned from their posts
with the colonial government. Writing to the
government, the District Superintendent of Police
remarked, “Mr Gandhi appeared calm and collected.
He is gathering more strength as he proceeds.”

The progress of the Salt March can also be traced
from another source: the American newsmagazine,
Time. This, to begin with, scorned at Gandhiji’s looks,
writing with disdain of his “spindly frame” and his

Fig. 11.8
“spidery loins”. Thus in its first report on the march,

After Mahatma Gandhi’s
Time was deeply sceptical of the Salt March reaching release from prison in January
its destination. It claimed that Gandhiji “sank to 1931, Congress leaders met at
the ground” at the end of the second day’s walking; Allahabad to plan the future

the magazine did not believe that “the emaciated course of action.

saint would be physically able to go much further”. You can see (from right to left)
Jawaharlal Nehru, Jamnalal

But within a week it had changed its mind. The
Bajaj, Subhas Chandra Bose,

massive popular following that the march had Gandhiji, Mahadev Desai
garnered, wrote  Time, had made the British  rulers (in front), Sardar Vallabh
“desperately anxious”. Gandhiji himself they now Bhai Patel.

Reprint 2025-26



300  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Source 5
saluted as a “Saint” and “Statesman”, who was using

The problem with “Christian acts as a weapon against men with
separate electorates Christian beliefs”.

3.2 Dialogues
At the Round Table The Salt March was notable for at least three reasons.
Conference Mahatma Gandhi First, it was this event that first brought Mahatma
stated his arguments against Gandhi to world attention. The march was widely covered
separate electorates for by the European and American press. Second, it was
the Depressed Classes: the first nationalist activity in which women

Separate electorates participated in large numbers. The socialist activist
to the “Untouchables” Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay had persuaded Gandhiji not
will ensure them to restrict the protests to men alone. Kamaladevi was
bondage in  perpetuity herself one of numerous women who courted arrest by
…  Do  you want the breaking the salt or liquor laws. Third, and perhaps
“Untouchables” to most significant, it was the Salt March which forced
remain “Untouchables”

upon the British the realisation that their Raj would
for   ever? Well, the
separate electorates not last forever, and that they would have to devolve

would perpetuate some power to the Indians.
the stigma. What is To that end, the British government convened a series
needed is destruction of “Round Table Conferences” in London. The first meeting
of “Untouchability”, was held in November 1930, but without the pre-eminent
and when you have political leader in India, thus rendering it an exercise in
done i t ,  the bar- futility. Gandhiji was released from jail in January 1931
s inis ter,  which has and the following month had several long meetings with
been imposed by an the Viceroy. These culminated in what was called
insolent  “superior”

the “Gandhi-Irwin Pact’, by the terms of which civil
class upon an “inferior”
class will be destroyed. disobedience would be called off, all prisoners released,

When you have and salt manufacture allowed along the coast.  The pact
destroyed the bar- was criticised by radical nationalists, for Gandhiji was
sinister to whom will unable to obtain from the Viceroy a commitment to
you give the separate political independence for Indians; he could obtain merely
electorates? an assurance of talks towards that possible end.

A second Round Table Conference was held in London
in the latter part of 1931. Here, Gandhiji represented the
Congress. However, his claims that his party represented
all of India came under challenge from three parties:
from the Muslim League, which claimed to stand for the
interests of the Muslim minority; from the Princes, who
claimed that the Congress had no stake in their territories;
and from the brilliant lawyer and thinker B.R. Ambedkar,
who argued that Gandhiji and the Congress did not really
represent the lowest castes.

The Conference in London was inconclusive, so
Gandhiji returned to India and resumed civil
disobedience. The new Viceroy, Lord Willingdon, was
deeply unsympathetic to the Indian leader. In a private

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 301

Source 6

Ambedkar on separate
electorates

In response to Mahatma
Gandhi’s opposit ion to the
demand for separate electorates
for the Depressed Classes,
Ambedkar wrote:

Here is  a class which is
undoubtedly not in a
position to sustain itself in
the struggle for existence.
The religion, to which they
are tied, instead of providing
them an honourable place,
brands them as lepers, not
fit for ordinary intercourse.

Fig. 11.9 Economically, it is a class
At the Second Round Table Conference, London, November 1931 entirely dependent upon
Mahatma Gandhi opposed the demand for separate

the high-caste Hindus for
electorates for “lower castes”. He believed that this would

earning its daily bread with
prevent their integration into mainstream society and

no independent way of living
permanently segregate them from other caste Hindus.

open to it. Nor are all ways

letter to his sister, Willingdon wrote: “It’s a beautiful closed by reason of the social
prejudices of the Hindus but

world if it wasn’t for Gandhi ... At the bottom of
there is a definite attempt

every move he makes which he always says is all  through our Hindu
inspired by God, one discovers the political Society to bolt every possible
manouevre. I see the American Press is saying what door so as not to allow the
a wonderful man he is ... But the fact is that we Depressed Classes any
live in the midst of very unpractical, mystical, and opportunity to rise in the
superstitious folk who look upon Gandhi as scale of life.

something holy, ...” In these circumstances, it
In 1935, however, a new Government of India Act would be granted by all fair-

promised some form of representative government. minded persons that as the
Two years later, in an election held on the basis only path for a community

of a restricted franchise, the Congress won a so handicapped to succeed

comprehensive victory. Now eight out of 11 provinces in the struggle for life against
organised tyranny, some

had a Congress “Prime Minister”, working under the
share of political power in

supervision of a British Governor.
order that it may protect itself

In September 1939, two years after the Congress is a paramount necessity …
ministries assumed office, the Second World War
broke out. Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru FROM DR BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR,
had both been strongly critical of Hitler and the “WHAT CONGRESS AND GANDHI

Nazis. Accordingly, they promised Congress support HAVE DONE TO THE UNTOUCHABLES”,
to the war effort if the British, in return, promised WRITINGS AND SPEECHES, VOL. 9, P. 312

to grant India independence once hostilities ended.

Reprint 2025-26



302  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Fig. 11.10
Mahatma Gandhi and Rajendra
Prasad on their way to a meeting
with the Viceroy, Lord Linlithgow,
13 October 1939
In the meeting the nature of
India’s involvement in the War
was discussed. When negotiations
with the Viceroy broke down, the
Congress ministries resigned.

The offer was refused. In protest, the Congress
ministries resigned in October 1939. Through 1940
and 1941, the Congress organised a series of individual
satyagrahas to pressure the rulers to promise freedom
once the war had ended.

Fig. 11.11
Meanwhile, in March 1940, the Muslim League

Mahatma Gandhi with Stafford
Cripps, March 1942 passed a resolution demanding a measure of

autonomy for the Muslim-majority areas of the
subcontinent.  The political landscape was now
becoming complicated: it was no longer Indians
versus the British; rather, it had become a three-
way struggle between the Congress, the Muslim
League, and the British. At this time Britain had an
all-party government, whose Labour members were
sympathetic to Indian aspirations, but whose
Conservative Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, was
a diehard imperialist who insisted that he had not
been appointed the King’s First Minister in order to
preside over the liquidation of the British Empire.
In the spring of 1942, Churchill was persuaded to
send one of his ministers, Sir Stafford Cripps, to
India to try and forge a compromise with Gandhiji
and the Congress. Talks broke down, however, after
the Congress insisted that if it was to help the British
defend India from the Axis powers, then the Viceroy
had first to appoint an Indian as the Defence Member
of his Executive Council.

Ü Discuss...
Read Sources 5 and 6. Write an imaginary dialogue
between Ambedkar and Mahatma Gandhi on the
issue of separate electorates for the Depressed Classes.

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 303

4. Quit India
After the failure of the Cripps Mission, Mahatma Satara, 1943
Gandhi decided to launch his third major movement From the late nineteenth
against British rule. This was the “Quit India” century, a non-Brahman
campaign, which began in August 1942. Although movement, which opposed  the
Gandhiji was jailed at once, younger activists caste system and landlordism,
organised strikes and acts of sabotage all over the had developed  in Maharashtra.
country. Particularly active in the underground This movement established
resistance were socialist members of the Congress, links with the national
such as Jayaprakash Narayan. In several districts, movement by the 1930s.
such as Satara in the west and Medinipur in the In 1943, some of the
east, “independent” governments were proclaimed. younger leaders in the Satara
The British responded with much force, yet it took district of Maharashtra set up
more than a year to suppress the rebellion. a parallel government ( prati

“Quit India” was genuinely a mass movement, sarkar), with volunteer corps

bringing into its ambit hundreds of thousands of (seba dals)  and vi l lage

ordinary Indians. It especially energised the young units (tufan dals ). They ran

who, in very large numbers, left their colleges to go people’s courts and organised

to jail. However, while the Congress leaders constructive work. Dominated

languished in jail, Jinnah and his colleagues in the by kunbi  peasants and
supported by dalits, the Satara

Muslim League worked patiently at expanding their
prati sarkar functioned till

influence. It was in these years that the League began
the elections of 1946, despite

to make a mark in the Punjab and Sind, provinces
government repression and,

where it had previously had scarcely any presence. in the later stages, Congress
In June 1944, with the end of the war in sight, disapproval.

Gandhiji was released from prison. Later that year

Fig. 11.12
Women’s procession in
Bombay during the
Quit India Movement

Reprint 2025-26



304  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

he held a series of meetings with Jinnah, seeking to
bridge the gap between the Congress and the League.
In 1945, a Labour government came to power in
Britain and committed itself to granting
independence to India. Meanwhile, back in India,
the Viceroy, Lord Wavell, brought the Congress and
the League together for a series of talks.

Early in 1946 fresh elections were held to the
provincial legislatures. The Congress swept the
“General” category, but in the seats specifically
reserved for Muslims the League won an
overwhelming majority. The political polarisation
was complete. A Cabinet Mission sent in the summer
of 1946 failed to get the Congress and the League to
agree on a federal system that would keep India
together while allowing the provinces a degree of
autonomy. After the talks broke down, Jinnah
called for a “Direct Action Day” to press the League’s

Fig. 11.13 demand for Pakistan. On the designated day,
Mahatma Gandhi conferring with 16 August 1946, bloody riots broke out in Calcutta.
Jawaharlal Nehru (on his right) and The violence spread to rural Bengal, then to Bihar,
Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel (on his left) and then across the country to the United Provinces
Nehru and Patel represented two
distinct political tendencies within and the Punjab. In some places, Muslims were the
the Congress – the socialist and main sufferers, in other places, Hindus.
the conservative. Mahatma In February 1947, Wavell was replaced as
Gandhi had to often mediate Viceroy by Lord Mountbatten. Mountbatten called
between these groups. onelast round of talks, but when these too

proved inconclusive he
announced that British
India would be freed, but
also divided. The formal
transfer of power was
fixed for 15 August.
When that day came, it
was celebrated  with
gusto in different parts of
India. In Delhi, there
was “prolonged applause”
when the President of the
Constituent Assembly
began the meeting by
invoking the Father of
the Nation – Mohandas
Karamchand Gandhi.
Outside the Assembly,
the crowds shouted
“Mahatma Gandhi ki jai”.

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 305

5. The Last Heroic Days
As it happened, Mahatma Gandhi was not present at
the festivities in the capital on 15 August 1947. He
was in Calcutta, but he did not attend any function or
hoist a flag there either. Gandhiji marked the day with
a 24-hour fast. The freedom he had struggled so long
for had come at an unacceptable price, with a nation
divided and Hindus and Muslims at each other’s throats.

Through September and October, writes his
biographer D.G. Tendulkar, Gandhiji “went round
hospitals and refugee camps giving consolation to
distressed people”. He “appealed to the Sikhs, the
Hindus and the Muslims to forget the past and not
to dwell on their sufferings but to extend the right
hand of fellowship to each other, and to determine
to live in peace ...”

At the initiative of Gandhiji and Nehru, the Congress
now passed a resolution on “the rights of minorities”.
The party had never accepted the “two-nation theory”:
forced against its will to accept Partition, it still believed
that “India is a land of many religions and many races,
and must remain so”. Whatever be the situation in
Pakistan, India would be “a democratic secular State
where all citizens enjoy full rights and are equally
entitled to the protection of the State, irrespective of
the religion to which they belong”. The Congress wished
to “assure the minorities in India that it will continue
to protect, to the best of its ability, their citizen rights
against aggression”. Fig. 11.14

Many scholars have written of the months after On the way to a riot-torn

Independence as being Gandhiji’s “finest hour”. After village,1947

working to bring peace to Bengal,
Gandhiji now shifted to Delhi, from
where he hoped to move on to the riot-
torn districts of Punjab. While in the
capital, his meetings were disrupted
by refugees who objected to readings
from the Koran, or  shouted slogans
asking why he did not speak of the
sufferings of those Hindus and Sikhs
still living in Pakistan. In fact, as
D.G. Tendulkar writes, Gandhiji “was
equally concerned with the sufferings
of the minority community in
Pakistan. He would have liked to be
able to go to their succour. But with

Reprint 2025-26



306  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

what face could he now go there, when he could not
guarantee full redress to the Muslims in Delhi?”

There was an attempt on Gandhiji’s life on
20 January 1948, but he carried on undaunted.
On 26 January, he spoke at his prayer meeting
of how that day had been celebrated in the past
as Independence Day. Now freedom had come,
but  i ts  f i rs t  f ew months  had been deep ly
disillusioning. However, he trusted that “the
worst is over”, that Indians would henceforth
work collectively for the “equality of all classes
and creeds ,  never  the  dominat ion and
superiority of the major community over a minor,
however insignificant it may be in numbers or
influence”. He also permitted himself the hope
“that though geographically and politically India
is divided into two, at heart we shall ever be
friends and brothers helping and respecting one
another and be one for the outside world”.

Fig. 11.15 Gandhiji had fought a lifelong battle for a free
The death of the Mahatma, and united India; and yet, when the country was
a popular print divided, he urged that the two parts respect and
In popular representations,

befriend one another.
Mahatma Gandhi was deified,
and shown as the unifying force Other Indians were less forgiving. At his daily
within the national movement. prayer meeting on the evening of 30 January,
Here you can see Jawaharlal Gandhiji was shot dead by a young man. The
Nehru and Sardar Patel, assassin, who surrendered afterwards, was
representing two strands within Nathuram Godse.
the Congress, standing on two

Gandhiji’s death led to an extraordinary
sides of Gandhiji’s pyre. Blessing
them both from a heavenly realm, outpouring of grief, with rich tributes being paid to
is Mahatma Gandhi, at the centre. him from across the political spectrum in India,

and moving appreciations coming from such
international figures as George Orwell and Albert
Einstein. Time magazine, which had once mocked
Gandhiji’s physical size and seemingly non-rational
ideas, now compared his martyrdom to that of
Abraham Lincoln: it was a bigoted American who
had killed Lincoln for believing that human beings
were equal regardless of their  race or skin colour;
and it was a bigoted Hindu who had killed Gandhiji
for believing that friendship was possible, indeed
necessary, between Indians of different faiths. In
this respect, as Time wrote, “The world knew that it
had, in a sense too deep, too simple for the world to
understand, connived at his (Gandhiji’s) death as it
had connived at Lincoln’s.”

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 307

6. Knowing Gandhi
There are many different kinds of sources from which we can
reconstruct the political career of Gandhiji and the history of
the nationalist movement.

6.1 Public voice and private scripts
One important source is the writings and speeches of Mahatma
Gandhi and his contemporaries, including both his associates
and his political adversaries. Within these writings we need
to distinguish between those that were meant for the public
and those that were not. Speeches, for instance, allow us to
hear the public voice of an individual, while private letters
give us a glimpse of his or her private thoughts. In letters we
see people expressing their anger and pain, their dismay and
anxiety, their hopes and frustrations in ways in which they
may not express themselves in public statements. But we must
remember that this private-public distinction often breaks
down. Many letters are written to individuals, and are therefore
personal, but they are also meant for the public. The language
of the letters is often shaped by the awareness that they may
one day be published. Conversely, the fear that a letter may
get into print often prevents people from expressing their
opinion freely in personal letters. Mahatma Gandhi regularly
published in his journal, Harijan, letters that others wrote to
him. Nehru edited a collection of letters written to him during
the national movement and published A Bunch of Old Letters.

Source 7

One event through letters

In the 1920s, Jawaharlal Nehru was increasingly influenced by socialism, and he returned
from Europe in 1928 deeply impressed with the Soviet Union. As he began working
closely with the socialists (Jayaprakash Narayan, Narendra Dev, N.G. Ranga and others),
a rift developed between the socialists and the conservatives within the Congress. After
becoming the Congress President in 1936, Nehru spoke passionately against fascism,
and upheld the demands of workers and peasants.

Worried by Nehru’s socialist rhetoric, the conservatives, led by Rajendra Prasad and
Sardar Patel, threatened to resign from the Working Committee, and some prominent
industrialists in Bombay issued a statement attacking Nehru. Both Prasad and Nehru
turned to Mahatma Gandhi and met him at his ashram at Wardha. The latter acted as the
mediator, as he often did, restraining Nehru’s radicalism and persuading Prasad and
others to see the significance of Nehru’s leadership.

In A Bunch of Old Letters, 1958, Nehru reprinted many of the letters that were exchanged
at the time.

Read the extracts in the following pages.

Reprint 2025-26



308  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Source 7 (contd)

From A Bunch of Old Letters

My dear Jawaharlalji, Wardha, July 1, 1936

Since we parted yesterday we have had a long conversation with Mahatmaji and a prolonged consultation
among ourselves. We understand that you have felt much hurt by the course of action taken by us and
particularly the tone of our letter has caused you much pain. It was never our intention either to embarrass
you or to hurt you and if you had suggested or indictated that it hurt you we would have without the
least hesitation amended or altered the letter. But we have decided to withdraw it and our resignation
on a reconsideration of the whole situation.

We have felt that in all your utterances as published in the Press you have been speaking not so much
on the general Congress programme as on a topic which has not been accepted by the Congress and in
doing so you have been acting more as the mouthpiece of the minority of our colleagues on the Working
Committee as also on the Congress than the mouthpiece of the majority which we expected you as
Congress President to do.

There is regular continuous campaign against us treating us as persons whose time is over, who
represent and stand for ideas that are worn out and that have no present value, who are only obstructing
the progress of the country and who deserve to be cast out of the positions which they undeservedly
hold … we have felt that a great injustice has been and is being done to us by others, and we are not
receiving the protection we are entitled from you as our colleague and as our President …

Yours  sincerely
Rajendra Prasad

My Dear Bapu, Allahabad, July 5, 1936

I arrived here last night. Ever since I left Wardha I have been feeling weak in body and troubled in mind.
… Since my return from Europe, I found that meetings of the Working Committee exhaust me

greatly; they have a devitalising effect on me and I have almost the feeling of being older in years after
every fresh experience …

I am grateful to you for all the trouble you took in smoothing over matters and in helping to
avoid a crisis.

I read again Rajendra Babu’s letter to me (the second one) and his formidable indictment of me ...
For however tenderly the fact may be stated, it amounts to this that I am an intolerable nuisance and

the very qualities I possess – a measure of ability, energy, earnestness, some personality which has a
vague appeal – become dangerous for they are harnessed to the wrong chariot (socialism). The
conclusion from all this is obvious.

I have written at length, both in my book and subsequently, about my present ideas. There is no lack
of material for me to be judged. Those views are not casual. They are part of me, and though I might
change them or vary them in future, so long as I hold them I must give expression to them. Because I
attached importance to a larger unity I tried to express them in the mildest way possible and more as an
invitation to thought than as fixed conclusions. I saw no conflict in this approach and in anything
that the Congress was doing. So far as the elections were concerned I felt that my approach was a
definite asset to us as it enthused the masses. But my approach, mild and vague as it was, is considered
dangerous and harmful by my colleagues. I was even told that my laying stress always on the
poverty and unemployment in India  was unwise, or at any rate the way I did it was wrong …

You told me that you intended issuing some kind of a statement. I shall welcome this for I believe in
every viewpoint being placed before the country.

Yours affectionately
Jawaharlal

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 309

Source 7 (contd)

Segaon, July 15, 1936

Dear Jawaharlal,

Your letter is touching. You feel the most injured party. The fact is that your colleagues have
lacked your courage and frankness. The result has been disastrous. I have always pleaded
with them to speak to you freely and fearlessly. But having lacked the courage, whenever they
have spoken they have done it clumsily and you have felt irritated. I tell you they have dreaded
you, because of your irritability and impatience with them. They have chafed under your
rebukes and magisterial manner and above all your arrogation of what has appeared to them
your infallibility and superior knowledge. They feel you have treated them with scant courtesy
and never defended them from socialist ridicule and even misrepresentation.

I have looked at the whole affair as a tragi-comedy. I would therefore like you to look at
the whole thing in a lighter vein.

I suggested your name for the crown of thorns (Presidentship of the Congress). Keep it
on, though the head be bruised. Resume your humour at the committee meetings. That is your
most usual role, not that of care-worn, irritable man ready to burst on the slightest occasion.

How I wish you could telegraph me that on finishing my letter you felt as merry as you
were on that new year’s day in Lahore when you were reported to have danced around the
tricolour flag.

You must give your throat a chance.
Love
Bapu

Ü

(a) What do the letters tell us
about the way Congress ideals
developed over time?
(b)  What do they reveal about the
role of Mahatma Gandhi within
the national movement?
(c) Do such letters give us any
special insight into the working of
the Congress, and into the nature
of the national movement?

Reprint 2025-26



310  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

6.2 Framing a picture
Autobiographies similarly give us an account of the
past that is often rich in human detail. But here
again we have to be careful of the way we read and
interpret autobiographies. We need to remember that
they are retrospective accounts written very often
from memory. They tell us what the author could
recollect, what he or she saw as important, or was
keen on recounting, or how a person wanted his
or her life to be viewed by others. Writing an
autobiography is a way of framing a picture of
yourself. So in reading these accounts  we have to
try and see what the author does not tell us; we
need to understand the reasons for that silence –
those wilful or unwitting acts of forgetting.

6.3 Through police eyes
Another vital source is government records, for the
colonial rulers kept close tabs on those they regarded
as critical of the government. The letters and reports
written by policemen and other officials were secret

Fig. 11.16 at the time; but now can be accessed in archives.
Police clash with Congress Let us look at one such source: the fortnightly
volunteers in Bombay during the reports that were prepared by the Home Department
Civil Disobedience Movement. from the early twentieth century. These reports were

based on police information from the localities,
Ü Can you see any conflict

but often expressed what the higher officials saw,
between this image and what

or wanted to believe. While noticing the possibility
was reported in the Fortnightly

of sedition and rebellion, they liked to assure
Reports of the police?

themselves that these fears were unwarranted.
If you see the Fortnightly
Reports for the period of
the Salt March you will
notice that the Home
Department was unwilling
to accept that Mahatma
Gandhi’s actions had
evoked any enthusiastic
response from the masses.
The march was seen as
a drama, an antic, a
desperate effort to
mobilise people who were
unwilling to rise against
the British and were busy
with their daily schedules,
happy under the Raj.

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 311

Source 8

Fortnightly Reports of the Home Department
(Confidential)

FOR THE FIRST HALF OF MARCH 1930 foretold freely but it seems quite possible
that nonfulfilment of the forecast is

The rapid political developments in Gujarat are upsetting plans.
being closely watched here. To what extent and
in what directions they will affect political Madras
condition in this province, it is difficult to surmise The opening of Gandhi’s civil disobedience
at present. The peasantry is for the moment campaign has completely overshadowed all
engaged in harvesting a good rabi; students are other issues. General opinion inclines to
pre-occupied with their impending examinations. regard his march as theatrical and his

programme as impracticable, but as he is
Central Provinces and Berar

held in such personal reverence by the Hindu
The arrest of Mr. Vallabh Bhai Patel caused little public generally, the possibility of arrest
excitement, except in Congress circles, but a which he seems deliberately to be courting
meeting organised by the Nagpur Nagar and its effect on the political situation are
Congress Committee to congratulate Gandhi on viewed with considerable misgiving.
the start of his march was attended by a crowd
of over 3000 people at Nagpur. The 12th of March was celebrated as the

day of inaugurating the civil disobedience

Bengal campaign. In Bombay the celebrations took

The outstanding event of the past fortnight has the form of saluting the national flag in
the morning.

been the start of Gandhi’s campaign of civil
disobedience. Mr. J.M. Sengupta has formed an
All-Bengal Civil Disobedience Council, and the Bombay
Bengal Provincial Congress Committee has Press Kesari indulged in offensive language
formed an All Bengal Council of Disobedience. and in its usual attitude of blowing hot and
But beyond forming councils no active steps have cold wrote: “If the Government wants to
yet been taken in the matter of civil disobedience test the power of Satyagraha, both its action
in Bengal. and inaction will cause injury to it. If it
The reports from the districts show that the arrests Gandhi it will incur the discontent
meetings that have been held excite little or no of the nation; if it does not do that, the
interest and leave no profound impression on movement of civil disobedience will go on
the general population. It is noticeable, however, spreading. We therefore say that if the
that ladies are attending these meetings in Government punishes Mr. Gandhi the nation
increasing numbers. will have won a victory, and if it lets him

alone it will have won a still greater victory.”
Bihar and Orissa

On the other hand the moderate paper
There is still little to report regarding Congress Vividh Vritt pointed out the futility of the
activity. There is a good deal of talk about a movement and opined that it could not
campaign to withhold payment of the chaukidari achieve the end in view. It,  however,
tax, but no area has yet been selected for reminded the government that repression
experiment. The arrest of Gandhi is being would defeat its purpose.

contd

Reprint 2025-26



312  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Source 8 (contd)

FOR THE SECOND HALF OF MARCH 1930 the salt laws on receipt of Mr. Gandhi’s orders are
reported from a number of districts.

Bengal

Interest has continued to centre round Gandhi’s FOR THE FIRST HALF OF APRIL 1930

march to the sea and the arrangements which
he is making to initiate a campaign of civil United Provinces
disobedience. The extremist papers report his Events have moved rapidly during the fortnight.
doings and speeches at great length and make a Apart from political meetings, processions and
great display of the various meetings that are the enrolment of volunteers, the Salt Act has
being held throughout Bengal and the resolutions been openly defied at Agra, Cawnpore, Benaras,
passed thereat. But there is little enthusiasm Allahabad, Lucknow, Meerut, Rae Bareli,
for the form of civil disobedience favoured by Farukhabad, Etawah, Ballia and Mainpuri.
Gandhi  …

Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru was arrested at Cheoki railway
Generally people are waiting to see what station early on the morning of April 14 as he was
happens to Gandhi and the probability is that if proceeding to the Central Provinces to attend a
any action is taken against him, a spark will be meeting of Youth League. He was at once taken
set to much inflammable material in Bengal. But direct to Naini Central Jail, where he was tried
the prospect of any serious conflagration is at and sentenced to six months simple imprisonment.
present slight.

Bihar and Orissa
Central Provinces and Berar There have been, or are now materialising,
In Nagpur these meetings were well attended spectacular, but small-scale, attempts at illicit
and most of the schools and colleges were salt manufacture in a few places …
deserted on the 12th March to mark the
inauguration of Gandhi’s march. Central Provinces

The boycott  of l iquor shops and the In Jubbalpore Seth Govinddass has attempted

infringement of forest laws appear to be the to manufacture chemical salt at a cost many times

most probable line of attack. in excess of the market price of clean salt.

Punjab Madras

It seems not improbable that organised attempts Considerable opposition was shown at

will be made to break the Salt Law in the Vizagapatam to the Police when they attempted

Jhelum district; that the agitation relating to the to seize salt made by boiling sea water, but

non-payment of the water-tax in Multan will elsewhere resistance to the seizure of illicit salt

be revived; and that some movement in has been half hearted.

connection with the National Flag will be started
Bengal

probably at Gujranwala.
In the mufassal efforts have been made to

United Provinces manufacture illicit salt, the main operation

Political activity has undoubtedly intensified areas being the districts of 24-Parganas and

during the last fortnight. The Congress party feels Midnapore.

that it must do something spectacular to sustain Very little salt has actually been manufactured
public interest. Enrolment of volunteers, and most of it has been confiscated and the
propaganda in villages, preparations for breaking utensils in which it was manufactured destroyed.

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 313

Ü Read the Fortnightly Reports carefully. Remember they are extracts from
confidential reports of the colonial Home Department. These reports did not always
accept what the police reported from different localities.

(1) How do you think the nature of the source affects what is being said in these
reports? Write a short note illustrating your argument with quotations from the
above text.

(2) Why do you think the Home Department was continuously reporting on what
people thought about the possibility of  Mahatma Gandhi’s arrest? Reread what
Gandhiji said about the question of arrests in his speech on 5 April 1930 at Dandi.

(3) Why do you think Mahatma Gandhi was not arrested?

(4) Why do you think the Home Department continued to say that the march was not
evoking any response?

6.4 From newspapers
One more important source is contemporary
newspapers, published in English as well
as in the different Indian languages, which
tracked Mahatma Gandhi’s movements and
reported on his activities, and also represented
what ordinary Indians thought of him.
Newspaper accounts, however, should not be
seen as unprejudiced. They were published by
people who had their own political opinions
and world views. These ideas shaped what was
published and the way events were reported.
The accounts that were published in a London
newspaper would be different from the report
in an Indian nationalist paper.

We need to look at these reports but should
be careful while interpreting them. Every
statement made in these cannot be accepted
literally as representing what was happening
on the ground. They often reflect the fears and
anxieties of officials who were unable to control
a movement and were anxious about its

Fig. 11.17
spread. They did not know whether to arrest

Pictures like this reveal how Mahatma
Mahatma Gandhi or what an arrest would Gandhi was perceived by people and
mean. The more the colonial state kept a watch represented in popular prints
on the public and its activities, the more it Within the tree of nationalism, Mahatma

worried about the basis of its rule. Gandhi appears as the looming central
figure surrounded by small images of
other leaders and sages.

Reprint 2025-26



314  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Timeline

1915 Mahatma Gandhi returns from South Africa

1917 Champaran movement

1918 Peasant movements in Kheda (Gujarat), and workers’ movement
in Ahmedabad

1919 Rowlatt Satyagraha (March-April)

1919 Jallianwala Bagh massacre (April)

1921 Non-cooperation and Khilafat Movements

1928 Peasant movement in Bardoli

1929 “Purna Swaraj” accepted as Congress goal at the Lahore
Congress (December)

1930 Civil Disobedience Movement begins; Dandi March (March-April)

1931 Gandhi-Irwin Pact (March); Second Round Table Conference
(December)

1935 Government of India Act promises some form of representative
government

1939 Congress ministries resign

1942 Quit India Movement begins (August)

1946 Mahatma Gandhi visits Noakhali and other riot-torn areas to stop
communal violence

ANSWER IN 100-150 WORDS

1. How did Mahatma Gandhi seek to identify with the
common people?

2. How was Mahatma Gandhi perceived by the peasants?

3. Why did the salt laws become an important issue of
struggle?

4. Why are newspapers an important source for the study
of the national movement?

5. Why was the charkha chosen as a symbol of
nationalism?

Reprint 2025-26



MAHATMA GANDHI AND THE NATIONALIST MOVEMENT 315

Write a short essay
(250-300 words) on the following:

6. How was non-cooperation a form of protest?

7. Why were the dialogues at the Round Table
Conference inconclusive?

8. In what way did Mahatma Gandhi transform the
nature of the national movement?

9. What do private letters and autobiographies tell
us about an individual? How are these sources
different from official accounts?

If you would like to know
more, read:

Map work Sekhar Bandyopadhyay. 2004.
From Plassey to Partition:
A History of Modern India.

10. Find out about the route of the Dandi March. On
Orient Longman, New Delhi.

a map of Gujarat plot the line of the march and
mark the major towns and villages that it passed

Sarvepalli Gopal. 1975.
along the route.

Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography,
Volume I, 1889-1947.
Oxford University Press, Delhi.

Project (choose one)
David Hardiman. 2003.
Gandhi in His Time and Ours.

11. Read any two autobiographies of nationalist Permanent Black, New Delhi.
leaders. Look at the different ways in which the
authors represent their own life and times, and Gyanendra Pandey. 1978.
interpret the national movement. See how their The Ascendancy of the
views differ. Write an account based on your Congress in Uttar Pradesh.
studies. 1926-34.

Oxford University Press, Delhi.
12. Choose any event that took place during the

national movement. Try and read the letters and Sumit Sarkar. 1983.
speeches of the leaders of the time. Some of these Modern India, 1885-1947.
are now published. He could be a local leader from Macmillan, New Delhi.
the region where you live. Try and see how the
local leaders viewed the activities of the national
leadership at the top. Write about the movement
based on your reading.

You could visit:
http:/www.gandhiserve.org/
cwmg/cwmg.html
(for Collected Works of Mahatma
Gandhi)

Reprint 2025-26


##12##
Framing the Constitution
THEME

The Beginning of a New Era
TWELVE

The Indian Constitution, which came into effect on 26 January 1950,
has the dubious distinction of being the longest in the world. But
its length and complexity are perhaps understandable when one
considers the country’s size and diversity. At Independence, India
was not merely large and diverse, but also deeply divided.
A Constitution designed to keep the country together, and to take it
forward, had necessarily to be an elaborate, carefully-worked-out,
and painstakingly drafted document. For one thing, it sought to
heal wounds of the past and the present, to make Indians of different
classes, castes and communities come together in a shared political
experiment. For another, it sought to nurture democratic institutions
in what had long been a culture of hierarchy and deference.

The Constitution of India was framed between December 1946
and November 1949. During this time its drafts were discussed clause
by clause in the Constituent Assembly of India. In all, the Assembly

Fig. 15.2
Images of
desolation
and
destruction
continued to
haunt
members of
the
Constituent
Assembly.

Fig. 12.1
The Constitution was signed in December 1949 after three years of debate.

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 317

held eleven sessions, with sittings spread over 165 days. In
between the sessions, the work of revising and refining the drafts
was carried out by various committees and sub-committees.

From your political science textbooks you know what the
Constitution of India is, and you have seen how it has worked
over the decades since Independence. This chapter will introduce
you to the history that lies behind the Constitution, and the
intense debates that were part of its making. If we try and hear
the voices within the Constituent Assembly, we get an idea of the
process through which the Constitution was framed and the vision
of the new nation formulated.

1. A Tumultuous Time
The years immediately preceding the making of the
Constitution had been exceptionally tumultuous: a
time of great hope, but also of abject disappointment.
On 15 August 1947, India had been made free, but it
had also been divided. Fresh in popular memory were
the Quit India struggle of 1942 – perhaps the most
widespread popular movement against the British
Raj – as well as the bid by Subhas Chandra Bose to
win freedom through armed struggle with foreign aid.
An even more recent upsurge had also evoked much
popular sympathy – this was the rising of the ratings
of the Royal Indian Navy in Bombay and other cities
in the spring of 1946. Through the late 1940s there
were periodic, if scattered, mass protests of workers
and peasants in different parts of the country.

One striking feature of these popular upsurges was Fig. 12.2
the degree of Hindu-Muslim unity they manifested. Images of desolation and
In contrast, the two leading Indian political parties, the destruction continued to haunt
Congress and the Muslim League, had repeatedly failed members of the Constituent

to arrive at a settlement that would bring about religious Assembly.

reconciliation and social harmony. The Great Calcutta
Killings of August 1946 began a year of almost
continuous rioting across northern and eastern India
(see Chapter 11). The violence culminated in the
massacres that accompanied the transfer of
populations when the Partition of India was announced.

On Independence Day, 15 August 1947, there was
an outburst of joy and hope, unforgettable for those
who lived through that time. But innumerable
Muslims in India, and Hindus and Sikhs in Pakistan,
were now faced with a cruel choice – the threat of

Reprint 2025-26



318  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Fig. 12.3
Jawaharlal Nehru speaking in the
Constituent Assembly at midnight
on14 August 1947
It was on this day that Nehru
gave his famous speech that
began with the following lines:
“Long years ago we made a tryst
with destiny, and now the time
comes when we shall redeem our
pledge, not wholly or in full
measure, but very substantially.
At the stroke of the midnight
hour, when the world sleeps,
India will awake to life and
freedom.”

sudden death or the squeezing of opportunities on
the one side, and a forcible tearing away from
their age-old roots on the other. Millions of refugees
were on the move, Muslims into East and West
Pakistan, Hindus and Sikhs into West Bengal and
the eastern half of the Punjab. Many perished
before they reached their destination.

Another, and scarcely less serious, problem faced
by the new nation was that of the princely states.
During the period of the Raj, approximately one-third
of the area of the subcontinent was under the control
of nawabs and maharajas who owed allegiance to
the British Crown, but were otherwise left mostly
free to rule – or misrule – their territory as they
wished. When the British left India, the constitutional
status of these princes remained ambiguous. As one
contemporary observer remarked, some maharajas
now began “to luxuriate in wild dreams of independent
power in an India of many partitions”.

This was the background in which the
Constituent Assembly met. How could the debates
within the Assembly remain insulated from what
was happening outside?

1.1 The making of the Constituent Assembly
The members of the Constituent Assembly were not
elected on the basis of universal franchise. In the
winter of 1945-46 provincial elections were held in
India. The Provincial Legislatures then chose the
representatives to the Constituent Assembly.

The Constituent Assembly that came into being
was dominated by one party: the Congress. The

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 319

Congress swept the general seats in the provincial
elections, and the Muslim League captured most of
the reserved Muslim seats. But the League chose to
boycott the Constituent Assembly, pressing its
demand for Pakistan with a separate constitution.
The Socialists too were initially unwilling to join,
for they believed the Constituent Assembly was a
creation of the British, and therefore incapable of being
truly autonomous. In effect, therefore, 82 per cent
of the members of the Constituent Assembly were
also members of the Congress.

The Congress however was not a party with one
voice. Its members differed in their opinion on critical
issues. Some members were inspired by socialism
while others were defenders of landlordism. Some
were close to communal parties while others were
assertively secular. Through the national movement
Congress members had learnt to debate their ideas
in public and negotiate their differences. Within the
Constituent Assembly too, Congress members did not
sit quiet.

The discussions within the Constituent Assembly
Fig. 12.4

were also influenced by the opinions expressed by
The Constituent Assembly in

the public. As the deliberations continued, the session
arguments were reported in newspapers, and the Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel is seen
proposals were publicly debated. Criticisms and sitting second from right.

Reprint 2025-26



320  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Important Committees of the counter-criticisms in the press in turn shaped the
Constituent Assembly and nature of the consensus that was ultimately

Presidents reached on specific issues. In order to create a sense
of collective participation the public was also asked

Name of Important Name of
to send in their views on what needed to be done.

Committee Presidents
Many of the linguistic minorities wanted the

1. Rules of Procedure Rajendra Prasad protection of their mother tongue, religious
Committee minorities asked for special safeguards, while dalits

2. Union Power Pandit demanded an end to all caste oppression and
Committee Jawaharlal Nehru reservation of seats in government bodies. Important

3. Union Constitution Pandit issues of cultural rights and social justice raised
Committee Jawaharlal Nehru in these public discussions were debated on the floor

of the Assembly.
4. Provincial Constitution Vallabhbhai

Committee Patel 1.2 The dominant voices
5. Steering Committee Rajendra Prasad The Constituent Assembly had 300 members. Of these,
6. Drafting Committee Bhimrao six members played particularly important roles.

Ambedkar Three were representatives of the Congress, namely,
7. Flag Committee J. B. Kripalani Jawaharlal Nehru, Vallabh Bhai Patel and Rajendra

Prasad. It was Nehru who moved the crucial
8. States Committee Pandit Jawaharlal

Nehru “Objectives Resolution”, as well as the resolution
proposing that the National Flag of India be a

9. Advisory Committee Sardar “horizontal tricolour of saffron, white and dark
Vallabhbhai Patel

green in equal proportion”, with a wheel in navy
10. Suprime Court S. Varadachariar blue at the centre. Patel, on the other hand, worked

Committee mostly behind the scenes, playing a key role in the
11. Fundamental Rights J. B. Kripalani drafting of several reports, and working to reconcile

Sub-Committee opposing points of view. Rajendra Prasad’s role was
12. Minorities H. C. Mookerjee, as President of the Assembly, where he had to steer

Sub-Committee the discussion along constructive lines while
making sure all members had a chance to speak.

13. Constitution M. N.
Review Commission Venkatachaliah Besides this Congress trio, a very important member

of the Assembly was the lawyer and economist B.R.
Ambedkar. During the period of British rule,
Ambedkar had been a political opponent of the
Congress; but, on the advice of Mahatma Gandhi,
he was asked at Independence to join the Union
Cabinet as law minister. In this capacity, he served
as Chairman of the Drafting Committee of the
Constitution. Serving with him were two other
lawyers, K.M. Munshi from Gujarat and Alladi
Krishnaswamy Aiyar from Madras, both of whom
gave crucial inputs in the drafting of the Constitution.

These six members were given vital assistance by
two civil servants. One was B. N. Rau, Constitutional
Advisor to the Government of India, who prepared
a series of background papers based on a close study
of the political systems obtaining in other countries.

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 321

The other was the Chief Draughtsman, S. N. Mukherjee,
who had the ability to put complex proposals in clear
legal language.

Ambedkar himself had the responsibility of
guiding the Draft Constitution through the Assembly.
This took three years in all, with the printed record
of the discussions taking up eleven bulky volumes.
But while the process was long it was also extremely
interesting. The members of the Constituent Assembly
were eloquent in expressing their sometimes very
divergent points of view. In their presentations we
can discern many conflicting ideas of India – of what
language Indians should speak, of what political and
economic systems the nation should follow, of what
moral values its citizens should uphold or disavow.

Ü Discuss...
Look again at Chapter 11. Discuss how the political Fig. 12.5
situation of the time may have shaped the nature of B. R. Ambedkar presiding over a
the debates within the Constituent Assembly. discussion of the Hindu Code Bill

Reprint 2025-26



322  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

2. The Vision of the Constitution

On 13 December 1946, Jawaharlal Nehru introduced
the “Objectives Resolution” in the Constituent
Assembly. It was a momentous resolution that
outlined the defining ideals of the Constitution of
Independent India, and provided the framework
within which the work of constitution-making was
to proceed. It proclaimed India to be an “Independent
Sovereign Republic”, guaranteed its citizens justice,
equality and freedom, and assured that “adequate
safeguards shall be provided for minorities, backward
and tribal areas, and Depressed and Other Backward
Classes …  ” After outlining these objectives, Nehru
placed the Indian experiment in a broad historical
perspective. As he spoke, he said, his mind went
back to the historic efforts in the past to produce
such documents of rights.

Source 1

“We are not going just to copy”

This is what Jawaharlal Nehru said in his famous speech of
13 December 1946:

My mind goes back to the various Constituent Assemblies that
have gone before and of what took place at the making of the
great American nation when the fathers of that nation met and
fashioned out a Constitution which has stood the test of so many
years, more than a century and a half, and of the great nation
which has resulted, which has been built up on the basis of that
Constitution. My mind goes back to that mighty revolution which
took place also over 150 years ago and to that Constituent
Assembly that met in that gracious and lovely city of Paris which
has fought so many battles for freedom, to the difficulties that
that Constituent Assembly had and to how the King and other
authorities came in its way, and still it continued. The House will
remember that when these difficulties came and even the room
for a meeting was denied to the then Constituent Assembly, they
betook themselves to an open tennis court and met there and
took the oath, which is called the Oath of the Tennis Court, that
they continued meeting in spite of Kings, in spite of the others,
and did not disperse till they had finished the task they had
undertaken. Well, I trust that it is in that solemn spirit that we
too are meeting here and that we, too, whether we meet in
this chamber or other chambers, or in the fields or in the
market-place, will go on meeting and continue our work till
we have finished it.

contd

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 323

Source 1 (contd)

Then my mind goes back to a more recent revolution which gave rise to a new
type of State, the revolution that took place in Russia and out of which has arisen
the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics, another mighty country which is
playing a tremendous part in the world, not only a mighty country but for us in
India, a neighbouring country.

So our mind goes back to these great examples and we seek to learn from their
success and to avoid their failures. Perhaps we may not be able to avoid failures
because some measure of failure is inherent in human effort. Nevertheless, we
shall advance, I am certain, in spite of obstructions and difficulties, and achieve
and realise the dream that we have dreamt so long …

We say that it is our firm and solemn resolve to have an independent sovereign
republic. India is bound to be sovereign, it is bound to be independent and it is
bound to be a republic … Now, some friends have raised the question: “Why
have you not put in the word ‘democratic’ here.?” Well, I told them that it is
conceivable, of course, that a republic may not be democratic but the whole of
our past is witness to this fact that we stand for democratic institutions. Obviously
we are aiming at democracy and nothing less than a democracy. What form of
democracy, what shape it might take is another matter. The democracies of the
present day, many of them in Europe and elsewhere, have played a great part in
the world’s progress. Yet it may be doubtful if those democracies may not have to
change their shape somewhat before long if they have to remain completely
democratic. We are not going just to copy, I hope, a certain democratic procedure
or an institution of a so-called democratic country. We may improve upon it. In
any event whatever system of government we may establish here must fit in with
the temper of our people and be acceptable to them. We stand for democracy. It
will be for this House to determine what shape to give to that democracy, the
fullest democracy, I hope. The House will notice that in this Resolution, although
we have not used the word “democratic” because we thought it is obvious that
the word “republic” contains that word and we did not want to use unnecessary
words and redundant words, but we have done something much more than
using the word. We have given the content of democracy in this Resolution and
not only the content of democracy but the content, if I may say so, of economic
democracy in this Resolution. Others might take objection to this Resolution on
the ground that we have not said that it should be a Socialist State. Well, I stand
for Socialism and, I hope, India will stand for Socialism and that India will go
towards the constitution of a Socialist State and I do believe that the whole
world will have to go that way.

CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY DEBATES (CAD), VOL.I

Oath of the Tennis Court

Reprint 2025-26



324  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Nehru’s speech (Source 1) merits careful scrutiny.
Ü What explanation does

What exactly was being stated here? What did Nehru’s
Jawaharlal Nehru give for not

seemingly nostalgic return to the past reflect? What
using the term “democratic”

was he saying about the origin of the ideas embodied
in the Objectives Resolution
in Source 1? in the vision of the Constitution? In returning to the

past and referring to the American and French
Revolutions, Nehru was locating the history of
constitution-making in India within a longer history
of struggle for liberty and freedom. The momentous
nature of the Indian project was emphasised by linking
it to revolutionary moments in the past. But Nehru
was not suggesting that those events were to provide
any blueprint for the present; or that the ideas of
those revolutions could be mechanically borrowed and
applied in India. He did not define the specific form
of democracy, and suggested that this had to be
decided through deliberations. And he stressed that
the ideals and provisions of the constitution
introduced in India could not be just derived from
elsewhere. “We are not going just to copy”, he said.
The system of government established in India, he
declared, had to “fit in with the temper of our people
and be acceptable to them”. It was necessary to learn
from the people of the West, from their achievements
and failures, but the Western nations too had to learn
from experiments elsewhere, they too had to change
their own notions of democracy. The objective of the
Indian Constitution would be to fuse the liberal ideas
of democracy with the socialist idea of economic
justice, and re-adapt and re-work all these ideas
within the Indian context. Nehru’s plea was for creative
thinking about what was appropriate for India.

2.1 The will of the people
A Communist member, Somnath Lahiri saw the dark
hand of British imperialism hanging over the
deliberations of the Constituent Assembly. He thus
urged the members, and Indians in general, to fully
free themselves from the influences of imperial rule.
In the winter of 1946-47, as the Assembly
deliberated, the British were still in India. An interim
administration headed by Jawaharlal Nehru was in
place, but it could only operate under the directions
of the Viceroy and the British Government in London.
Lahiri exhorted his colleagues to realise that the
Constituent Assembly was British-made and was
“working the British plans as the British should like
it to be worked out”.

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 325

Fig. 12.6
Members of the Interim Government
Front row (left to right): Baldev Singh, John Mathai, C Rajagopalachari, Jawaharlal Nehru,
Liaquat Ali Khan, Vallabhbhai Patel, I.I. Chundrigar, Asaf Ali, C.H. Bhabha.
Back row (left to right): Jagjivan Ram, Ghazanfar Ali Khan, Rajendra Prasad, Abdur Nishtar

Source 2

 “That is very good, Sir – bold words, noble words”

 Somnath Lahiri said:

Well, Sir, I must congratulate Pandit Nehru for the fine expression he gave to the spirit of
the Indian people when he said that no imposition from the British will be accepted by
the Indian people. Imposition would be resented and objected to, he said, and he added
that if need be we will walk the valley of struggle. That is very good, Sir – bold words,
noble words.

But the point is to see when and how are you going to apply that challenge. Well, Sir, the
point is that the imposition is here right now. Not only has the British Plan made any future
Constitution … dependent on a treaty satisfactory to the Britisher but it suggests that for
every little difference you will have to run to the Federal Court or dance attendance
there in England; or to call on the British Prime Minister Clement Attlee or someone else.
Not only is it a fact that this Constituent Assembly, whatever plans we may be hatching, we
are under the shadow of British guns, British Army, their economic and financial
stranglehold – which means that the final power is still in the British hands and the question
of power has not yet been finally decided, which means the future is not yet completely in
our hands. Not only that, but the statements made by Attlee and others recently have
made it clear that if need be, they will even threaten you with division entirely. This means,
Sir, there is no freedom in this country. As Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel put it some days ago,
we have freedom only to fight among ourselves. That is the only freedom we have got …
Therefore, our humble suggestion is that it is not a question of getting something by working
out this Plan but to declare independence here and now and call upon the Interim
Government, call upon the people of India, to stop fratricidal warfare and look out against
its enemy, which still has the whip hand, the British Imperialism – and go together to fight
it and then resolve our claims afterwards when we will be free.

CAD, VOL.I

Reprint 2025-26



326  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Nehru admitted that most nationalist leaders had
Ü Why does the speaker in wanted a different kind of Constituent Assembly. It
Source 2 think that the was also true, in a sense, that the British
Constituent Assembly was Government had a “hand in its birth”, and it had
under the shadow of attached certain conditions within which the
British guns? Assembly had to function. “But,” emphasised Nehru,

“you must not ignore the source from which this
Assembly derives its strength.”
Nehru added:

Governments do not come into being by State
Papers. Governments are, in fact the expression
of the will of the people. We have met here today
because of the strength of the people behind us
and we shall go as far as the people – not of any
party or group but the people as a whole – shall
wish us to go. We should, therefore, always
keep in mind the passions that lie in the hearts
of the masses of the Indian people and try to

Fig. 12.7 fulfil them.
Edwin Montague (left) was the
author of the Montague-Chelmsford The Constituent Assembly was expected to express
Reforms of 1919 which allowed the aspirations of those who had participated in the
some form of representation in movement for independence. Democracy, equality
provincial legislative assemblies. and justice were ideals that had become intimately

associated with social struggles in India since the
nineteenth century. When the social reformers in
the nineteenth century opposed child marriage and
demanded that widows be allowed to remarry, they
were pleading for social justice. When Swami
Vivekananda campaigned for a reform of Hinduism,
he wanted religions to become more just. When
Jyotiba Phule in Maharashtra pointed to the
suffering of  the depressed castes, or Communists
and Socialists organised workers and peasants, they
were demanding economic and social justice. The
national movement against a government that was
seen as oppressive and illegitimate was inevitably a
struggle for democracy  and justice, for citizens’
rights and equality.

In fact, as the demand for representation grew,
the British had been forced to introduce a series of
constitutional reforms. A number of Acts were passed
(1909, 1919 and 1935), gradually enlarging the space
for Indian participation in provincial governments.
The executive was made partly responsible to the
provincial legislature in 1919, and almost entirely
so under the Government of India Act of 1935. When
elections were held in 1937, under the 1935 Act,
the Congress came to power in eight out of the
11 provinces.

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 327

Yet we should not see an unbroken continuity
between the earlier constitutional developments and Ü Discuss...
what happened in the three years from 1946. While What were the ideas
the earlier constitutional experiments were in response outlined by Jawaharlal
to the growing demand for a representative government, Nehru in his speech on the
the Acts (1909, 1919 and 1935) were not directly debated Objectives Resolution?
and formulated by Indians. They were enacted by the
colonial government. The electorate that elected the
provincial bodies had expanded over the years, but even
in 1935 it remained limited to no more than 10 to 15
per cent of the adult population: there was no universal
adult franchise. The legislatures elected under the 1935
Act operated within the framework of colonial rule, and
were responsible to the Governor appointed by the
British. The vision that Nehru was trying to outline on
13 December 1946  was of the Constitution of an
independent, sovereign Republic of India.

3. Defining Rights
How were the rights of individual citizens to be defined?
Were the oppressed groups to have any special rights?
What rights would minorities have? Who, in fact, could
be defined as a minority? As the debate on the floor of
the Constituent Assembly unfolded, it was clear that
there were no collectively shared answers to any of
these questions. The answers were evolved through the
clash of opinions and the drama of individual
encounters. In his inaugural speech, Nehru had invoked
the “will of the people” and declared that the makers of
the Constitution had to fulfil “the passions that lie in
the hearts of the masses”. This was no easy task. With
the anticipation of Independence, different groups
expressed their will in different ways, and made
different demands. These would have to be debated and
conflicting ideas would have to be reconciled, before a
consensus could be forged.

3.1 The problem with separate electorates
On 27 August 1947, B. Pocker Bahadur from Madras
made a powerful plea for continuing separate
electorates. Minorities exist in all lands, argued
Bahadur; they could not be wished away, they could
not be “erased out of existence”. The need was to
create a political framework in which minorities could
live in harmony with others, and the differences
between communities could be minimised. This was
possible only if minorites were well represented
within the political system, their voices heard,

Reprint 2025-26



328  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

and their views taken into account. Only separate
electorates would ensure that Muslims had a
meaningful voice in the governance of the country.
The needs of Muslims, Bahadur felt, could not be
properly understood by non-Muslims; nor could a
true representative of Muslims be chosen by people
who did not belong to that community.

This demand for separate electorates provoked
anger and dismay amongst most nationalists. In the
passionate debate that followed, a range of arguments
were offered against the demand. Most nationalists
saw separate electorates as a measure deliberately
introduced by the British to divide the people. “The
English played their game under the cover of
safeguards,” R.V. Dhulekar told Bahadur. “With the help
of it they allured you (the minorities) to a long lull. Give
it up now … Now there is no one to misguide you.”

Fig. 12.8 Partition had made nationalists fervently opposed
In the winter of 1946 Indian leaders to the idea of separate electorates. They were haunted
went to London for what turned out by the fear of continued civil war, riots and violence.
to be a fruitless round of talks with Separate electorates was a “poison that has entered
British Prime Minister Attlee. (Left to
right: Liaquat Ali, Mohammad Ali the body politic of our country”, declared Sardar
Jinnah, Baldev Singh and Pethick- Patel. It was a demand that had turned one
Lawrence) community against another, divided the nation,

caused bloodshed, and led to the tragic partition of
the country. “Do you want peace in this land? If so
do away with it (separate electorates),” urged Patel.

Source 3

“The British element is gone, but they
have left the mischief behind”

Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel said:

It is no use saying that we ask for separate electorates, because it is good for us. We
have heard it long enough. We have heard it for years, and as a result of this
agitation we are now a separate nation … Can you show me one free country
where there are separate electorates? If so, I shall be prepared to accept it. But in
this unfortunate country if this separate electorate is going to be persisted in, even
after the division of the country, woe betide the country; it is not worth living in.
Therefore, I say, it is not for my good alone, it is for your own good that I say it,
forget the past. One day, we may be united … The British element is gone, but they
have left the mischief behind. We do not want to perpetuate that mischief. (Hear,
hear). When the British introduced this element they had not expected that they
will have to go so soon. They wanted it for their easy administration. That is all
right. But they have left the legacy behind. Are we to get out of it or not?

CAD, VOL.V

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 329

Countering the demand for separate electorates,
Govind Ballabh Pant declared that it was not only
harmful for the nation but also for the minorities. He
agreed with Bahadur that the success of a democracy
was to be judged by the confidence it generated
amongst different sections of people. He agreed too
that every citizen in a free state should be treated in
a manner that satisfied “not only his material wants
but also his spiritual sense of self-respect”, and that
the majority community had an obligation to try and
understand the problems of minorities, and empathise
with their aspirations. Yet Pant opposed the idea of
separate electorates. It was a suicidal demand, he
argued, that would permanently isolate the minorities,
make them vulnerable, and deprive them of any
effective say within the government.

Source 4

“I believe separate electorates will
be suicidal to the minorities”

During the debate on 27 August 1947, Govind Ballabh
Pant said:

I believe separate electorates will be suicidal to
the minorities and will do them tremendous harm. If
they are isolated for ever, they can never convert
themselves into a majority and the feeling of
frustration will cripple them even from the very
beginning. What is it that you desire and what is our
ultimate objective? Do the minorities always want to
remain as minorities or do they ever expect to form
an integral part of a great nation and as such to guide
and control its destinies? If they do, can they ever
achieve that aspiration and that ideal if they are
isolated from the rest of the community? I think it
would be extremely dangerous for them if they were
segregated from the rest of the community and kept
aloof in an air-tight compartment where they would
have to rely on others even for the air they breath …

Ü Read Sources 3 and 4.
The minorities if they are returned by separate
electorates can never have any effective voice. What are the different

arguments being put forward
CAD, VOL.II against separate electorates?

Behind all these arguments was the concern with
the making of a unified nation state. In order to build
political unity and forge a nation, every individual
had to be moulded into a citizen of the State, each

Reprint 2025-26



330  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Source 5 group had to be assimilated within the nation. The
Constitution would grant to citizens rights, but

“There cannot be any citizens had to offer their loyalty to the State.
divided loyalty” Communities could be recognised as cultural entities

and assured cultural rights. Politically, however,
Govind Ballabh Pant argued members of all communities had to act as equal
that in order to become loyal members of one State, or else there would be divided
cit izens people had to loyalties. “There is the unwholesome and to some
stop focusing only on the extent degrading habit                   of thinking always
community and the self: in terms of communities and never in terms of

For the success of citizens,” said Pant. And he added: “Let us remember
democracy one must that it is the citizen that must count. It is the citizen
train himself in the that forms the base as well as the summit of the
art of self-discipline. In

social pyramid.” Even as the importance of
democracies one should

community rights was being recognised, there was
care less for himself and
more for others. There a lurking fear among many nationalists that this
cannot be any divided may lead to divided loyalties, and make it difficult
loyalty. All loyalties must to forge a strong nation and a strong State.
exclusively be centred Not all Muslims supported the demand for
round the State. If in a separate electorates. Begum Aizaas Rasul, for
democracy, you create instance, felt that separate electorates were self-
rival loyalties, or you destructive since they isolated the minorities from
create a system in which the majority. By 1949, most Muslim members of the
any individual  or group,

Constituent Assembly were agreed that separate
instead of suppressing

electorates were against the interests of the
his extravagance, cares
nought for larger or other minorities. Instead Muslims needed to take an active
interests, then  democracy part in the democratic process to ensure that they
is doomed. had a decisive voice in the political system.

CAD, VOL.II 3.2 “We will need much more than this Resolution”
While welcoming the Objectives Resolution,

Ü How does G.B. Pant N.G. Ranga, a socialist who had been a leader of the
define the attributes of a peasant movement, urged that the term minorities
loyal citizen? be interpreted in economic terms. The real minorities

for Ranga were the poor and the downtrodden. He
welcomed the legal rights the Constitution was
granting to each individual but pointed to its limits.
In his opinion it was meaningless for the poor people
in the villages to know that they now had the
fundamental right to live, and to have full
employment, or that  they could have their meetings,
their conferences, their associations and various
other civil liberties. It was essential to create
conditions where these constitutionally enshrined
rights could be effectively enjoyed. For this they
needed protection. “They need props. They need a
ladder,” said Ranga.

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 331

Source 6

“The real minorities are the
masses of this country”

Welcoming the Objectives Resolution introduced by
Jawaharlal Nehru, N.G. Ranga said:

Sir, there is a lot of talk about minorities. Who are
the real minorities? Not the Hindus in the so-called
Pakistan provinces, not the Sikhs, not even the
Muslims. No, the real minorities are the masses of
this country. These people are so depressed and
oppressed and suppressed till now that they are not
able to take advantage of the ordinary civil rights.
What is the position? You go to the tribal areas.
According to law, their own traditional law, their
tribal law, their lands cannot be alienated. Yet our
merchants go there, and in the so-called free
market they are able to snatch their lands. Thus,
even though the law goes against this snatching Ü How is the notion of
away of their lands, still the merchants are able to minority defined by Ranga?
turn the tribal people into veritable slaves by
various kinds of bonds, and make them hereditary
bond-slaves. Let us go to the ordinary villagers.
There goes the money-lender with his money and
he is able to get the villagers in his pocket. There
is the landlord himself, the zamindar, and the
malguzar and there are the various other people
who are able to exploit these poor villagers. There
is no elementary education even among these
people. These are the real minorities that need
protection and assurances of protection. In order
to give them the necessary protection, we will need
much more than this Resolution ...

CAD, VOL.II

Ranga also drew attention to the gulf that
separated the broad masses of Indians and those
claiming to speak on their behalf in the Constituent
Assembly:

Whom are we supposed to represent? The
ordinary masses of our country. And yet most of
us do not belong to the masses themselves. We
are of them, we wish to stand for them, but the
masses themselves are not able to come up to the
Constituent Assembly. It may take some time; in
the meanwhile, we are here as their trustees, as
their champions, and we are trying our best to
speak for them.

Reprint 2025-26



332  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

One of the groups mentioned by Ranga, the tribals,
List of women members of the

constituent assembly had among its representatives to the Assembly the
gifted orator Jaipal Singh. In welcoming the Objectives

Name of the Date of Constituency Resolution, Singh said:
Member Signing

Register ... as an Adibasi, I am not expected to
understand the legal intricacies of the

1. Ammu 9 Dec.1946 Madras/ Resolution. But my common sense tells me
Swaminathan General that every one of us should march in that

2. Annie 29 Dec.1948 Travancore road to freedom and fight together. Sir, if there
Mascarene and Cochin is any group of Indian people that has been

Union shabbily treated it is my people. They have

3. Begum 14 Dec. 1947 United been disgracefully treated, neglected for the
Aizaz Rasul Provinces/ last  6,000 years. …  The whole history of my

Muslim people is one of continuous exploitation and
dispossession by the non-aboriginals of India

4. Dakshayani 9 Dec. 1946 Madras/
Velayudan General punctuated by rebellions and disorder, and

yet I take Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru at his
5. G. Durgabai 9 Dec. 1946 Madras/ word. I take you all at your word that now we

General are going to start a new chapter, a new
6. Hansa 9 Dec.1946 Bombay/ chapter of independent India where there is

Mehta General equality of opportunity, where no one would
be neglected.

7. Kamla 9 Dec.1946 United
Chaudhri Provinces/  Singh spoke eloquently on the need to protect the

General tribes, and ensure conditions that could help them
8. Leela Ray 9 Dec.1946 West come up to the level of the general population. Tribes

Bengal/ were not a numerical minority, he argued, but they
General needed protection. They had been dispossessed of the

9. Malati 9 Dec.1946 Orissa/ land they had settled, deprived of their forests and
Chowdhury General pastures, and forced to move in search of new homes.

Perceiving them as primitive and backward, the rest
10. Purnima 9 Dec.1946 United

Banerji Provinces/ of society had turned away from them, spurned them.
General He made a moving plea for breaking the emotional

and physical distance that separated the tribals from
11. Rajkumari 21 Dec.1946 Central

Amrit Kaur Provinces the rest of society: “Our point is that you have got to
and Berar/ mix with us. We are willing to mix with you …  ”.
General Singh was not asking for separate electorates, but

12. Renuka Ray 14 July 1947 West he felt that reservation of seats in the legislature
Bangal/ was essential to allow tribals to represent
General themselves. It would be a way, he said, of compelling

13. Sarojini 9 Dec.1946 Bihar/ others to hear the voice of tribals, and come near
Naidu General them.

14. Sucheta 9 Dec.1946 United 3.3 “We were suppressed for thousands of years”
Kripalani Provinces/ How were the rights of the Depressed Castes to be

General defined by the Constitution? During the national
15. Vijayalakshmi 17 Dec.1946 United movement Ambedkar had demanded separate

Pandit Provinces/ electorates for the Depressed Castes, and Mahatma
General Gandhi had opposed it, arguing that this would

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 333

permanently segregate them from the rest of society. Source 7

How could the Constituent Assembly resolve this “We want removal of our
opposition? What kinds of protection were the

social disabilities”
Depressed Castes to be provided?

Some members of the Depressed Castes
emphasised that the problem of the “Untouchables” Dakshayani Velayudhan from

could not be resolved through protection and Madras, argued:

safeguards alone. Their disabilities were caused What we want is not all
by the social norms and the moral values of caste kinds of safeguards. It is

society. Society had used their services and labour the moral safeguard which

but kept them at a social distance, refusing to gives protection to the

mix with them or dine with them or allow them underdogs of this country ...

entry into temples. “We have been suffering, but I  refuse to bel ieve that
seventy mill ion Harijans

we are prepared to suffer no more,” said  J. Nagappa
are to be considered as a

from Madras. “We have realised our responsibilities.
minority ... what we want is

We know how to assert ourselves.”
the ... immediate removal

Nagappa pointed out that numerically the of our social disabilities.’
Depressed Castes were not a minority: they formed

CAD, VOL.I
between 20 and 25 per cent of the total population.
Their suffering was due to their systematic
marginalisation, not their numerical insignificance.
They had no access to education, no share in the
administration. Addressing the assembly, K.J.
Khanderkar of the Central Provinces said:

We were suppressed for thousands of years. ...
suppressed... to such an extent that neither our
minds nor our bodies and now even our hearts
work, nor are we able to march forward. This is Source 8

the position. We have never asked
After the Partition violence, Ambedkar too no for privileges

longer argued for separate electorates. The
Constituent Assembly finally recommended that Hansa Mehta of Bombay
untouchability be abolished, Hindu temples be demanded justice for women,
thrown open to all castes, and seats in legislatures not reserved seats, or separate
and jobs in government offices be reserved for the electorates.
lowest castes. Many recognised that this could not We have never asked for
solve all problems: social discrimination could not privileges. What we have
be erased only through constitutional legislation, asked for is social justice,
there had to be a change in the attitudes within economic just ice, and
society. But the measures were welcomed by the political justice. We have
democratic public. asked for that equali ty

which alone can be the
basis of mutual respect and

Ü Discuss... understanding, without
which real cooperation is

What were the different arguments that Jaipal
not possible between man

Singh put forward in demanding protective and woman.
measures for the tribals?

Reprint 2025-26



334  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

4. The Powers of the State
One of the topics most vigorously debated in the
Constituent Assembly was the respective rights of the
Central Government and the states. Among those
arguing for a strong Centre was Jawaharlal Nehru.
As he put it in a letter to the President of the
Constituent Assembly, “Now that partition is a settled
fact, … it would be injurious to the interests of the
country to provide for a weak central authority which
would be incapable of ensuring peace, of coordinating
vital matters of common concern and of speaking
effectively for the whole country in the international
sphere”.

The Draft Constitution provided for three lists of
subjects: Union, State, and Concurrent. The subjects
in the first list were to be the preserve of the Central
Government, while those in the second list were vested
with the states. As for the third list, here Centre and
state shared responsibility. However, many more
items were placed under exclusive Union control than
in other federations, and more placed on the
Concurrent list too than desired by the provinces.
The Union also had control of minerals and key
industries. Besides, Article 356 gave the Centre the
powers to take over a state administration on the
recommendation of the Governor.

The Constitution also mandated for a complex
system of fiscal federalism. In the case of some taxes
(for instance, customs duties and Company taxes) the
Centre retained all the proceeds; in other cases (such
as income tax and excise duties) it shared them with
the states; in still other cases (for instance, estate
duties) it assigned them wholly to the states. The
states, meanwhile, could levy and collect certain taxes
on their own: these included land and property taxes,
sales tax, and the hugely profitable tax on bottled
liquor.

4.1 “The centre is likely to break”
The rights of the states were most eloquently defended
by K. Santhanam from Madras. A reallocation of
powers was necessary, he felt, to strengthen not only
the states but also the Centre.  “There is almost an
obsession that by adding all kinds of powers to the
Centre we can make it strong.” This was a
misconception, said Santhanam. If the Centre was
overburdened with responsibilities, it could not
function effectively. By relieving it of some of its
functions, and transferring them to the states, the
Centre could, in fact, be made stronger.

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 335

As for the states, Santhanam felt that the proposed Source 9

allocation of powers would cripple them. The fiscal
provisions would impoverish the provinces since Who is a better patriot?
most taxes, except land revenue, had been made
the preserve of the Centre. Without finances how Sir A. Ramaswamy Mudaliar
could the states undertake any project of from Mysore said during the
development? “I do not want any constitution in debate on 21 August 1947:
which the Unit has to come to the Centre and say ‘I

Let us not lay the flattering
cannot educate my  people. I cannot give sanitation,

unction to our soul that we
give me a dole for the improvement of roads, of

are better patriots if we
industries.’ Let us rather wipe out the federal system

propose a strong Centre and
and let us have Unitary system.” Santhanam that those who advocate a
predicted a dark future if the proposed distribution more vigorous examination
of powers was adopted without further scrutiny. In of these resources are
a few years, he said, all the provinces would rise in people with not enough of
“revolt against the Centre”. national spirit or patriotism.

Many others from the provinces echoed the same
fears. They fought hard for fewer items to be put
on the Concurrent and Union lists. A member from
Orissa warned that “the Centre is likely to break”
since powers had been excessively centralised
under the Constitution.

4.2 “What we want today is a strong Government”
The argument for greater power to the provinces
provoked a strong reaction in the Assembly. The need
for a strong centre had been underlined on numerous
occasions since the Constituent Assembly  had
begun its sessions. Ambedkar had declared that he
wanted “a strong and united Centre (hear, hear)
much stronger than the Centre we had created under
the Government of India Act of 1935”. Reminding
the members of the riots and violence that was
ripping the nation apart, many members had
repeatedly stated that the powers of the Centre had
to be greatly strengthened to enable it to stop the
communal frenzy. Reacting to the demands for giving
power to the provinces, Gopalaswami Ayyangar
declared that “the Centre should be made as strong
as possible”.  One member from the United Provinces,
Balakrishna Sharma, reasoned at length that only
a strong centre could plan for the well-being of the
country, mobilise the available economic resources,
establish a proper administration, and defend the
country against foreign aggression.

Before Partition the Congress had agreed to grant
considerable autonomy to the provinces. This had been
part of an effort to assure the Muslim League that
within the provinces where the Muslim League came

Reprint 2025-26



336  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

to power the Centre would not interfere. After
Ü Discuss... Partition  most nationalists changed their position
What different arguments because they felt that the earlier political pressures
were put forward by those for a decentralised structure were no longer there.
advocating a strong Centre? There was already a unitary system in place,

imposed by the colonial government. The violence of
the times gave a further push to centralisation, now
seen as necessary both to forestall chaos and to
plan for the country’s economic development. The
Constitution thus showed a distinct bias towards
the rights of the Union of India over those of its
constituent states.

5. The Language of the Nation
How could the nation be forged when people in different

Source 10 regions spoke different languages, each associated

What should the with its own cultural heritage? How could people listen
to each other, or connect with each other, if they did not

qualities of a national
know each other’s language? Within the Constituent

language be ? Assembly, the language issue was debated over many
months, and often generated intense arguments.

A few months before his death By the 1930s, the Congress had accepted that
Mahatma Gandhi reiterated

Hindustani ought to be the national language.
his views on the language

Mahatma Gandhi felt that everyone should speak in a
question:

language that common people could easily understand.
This Hindustani should be Hindustani – a blend of Hindi and Urdu – was a popular
neither Sanskritised Hindi language of a large section of the people of India, and
nor Persianised Urdu but

it was a composite language enriched by the interaction
a happy combination of

of diverse cultures. Over the years it had incorporated
both. It should also freely
admit words wherever words and terms from very many different sources,
necessary from the different and was therefore understood by people from various
regional languages and regions. This multi-cultural language, Mahatma
also assimilate words from Gandhi thought, would be the ideal language of
foreign languages, provided communication between diverse communities: it could
that they can mix well and unify Hindus and Muslims, and people of the north
easily with our national and the south.
language. Thus our national From the end of the nineteenth century, however,
language must develop

Hindustani as a language had been gradually
into a rich and powerful

changing. As communal conflicts deepened, Hindi and
instrument capable of
expressing the whole gamut Urdu also started growing apart. On the one hand,
of human thought and there was a move to Sanskritise Hindi, purging it of
feelings. To confine oneself all words of Persian and Arabic origin. On the other
to Hindi or Urdu would be hand, Urdu was being increasingly Persianised. As
a crime against intelligence a consequence, language became associated with the
and the spirit of patriotism. politics of religious identities. Mahatma Gandhi,
HARIJANSEVAK, 12 OCTOBER 1947 however, retained his faith in the composite character

of Hindustani.

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 337

5.1 A plea for Hindi
In one of the earliest sessions of the Constituent
Assembly, R. V. Dhulekar, a Congressman from the
United Provinces, made an aggressive plea that Hindi
be used as the language of constitution-making. When
told that not everyone in the Assembly knew the
language, Dhulekar retorted: “People who are present
in this House to fashion a constitution for India and
do not know Hindustani are not worthy to be members
of this Assembly. They better leave.” As the House broke
up in commotion over these remarks, Dhulekar
proceeded with his speech in Hindi. On this occasion
peace in the House was restored through Jawaharlal
Nehru’s intervention, but the language issue continued
to disrupt proceedings and agitate members over the
subsequent three years.

Almost three years later, on 13 September 1949,
Dhulekar’s speech on the language of the nation once
again sparked off a huge storm. By now the Language
Committee of the Constituent Assembly had produced
its report and had thought of a compromise formula
to resolve the deadlock between those who advocated
Hindi as the national language and those who opposed
it. It had decided, but not yet formally declared, that
Hindi in the Devanagari script would be the official
language, but the transition to Hindi would be gradual.
For the first fifteen years, English would continue to
be used for all official purposes. Each province was
to be allowed to choose one of the regional languages
for official work within the province. By referring to
Hindi as the official rather that the national
language, the Language Committee of the
Constituent Assembly hoped to placate ruffled
emotions and arrive at a solution that would be
acceptable to all.

Dhulekar was not one who liked such an attitude
of reconciliation. He wanted Hindi to be declared
not an Official Language, but a National Language.
He attacked those who protested that Hindi was being
forced on the nation, and mocked at those who said,
in the name of Mahatma Gandhi, that Hindustani
rather than Hindi ought to be the national language.

Sir, nobody can be more happy than myself that
Hindi has become the official language of the
country …  Some say that it is a concession to
Hindi language. I say “no”. It is a consummation
of a historic process.

Reprint 2025-26



338  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

What particularly perturbed many members was
the tone in which Dhulekar was arguing his case.
Several times during his speech, the President of the
Assembly interrupted Dhulekar and told him: “I do
not think you are advancing your case by speaking
like this.” But Dhulekar continued nonetheless.

5.2 The fear of domination
A day after Dhulekar spoke, Shrimati G. Durgabai
from Madras explained her worries about the way
the discussion was developing:

Mr President, the question of national language
for India which was an almost agreed
proposition until recently has suddenly become
a highly controversial issue. Whether rightly
or wrongly, the people of non-Hindi-speaking
areas have been made to feel that this fight, or
this attitude on behalf of the Hindi-speaking
areas, is a fight for effectively preventing the
natural influence of other powerful languages
of India on the composite culture of this nation.

Durgabai informed the House that the opposition
in the south against Hindi was very strong: “The
opponents feel perhaps justly that this propaganda
for Hindi cuts at the very root of the provincial
languages ...” Yet, she along with many others had
obeyed the call of Mahatma Gandhi and carried on
Hindi propaganda in the south, braved resistance,
started schools and conducted classes in Hindi.
“Now what is the result of it all?” asked Durgabai.
“I am shocked to see this agitation against the
enthusiasm with which we took to Hindi in the early
years of the century.” She had accepted Hindustani
as the language of the people, but now that language
was being changed, words from Urdu and other
regional languages were being taken out. Any move
that eroded the inclusive and composite character
of Hindustani, she felt, was bound to create anxieties
and fears amongst different language groups.

As the discussion became acrimonious, many
members appealed for a spirit of accommodation.
A member from Bombay, Shri Shankarrao Deo stated
that as a Congressman and a follower of Mahatma
Gandhi he had accepted Hindustani as a language of
the nation, but he warned: “if you want my whole-
hearted support (for Hindi) you must not do now
anything which may raise my suspicions and which

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 339

will strengthen my fears.” T. A. Ramalingam Chettiar
from Madras emphasised that whatever was done
had to be done with caution; the cause of Hindi would
not be helped if it was pushed too aggressively. The
fears of the people, even if they were unjustified,
had to be allayed, or else “there will be bitter feelings
left behind”.  “When we want to live together and
form a united nation,” he said, “there should be
mutual adjustment and no question of forcing things
on people ...”

The Constitution of India thus emerged through a
process of intense debate and discussion. Many of
its provisions were arrived at through a process
of give-and-take, by forging a middle ground between
two opposed positions.

However, on one central feature of the
Constitution there was substantial agreement. This
was on the granting of the vote to every adult Indian.
This was an unprecedented act of faith, for in other
democracies the vote had been granted slowly, and
in stages. In countries such as the United States
and the United Kingdom, only men of property were
first granted the vote; then, men with education
were also allowed into the charmed circle. After a
long and bitter struggle, men of working-class or
peasant background were also given the right to
vote. An even longer struggle was required to grant
this right to women.

A second important feature of the Constitution was
its emphasis on secularism. There was no ringing
pronouncement of secularism in the Preamble, but
operationally, its key features as understood in Indian
contexts were spelled out in an exemplary manner.
This was done through the carefully drafted series of
Fundamental Rights to “freedom of religion” (Articles
25-28), “cultural and educational rights” (Articles 29,
30), and “rights to equality” (Articles 14, 16, 17). All
religions were guaranteed equal treatment by the
State and given the right to maintain charitable
institutions. The State also sought to distance
itself from religious communities, banning

Reprint 2025-26



340  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

compulsory religious instructions in State-run
schools and colleges, and declaring religious
discrimination in employment to be illegal. However,
a certain legal space was created for social reform
within communities, a space that was used to ban
untouchability and introduce changes in personal
and family laws. In the Indian variant of political
secularism, then, there has been no absolute
separation of State from religion, but a kind of
judicious distance between the two.

The Constituent Assembly debates help us
understand the many conflicting voices that had to
be negotiated in framing the Constitution, and the
many demands that were articulated. They tell us
about the ideals that were invoked and the principles
that the makers of the Constitution operated with.
But in reading these debates we need to be aware
that the ideals invoked were very often re-worked
according to what seemed appropriate within a
context. At times the members of the Assembly also
changed their ideas as the debate unfolded over
three years. Hearing others argue, some members
rethought their positions, opening their minds to
contrary views, while others changed their views in
reaction to the events around.

Fig. 12. 9
B. R. Ambedkar and Rajendra
Prasad greeting each other at the
time of the handing over of the
Constitution

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 341

Timeline
1945

26 July Labour Government comes into power in Britain

December-January General Elections in India

1946

16 May Cabinet Mission announces its constitutional scheme

16 June Muslim League accepts Cabinet Mission’s constitutional scheme

16 June Cabinet Mission presents scheme for the formation of an
Interim Government at the Centre

16 August Muslim League announces Direct Action Day

2 September Congress forms Interim Government with Nehru as the
Vice-President

13 October Muslim League decides to join the Interim Government

3-6 December British Prime Minister, Attlee, meets some Indian leaders; talks fail

9 December Constituent Assembly begins its sessions

1947

29 January Muslim League demands dissolution of Constituent Assembly

16 July Last meeting of the Interim Government

11 August Jinnah elected President of the Constituent Assembly of
Pakistan

14 August Pakistan Independence; celebrations in Karachi

14-15 August At midnight India celebrates Independence

1949

December Constitution is signed

ANSWER IN 100-150 WORDS

1. What were the ideals expressed in the Objectives
Resolution?

2. How was the term minority defined by different groups?

3. What were the arguments in favour of greater power to
the provinces?

4. Why did Mahatma Gandhi think Hindustani should
be the national language?

Reprint 2025-26



342  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Write a short essay
(250-300 words) on the following:

If you would like to know
more, read:

5. What historical forces shaped the vision of the
Granville Austin. 1972. Constitution?
The Indian Constitution:

6. Discuss the different arguments made in favour
The Cornerstone of a Nation.

of protection of the oppressed groups.
Oxford University Press,
New Delhi. 7. What connection did some of the members of the

Constituent Assembly make between the political
Rajeev Bhargava. 2000. situation of the time and the need for a strong
“Democratic Vision of a Centre?
New Republic”in F. R. Frankel
et al. eds, Transforming India: 8. How did the Constituent Assembly seek to resolve
Social and Political Dynamics the language controversy?
of Democracy.
Oxford University Press,
New Delhi. Map work
Sumit Sarkar. 1983.
“Indian Democracy: 9. On a present-day political map of India, indicate

The Historical Inheritance” the different languages spoken in each state and
in Atul Kohli ed., mark out the one that is designated as the
The Success of India’s language for official communication. Compare the
Democracy. present map with a map of the early 1950s. What
Cambridge University Press, differences do you notice? Do the differences say
Cambridge. something about the relationship between

language and the organisation of the states?
Sumit Sarkar. 1983.
Modern India: 1885-1947.
Macmillan, New Delhi.

Project (Choose One)

10. Choose any one important constitutional change
that has happened in recent years. Find out why
the change was made, what different arguments
were put forward for the change, and the historical
background to the change. If you can, try and look
at the Constitutional Assembly Debates (http://
parliamentofindia.nic.in/ls/debates/debates.htm)
to see how the issue was discussed at that time.
Write about your findings.

11. Compare the Constitution of America, France or

You could visit: South Africa with the Indian Constitution,

parliamentofindia.nic.in/ls/ focusing on any two of the following themes:
debates/debates.htm secularism, minority rights, realtions between the

(for a digitalised version of the Centre and the states. Find out how these

Constituent Assembly Debates) differences and similarities are linked to the
histories of the regions.

Reprint 2025-26



FRAMING THE CONSTITUTION 343

Credits for Illustrations

Institutions
Alkazi Foundation for the Arts, New Delhi

(Figs. 10.6; 10.8)
Collection Jyotindra and Juta Jain, CIVIC Archives,

New Delhi (Fig. 11.15)
Photo Division, Government of India, New Delhi

(Figs. 12.3; 12.4; 12.5; 12.9)
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library, New Delhi

(Fig. 12.6)
The Osian’s Archive and Library Collection, Mumbai

(Figs. 10.9; 10.18; 11.17)
Victoria Memorial Museum and Library, Kolkata

(Figs. 9.6, 9.7)

Journals
Punch (Figs. 10.13; 10.14; 10.17)
The Illustrated London News  (Figs. 9.1; 9.10;

9.11; 9.12; 9.13; 9.14; 9.16; 9.17; 9.18;
9.19; 10.15; 10.16 )

Books
Bayly, C.A., The Raj: India and the British 1600-1947

(Figs. 9.4; 10.10; 10.11)
Ruhe, Peter, Gandhi (Figs. 11.7; 11.11; 11.12)
Singh, Khushwant, Train to Pakistan (Figs. 12.1;

12.4; 12.12; 12.13; 12.15)

Reprint 2025-26



344  THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY – PART III

Note

Reprint 2025-26