##9##
Chapter Nine

RAY OPTICS
AND OPTICAL
INSTRUMENTS

9.1  INTRODUCTION

Nature has endowed the human eye (retina) with the sensitivity to detect
electromagnetic waves within a small range of the electromagnetic
spectrum. Electromagnetic radiation belonging to this region of the
spectrum (wavelength of about 400 nm to 750 nm) is called light. It is
mainly through light and the sense of vision that we know and interpret
the world around us.

There are two things that we can intuitively mention about light from
common experience. First, that it travels with enormous speed and second,
that it travels in a straight line. It took some time for people to realise that
the speed of light is finite and measurable. Its presently accepted value
in vacuum is c = 2.99792458 × 108 m s–1.  For many purposes, it suffices
to take c = 3 × 108 m s–1. The speed of light in vacuum is the highest
speed attainable in nature.

The intuitive notion that light travels in a straight line seems to
contradict what we have learnt in Chapter 8, that light is an
electromagnetic wave of wavelength belonging to the visible part of the
spectrum. How to reconcile the two facts? The answer is that the
wavelength of light is very small compared to the size of ordinary objects
that we encounter commonly (generally of the order of a few cm or larger).
In this situation, as you will learn in Chapter 10, a light wave can be
considered to travel from one point to another, along a straight line joining

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
them. The path is called a ray of light, and a bundle of such rays
constitutes a beam of light.

In this chapter, we consider the phenomena of reflection, refraction
and dispersion of light, using the ray picture of light. Using the basic
laws of reflection and refraction, we shall study the image formation by
plane and spherical reflecting and refracting surfaces. We then go on to
describe the construction and working of some important optical
instruments, including the human eye.

9.2  REFLECTION OF LIGHT BY SPHERICAL MIRRORS

We are familiar with the laws of reflection. The
angle of reflection (i.e., the angle between reflected
ray and the normal to the reflecting surface or
the mirror) equals the angle of incidence (angle
between incident ray and the normal). Also that
the incident ray, reflected ray and the normal to
the reflecting surface at the point of incidence lie
in the same plane (Fig. 9.1). These laws are valid
at each point on any reflecting surface whether
plane or curved. However, we shall restrict our
discussion to the special case of curved surfaces,

FIGURE 9.1 The incident ray, reflected ray that is, spherical surfaces. The normal in this case
and the normal to the reflecting surface lie is to be taken as normal to the tangent to surface

in the same plane. at the point of incidence. That is, the normal is
along the radius, the line joining the centre of curvature of the mirror to
the point of incidence.

We have already studied that the geometric centre of a spherical mirror
is called its pole while that of a spherical lens is called its optical centre.
The line joining the pole and the centre of curvature of the spherical
mirror is known as the principal axis. In the case of spherical lenses, the
principal axis is the line joining the optical centre with its principal focus
as you will see later.

9.2.1  Sign convention
To derive the relevant formulae for
reflection by spherical mirrors and
refraction by spherical lenses, we must
first adopt a sign convention for
measuring distances. In this book, we
shall follow the Cartesian sign
convention. According to this
convention, all distances are measured
from the pole of the mirror or the optical
centre of the lens. The distances
measured in the same direction as the
incident light are taken as positive and

FIGURE 9.2  The Cartesian Sign Convention.
those measured in the direction

opposite to the direction of incident light are taken as negative (Fig. 9.2).
222 The heights measured upwards with respect to x-axis and normal to the

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

principal axis (x-axis) of the mirror/lens are taken as positive (Fig. 9.2).
The heights measured downwards are taken as negative.

With a common accepted convention, it turns out that a single formula
for spherical mirrors and a single formula for spherical lenses can handle
all different cases.

9.2.2  Focal length of spherical mirrors
Figure 9.3 shows what happens when a parallel beam of light is incident
on (a) a concave mirror, and (b) a convex mirror. We assume that the rays
are paraxial, i.e., they are incident at points close to the pole P of the mirror
and make small angles with the principal axis. The reflected rays converge
at a point F on the principal axis of a concave mirror [Fig. 9.3(a)].
For a convex mirror, the reflected rays appear to diverge from a point F
on its principal axis [Fig. 9.3(b)]. The point F is called the principal focus
of the mirror. If the parallel paraxial beam of light were incident, making
some angle with the principal axis, the reflected rays would converge (or
appear to diverge) from a point in a plane through F normal to the principal
axis. This is called the focal plane of the mirror [Fig. 9.3(c)].

FIGURE 9.3  Focus of a concave and convex mirror.

The distance between the focus F and the pole P of the mirror is called
the focal length of the mirror, denoted by f. We now show that f = R/2,
where R is the radius of curvature of the mirror. The geometry of reflection
of an incident ray is shown in Fig. 9.4.

Let C be the centre of curvature of the mirror. Consider a ray parallel
to the principal axis striking the mirror at M. Then CM will be
perpendicular to the mirror at M. Let q be the angle of incidence, and MD 223

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
be the perpendicular from M on the principal axis. Then,

ÐMCP = q and ÐMFP = 2q
Now,

MD MD
tanq =  and tan 2q = (9.1)

CD FD
For small q, which is true for paraxial rays, tanq  » q,

tan 2q » 2q.  Therefore, Eq. (9.1) gives

MD MD
 = 2 

FD CD

CD
or, FD = (9.2)

2
Now, for small q, the point D is very close to the point P.

Therefore, FD = f and CD = R. Equation (9.2) then gives
f = R/2 (9.3)

9.2.3  The mirror equation
If rays emanating from a point actually meet at another point

FIGURE 9.4 Geometry of after reflection and/or refraction, that point is called the image
reflection of an incident ray on

of the first point. The image is real if the rays actually converge
(a) concave spherical mirror,

to the point; it is virtual if the rays do not actually meet but
and (b) convex spherical mirror.

appear to diverge from the point when produced
backwards. An image is thus a point-to-point
correspondence with the object established through
reflection and/or refraction.

In principle, we can take any two rays emanating
from a point on an object, trace their paths, find their
point of intersection and thus, obtain the image of
the point due to reflection at a spherical mirror. In
practice, however, it is convenient to choose any two
of the following rays:
(i) The ray from the point which is parallel to the

principal axis. The reflected ray goes through
the focus of the mirror.

(ii) The ray passing through the centre of
curvature of a concave mirror or appearing to

FIGURE 9.5 Ray diagram for image
formation by a concave mirror. pass through it for a convex mirror. The

reflected ray simply retraces the path.
(iii) The ray passing through (or directed towards) the focus of the concave

mirror or appearing to pass through (or directed towards) the focus
of a convex mirror. The reflected ray is parallel to the principal axis.

(iv) The ray incident at any angle at the pole. The reflected ray follows
laws of reflection.
Figure 9.5 shows the ray diagram considering three rays. It shows

the image A¢B¢ (in this case, real) of an object AB formed by a concave
mirror. It does not mean that only three rays emanate from the point A.
An infinite number of rays emanate from any source, in all directions.
Thus, point A¢ is image point of A if every ray originating at point A and

224 falling on the concave mirror after reflection passes through the point A¢.

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

We now derive the mirror equation or the relation between the object
distance (u), image distance (v) and the focal length ( f ).

From Fig. 9.5, the two right-angled triangles A¢B¢F and MPF are
similar. (For paraxial rays, MP can be considered to be a straight line
perpendicular to CP.) Therefore,

B′A ′ = B′F
PM FP

B′A ′ = B′F
or  (∵PM = AB) (9.4)

BA FP
Since Ð APB = Ð A¢PB¢, the right angled triangles A¢B¢P and ABP are

also similar. Therefore,

B′A ′ = B′ P
(9.5)

B A BP
Comparing Eqs. (9.4) and (9.5), we get

B′F = B′P – FP = B′P
(9.6)

FP FP BP
Equation (9.6) is a relation involving magnitude of distances. We now

apply the sign convention. We note that light travels from the object to
the mirror MPN. Hence this is taken as the positive direction. To reach
the object AB, image A¢B¢ as well as the focus F from the pole P, we have
to travel opposite to the direction of incident light. Hence, all the three
will have negative signs. Thus,

B¢ P = –v, FP = –f, BP = –u
Using these in Eq. (9.6), we get

– v + f – v
=

– f –u

v – f v
or =

f u

v
      = + v

1
f u

Dividing it by v, we get
1 1 1

+ =
      v u f (9.7)

This relation is known as the mirror equation.
The size of the image relative to the size of the object is another

important quantity to consider. We define linear magnification (m ) as the
ratio of the height of the image (h¢) to the height of the object (h):

h ′
m = (9.8)

h
h and h¢ will be taken positive or negative in accordance with the accepted
sign convention. In triangles A¢B¢P and ABP, we have,

B′A ′ = B′P
BA BP

With the sign convention, this becomes 225

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

– h ′ – v
=

h –u

so that

h ′ v
m = = – (9.9)

h u
We have derived here the mirror equation, Eq. (9.7), and the

magnification formula, Eq. (9.9), for the case of real, inverted image formed
by a concave mirror. With the proper use of sign convention, these are,
in fact, valid for all the cases of reflection by a spherical mirror (concave
or convex) whether the image formed is real or virtual. Figure 9.6 shows
the ray diagrams for virtual image formed by a concave and convex mirror.
You should verify that Eqs. (9.7) and (9.9) are valid for these cases as
well.

FIGURE 9.6  Image formation by (a) a concave mirror with object between
P and F, and (b) a convex mirror.

Example 9.1 Suppose that the lower half of the concave mirror’s
reflecting surface in Fig. 9.6 is covered with an opaque (non-reflective)
material. What effect will this have on the image of an object placed
in front of the mirror?

Solution You may think that the image will now show only half of the
object, but taking the laws of reflection to be true for all points of the
remaining part of the mirror, the image will be that of the whole object.
However, as the area of the reflecting surface has been reduced, the
intensity of the image will be low (in this case, half).

Example 9.2 A mobile phone lies along the principal axis of a concave
mirror, as shown in Fig. 9.7. Show by suitable diagram, the formation
of its image. Explain why the magnification is not uniform. Will the
distortion of image depend on the location of the phone with respect
to the mirror?

226 FIGURE 9.7

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 9.2  EXAMPLE 9.1



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

Solution
The ray diagram for the formation of the image of the phone is shown
in Fig. 9.7. The image of the part which is on the plane perpendicular
to principal axis will be on the same plane. It will be of the same size,
i.e., B¢C = BC. You can yourself realise why the image is distorted.

Example 9.3 An object is placed at (i) 10 cm, (ii) 5 cm in front of a
concave mirror of radius of curvature 15 cm. Find the position, nature,
and magnification of the image in each case.

Solution

The focal length f = –15/2 cm = –7.5 cm

(i) The object distance u = –10 cm. Then Eq. (9.7) gives

1 1 1
+ =

v –10 –7.5

10 × 7.5
or v=

−  = – 30 cm
2.5

The image is 30 cm from the mirror on the same side as the object.

v (−30)
Also, magnification m = – = – = – 3

u (−10)

The image is magnified, real and inverted.
(ii) The object distance u = –5 cm. Then from Eq. (9.7),

1 + 1 = 1
v −5 −7.5

5 × 7.5
or  v= ( 15 cm

7.5 –5) =

This image is formed at 15 cm behind the mirror. It is a virtual image.

v 15
Magnification m = – = – = 3

u (−5)

The image is magnified, virtual and erect.

Example 9.4  Suppose while sitting in a parked car, you notice a
jogger approaching towards you in the side view mirror of R = 2 m.  If
the jogger is running at a speed of 5 m s–1, how fast the image of the
jogger appear to move when the jogger is (a) 39 m, (b) 29 m, (c) 19 m,
and (d) 9 m away.

Solution
From the mirror equation, Eq. (9.7), we get

fu
v =

u − f

For convex mirror, since R = 2 m, f = 1 m. Then

for u = –39 m, = (−39) ×1 = 39
v m

−39 −1 40
Since the jogger moves at a constant speed of 5 m s–1, after 1 s the
position of the image v (for u = –39 + 5 = –34) is (34/35 )m.

227

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 9.2  EXAMPLE 9.3  EXAMPLE 9.4



Physics

The shift in the position of image in 1 s is

39 − 34 = 1365 −1360 = 5 = 1
m

40 35 1400 1400 280
Therefore, the average speed of the image when the jogger is between
39 m and 34 m from the mirror, is (1/280) m s–1

Similarly, it can be seen that for u = –29 m,  –19 m and –9 m, the
speed with which the image appears to move is

1
m s–1 1

m –1 1
 , s and m s–1,  respectively.
150 60 10

Although the jogger has been moving with a constant speed, the speed
of his/her image appears to increase substantially as he/she moves
closer to the mirror. This phenomenon can be noticed by any person
sitting in a stationary car or a bus. In case of moving vehicles, a
similar phenomenon could be observed if the vehicle in the rear is
moving closer with a constant speed.

9.3  REFRACTION

When a beam of light encounters another transparent medium, a part of
light gets reflected back into the first medium while the rest enters the
other. A ray of light represents a beam. The direction of propagation of an
obliquely incident (0°< i < 90°) ray of light that enters the other medium,
changes at the interface of the two media. This phenomenon is called
refraction of light. Snell experimentally obtained the following laws
of refraction:

(i) The incident ray, the refracted ray and the
normal to the interface at the point of
incidence, all lie in the same plane.

(ii) The ratio of the sine of the angle of incidence
to the sine of angle of refraction is constant.
Remember that the angles of incidence (i ) and
refraction (r ) are the angles that the incident
and  its refracted ray make with the normal,
respectively. We have

sin i = n 21 (9.10)
sinr

where n  is a constant, called the refractive
21

index of the second medium with respect to the
FIGURE 9.8 Refraction and reflection of light. first medium. Equation (9.10) is the well-known

Snell’s law of refraction. We note that n  is a
21

characteristic of the pair of media (and also depends on the wavelength
of light), but is independent of the angle of incidence.

From Eq. (9.10), if n  > 1, r < i , i.e., the refracted ray bends towards
21

the normal. In such a case medium 2 is said to be optically denser (or
228 denser, in short) than medium 1. On the other hand, if n  <1, r > i, the

21

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 9.4



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

refracted ray bends away from the normal. This
is the case when incident ray in a denser
medium refracts into a rarer medium.

Note: Optical density should not be
confused with mass density, which is mass
per unit volume. It is possible that mass
density of an optically denser medium may
be less than that of an optically rarer
medium (optical density is the ratio of the
speed of light in two media). For example, FIGURE 9.9  Lateral shift of a ray refracted
turpentine and water. Mass density of through a parallel-sided slab.

turpentine is less than that of water but
its optical density is higher.

If n  is the refractive index of medium 2 with
21

respect to medium 1 and n  the refractive index
12

of medium 1 with respect to medium 2, then it
should be clear that

1
n12 = (9.11)

n21

It also follows that if n  is the refractive index
32

of medium 3 with respect to medium 2 then n  =
 32

n  ×  n , where  n  is the refractive index  of
31 12 31

medium 3 with respect to medium 1.
Some elementary results based on the laws of

refraction follow immediately. For a rectangular
slab, refraction takes place at two interfaces (air-
glass and glass-air). It is easily seen from Fig. 9.9
that r  = i , i.e., the emergent ray is parallel to the

2 1
incident ray—there is no deviation, but it does
suffer lateral displacement/shift with respect to the
incident ray. Another familiar observation is that FIGURE 9.10  Apparent depth for

the bottom of a tank filled with water appears to be (a) normal, and (b) oblique viewing.

raised (Fig. 9.10). For viewing near the normal direction, it can be shown
that the apparent depth (h ) is real depth (h ) divided by the refractive

1 2
index of the medium (water).

9.4  TOTAL INTERNAL REFLECTION

When light travels from an optically denser medium to a rarer medium
at the interface, it is partly reflected back into the same medium and
partly refracted to the second medium. This reflection is called the internal
reflection.

When a ray of light enters from a denser medium to a rarer medium,
it bends away from the normal, for example, the ray AO B in Fig. 9.11.

1 
The incident ray AO  is partially reflected (O C) and partially transmitted

1 1
(O B) or refracted, the angle of refraction (r ) being larger than the angle of

1
incidence (i ). As the angle of incidence increases, so does the angle of 229

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
refraction, till for the ray AO , the angle of

3
refraction is p/2. The refracted ray is bent
so much away from the normal that it
grazes the surface at the interface between
the two media. This is shown by the ray
AO D in Fig. 9.11. If the angle of incidence

3 
is increased still further (e.g., the ray AO ),

4
refraction is not possible, and the incident
ray is totally reflected. This is called total
internal reflection. When light gets
reflected by a surface, normally some

FIGURE 9.11   Refraction and internal reflection fraction of it gets transmitted. The
of rays from a point A in the denser medium reflected ray, therefore, is always less

(water) incident at different angles at the interface intense than the incident ray, howsoever
with a rarer medium (air). smooth the reflecting surface may be. In

total internal reflection, on the other hand,
no transmission of light takes place.

The angle of incidence corresponding to an angle of refraction 90°,
say ÐAO N, is called the critical angle (i  ) for the given pair of media.   We

3 c
see from Snell’s law [Eq. (9.10)] that if the relative refractive index of the
refracting medium is less than one then, since the maximum value of sin
r is unity, there is an upper limit to the value of sin i for which the law
can be satisfied, that is, i = i  such that

c

sin i   = n (9.12)
c 21

For values of i larger than i , Snell’s law of refraction cannot be
c

satisfied, and hence no refraction is possible.
The refractive index of denser medium 1 with respect to rarer medium

2 will be n  = 1/sin i . Some typical critical angles are listed in Table 9.1.
12 c

TABLE 9.1 CRITICAL ANGLE OF SOME TRANSPARENT MEDIA WITH RESPECT TO AIR

Substance medium Refractive index Critical angle

Water 1.33 48.75

Crown glass 1.52 41.14

Dense flint glass 1.62 37.31

Diamond 2.42 24.41

A demonstration for total internal reflection

All optical phenomena can be demonstrated very easily with the use of a
laser torch or pointer, which is easily available nowadays. Take a glass
beaker with clear water in it. Add a few drops of milk or any other
suspension to water and stir so that water becomes a little turbid. Take
a laser pointer and shine its beam through the turbid water. You will
find that the path of the beam inside the water shines brightly.

230

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

Shine the beam from below the beaker such that it strikes at the
upper water surface at the other end. Do you find that it undergoes partial
reflection (which is seen as a spot on the table below) and partial refraction
[which comes out in the air and is seen as a spot on the roof; Fig. 9.12(a)]?
Now direct the laser beam from one side of the beaker such that it strikes
the upper surface of water more obliquely [Fig. 9.12(b)]. Adjust the
direction of laser beam until you find the angle for which the refraction
above the water surface is totally absent and the beam is totally reflected
back to water. This is total internal reflection at its simplest.

Pour this water in a long test tube and shine the laser light from top,
as shown in Fig. 9.12(c). Adjust the direction of the laser beam such that
it is totally internally reflected every time it strikes the walls of the tube.
This is similar to what happens in optical fibres.

Take care not to look into the laser beam directly and not to point it
at anybody’s face.

9.4.1 Total internal reflection in nature and
its technological applications

(i) Prism : Prisms designed to bend light by 90° or by 180° make use of
total internal reflection [Fig. 9.13(a) and (b)]. Such a prism is also
used to invert images without changing their size [Fig. 9.13(c)].
In the first two cases, the critical angle i  for the material of the prism

c FIGURE 9.12
must be less than 45°. We see from Table 9.1 that this is true for both Observing total internal
crown glass and dense flint glass. reflection in water with

(ii) Optical fibres: Nowadays optical fibres are extensively used for a laser beam (refraction
transmitting audio and video signals through long distances. Optical due to glass of beaker
fibres too make use of the phenomenon of total internal reflection. neglected being very
Optical fibres are fabricated with high quality composite glass/quartz thin).
fibres. Each fibre consists of a core and
cladding. The refractive index of the
material of the core is higher than that
of the cladding.
When a signal in the form of light is

directed at one end of the fibre at a suitable
angle, it undergoes repeated total internal
reflections along the length of the fibre and
finally comes out at the other end (Fig.
9.14). Since light undergoes total internal
reflection at each stage, there is no
appreciable loss in the intensity of the light
signal. Optical fibres are fabricated such
that light reflected at one side of inner
surface strikes the other at an angle larger
than the critical angle. Even if the fibre is
bent, light can easily travel along its length.
Thus, an optical fibre can be used to act as
an optical pipe. FIGURE 9.13 Prisms designed to bend rays by

A bundle of optical fibres can be put to 90° and 180° or to invert image without changing
several uses. Optical fibres are extensively its size make use of total internal reflection.

used for transmitting and receiving 231

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
electrical signals which are converted to light
by suitable transducers. Obviously, optical
fibres can also be used for transmission of
optical signals. For example, these are used
as a ‘light pipe’ to facilitate visual examination
of internal organs like esophagus, stomach
and intestines. You might have seen a
commonly available decorative lamp with fine

FIGURE 9.14 Light undergoes successive total plastic fibres with their free ends forming a
internal reflections as it moves through an fountain like structure. The other end of the

optical fibre.
fibres is fixed over an electric lamp. When the

lamp is switched on, the light travels from the bottom of each fibre and
appears at the tip of its free end as a dot of light. The fibres in such
decorative lamps are optical fibres.

The main requirement in fabricating optical fibres is that there should
be very little absorption of light as it travels for long distances inside
them. This has been achieved by purification and special preparation of
materials such as quartz. In silica glass fibres, it is possible to transmit
more than 95% of the light over a fibre length of 1 km. (Compare with
what you expect for a block of ordinary window glass 1 km thick.)

9.5 REFRACTION AT SPHERICAL SURFACES

AND BY LENSES

We have so far considered refraction at a plane interface. We shall now
consider refraction at a spherical interface between two transparent media.
An infinitesimal part of a spherical surface can be regarded as planar
and the same laws of refraction can be applied at every point on the
surface. Just as for reflection by a spherical mirror, the normal at the
point of incidence is perpendicular to the tangent plane to the spherical
surface at that point and, therefore, passes through its centre of
curvature. We first consider refraction by a single spherical surface and
follow it by thin lenses. A thin lens is a transparent optical medium
bounded by two surfaces; at least one of which should be spherical.
Applying the formula for image formation by a single spherical surface
successively at the two surfaces of a lens, we shall obtain the lens maker’s
formula and then the lens formula.

9.5.1  Refraction at a spherical surface
Figure 9.15 shows the geometry of formation of image I of an object O on
the principal axis of a spherical surface with centre of curvature C, and
radius of curvature R. The rays are incident from a medium of refractive
index n , to another of refractive index n . As before, we take the aperture

1 2
(or the lateral size) of the surface to be small compared to other distances
involved, so that small angle approximation can be made. In particular,
NM will be taken to be nearly equal to the length of the perpendicular
from the point N on the principal axis. We have, for small angles,

MN
232 tan ÐNOM = 

OM

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

MN
tan ÐNCM = 

MC

MN
tan ÐNIM  = 

MI

Now, for DNOC, i is the exterior angle. Therefore, i
= ÐNOM + ÐNCM

MN
i = + MN

 (9.13)
OM MC

Similarly, FIGURE 9.15  Refraction at a spherical

r = ÐNCM – ÐNIM surface separating two media.

MN
i.e., r = − MN

(9.14)
MC MI

Now, by Snell’s law
n  sin i = n  sin r

1 2
or for small angles

n i = n r
1 2

Substituting i and r from Eqs. (9.13) and (9.14), we get
n1 n2 n2 −n

+ = 1
(9.15)

OM MI MC

Here, OM, MI and MC represent magnitudes of distances. Applying the
Cartesian sign convention,

OM = –u, MI = +v, MC = +R

Substituting these in Eq. (9.15), we get
n2 n1 n2 −n

− = 1
(9.16)

v u R
Equation (9.16) gives us a relation between object and image distance

in terms of refractive index of the medium and the radius of
curvature of the curved spherical surface. It holds for any curved
spherical surface.

Example 9.5 Light from a point source in air falls on a spherical
glass surface (n = 1.5 and radius of curvature = 20 cm). The distance
of the light source from the glass surface is 100 cm. At what position
the image is formed?

Solution
We use the relation given by Eq. (9.16). Here
u = – 100 cm, v = ?, R = + 20 cm, n  = 1, and n  = 1.5.

1 2
We then have

1.5 1 0.5
+ =

v 100 20

or   v = +100 cm
The image is formed at a distance of 100 cm from the glass surface,
in the direction of incident light.

233

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 9.5



Physics
9.5.2  Refraction by a lens
Figure 9.16(a) shows the geometry of image formation by a double convex
lens. The image formation can be seen in terms of two steps:
(i) The first refracting surface forms the image I  of the object O

1
[Fig. 9.16(b)]. The image I  acts as a virtual object for the second surface

1
that forms the image at I [Fig. 9.16(c)]. Applying Eq. (9.15) to the first
interface ABC, we get

n1 n2 n2 n1
  (9.17)

OB BI1 BC1

A similar procedure applied to the second
interface* ADC gives,

n2 n1 n2 n1
   (9.18)

DI1 DI DC2

For a thin lens, BI  = DI . Adding
1 1

Eqs. (9.17) and (9.18), we get

n n  
1 + 1 = (n − 1 1

2 n1 ) +
OB DI  BC1 DC2  (9.19)

Suppose the object is at infinity, i.e.,
OB ® ¥ and DI = f, Eq. (9.19) gives

n 
1 = 1 1 

(n2 −n1 ) +
f  (9.2

BC1 DC  0)
2

The point where image of an object
placed at infinity is formed is called the
focus F, of the lens and the distance f gives
its focal length. A lens has two foci, F and
F¢, on either side of it (Fig. 9.17). By the
sign convention,

BC  = + R ,
1 1

DC  = –R
2 2

So Eq. (9.20) can be written as

(9.21)

Equation (9.21) is known as the lens
maker’s formula. It is useful to design
lenses of desired focal length using surfaces

FIGURE 9.16  (a) The position of object, and the of suitable radii of curvature. Note that the
image formed by a double convex lens, formula is true for a concave lens also. In

(b) Refraction at the first spherical surface and that case R is negative, R  positive and
(c) Refraction at the second spherical surface. 1 2

therefore, f is negative.

* Note that now the refractive index of the medium on the right side of ADC is n
1

while on its left it is n . Further DI  is negative as the distance is measured
234 2 1

against the direction of incident light.

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

From Eqs. (9.19) and (9.20), we get

n1 n1 n
+ = 1

OB DI (9.22)
f

Again, in the thin lens approximation, B and D are both close to the
optical centre of the lens. Applying the sign convention,

BO = – u, DI = +v, we get

1 1 1
− = (9.23)

v u f

Equation (9.23) is the familiar thin lens formula. Though we derived
it for a real image formed by a convex lens, the formula is valid for both
convex as well as concave lenses and for both real and virtual images.

It is worth mentioning that the two foci, F and F¢, of a double convex
or concave lens are equidistant from the optical centre. The focus on the
side of the (original) source of light is called the first focal point, whereas
the other is called the second focal point.

To find the image of an object by a lens, we can, in principle, take any
two rays emanating from a point on an object; trace their paths using the
laws of refraction and find the point where the refracted rays meet (or
appear to meet). In practice, however, it is convenient to choose any two
of the following rays:
(i) A ray emanating from the object parallel to the principal axis of the

lens after refraction passes through the second principal focus F¢ (in
a convex lens) or appears to diverge (in a concave lens) from the first
principal focus F.

(ii) A ray of light, passing through the optical
centre of the lens, emerges without any
deviation after refraction.

(iii) (a) A ray of light passing through the first
principal focus of a convex lens [Fig. 9.17(a)]
emerges parallel to the principal axis after
refraction.
(b) A ray of light incident on a concave lens
appearing to meet the principal axis at
second focus point emerges parallel to the
principal axis after refraction [Fig. 9.17(b)].
Figures 9.17(a) and (b) illustrate these rules

for a convex and a concave  lens, respectively.
You should practice drawing similar ray
diagrams for different positions of the object with
respect to the lens and also verify that the lens
formula, Eq. (9.23), holds good for all cases.

Here again it must be remembered that each
point on an object gives out infinite number of
rays. All these rays will pass through the same
image point after refraction at the lens. FIGURE 9.17 Tracing rays through (a)

Magnification (m ) produced by a lens is convex lens  (b) concave lens.
defined, like that for a mirror, as the ratio of the

235
size of the image to that of the object. Proceeding

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
in the same way as for spherical mirrors, it is easily seen that
for a lens

h ′ v
m =  =  (9.24)

h u
When we apply the sign convention, we see that, for erect (and virtual)

image formed by a convex or concave lens, m is positive, while for an
inverted (and real) image, m is negative.

Example 9.6 A magician during a show makes a glass lens with
n = 1.47 disappear in a trough of liquid.  What is the refractive index
of the liquid? Could the liquid be water?

Solution
The refractive index of the liquid must be equal to 1.47 in order to
make the lens disappear. This means n  = n . This gives 1/f  =0 or

1 2
f ® ¥. The lens in the liquid will act like a plane sheet of glass. No,
the liquid is not water. It could be glycerine.

9.5.3  Power of a lens
Power of a lens is a measure of the convergence or
divergence, which a lens introduces in the light falling on
it. Clearly, a lens of shorter focal length bends the incident
light more,  while converging it in case of a convex lens
and diverging it in case of a concave lens. The power P of
a lens is defined as the tangent of the angle by which it
converges or diverges a beam of light parallel to the
principal axis falling at unit distance from the optical
centre (Fig. 9.18).

FIGURE 9.18 Power of a lens.
tanδ = h

; if h = 1, tanδ = 1
 or δ 1

=  for small
f f f

value of d. Thus,

1
P = (9.25)

f

The SI unit for power of a lens is dioptre (D): 1D = 1m–1. The power of
a lens of focal length of 1 metre is one dioptre. Power of a lens is positive
for a converging lens and negative for a diverging lens. Thus, when an
optician prescribes a corrective lens of power + 2.5 D, the required lens is
a convex lens of focal length + 40 cm. A lens of power of – 4.0 D means a
concave lens of focal length – 25 cm.

Example 9.7 (i) If f = 0.5 m for a glass lens, what is the power of the
lens? (ii) The radii of curvature of the faces of a double convex lens
are 10 cm and 15 cm. Its focal length is 12 cm. What is the refractive
index of glass? (iii) A convex lens has 20 cm focal length in air. What
is focal length in water? (Refractive index of air-water = 1.33, refractive
index for air-glass = 1.5.)

236

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 9.7  EXAMPLE 9.6



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

Solution
(i) Power = +2 dioptre.
(ii) Here, we have f = +12 cm, R  = +10 cm, R  = –15 cm.

1 2
Refractive index of air is taken as unity.
We use the lens formula of Eq. (9.22). The sign convention has to
be applied for f,  R  and R .

1 2
Substituting the values, we have

1 = −  1 1
1 − 

(n )
12 10 − 15
This gives n = 1.5.

(iii) For a glass lens in air, n  = 1.5, n  = 1, f = +20 cm. Hence, the lens
2 1

formula gives

1 
= 1 1 

0.5  − 
20 R1 R2 
For the same glass lens in water, n  = 1.5, n  = 1.33. Therefore,

2 1

1.33  1 1 
= (1.5 −1.33)  −  (9.26)

f R1 R2 
Combining these two equations, we find f = + 78.2 cm.

9.5.4  Combination of thin lenses in contact
Consider two lenses A and B of focal length f  and

1
f  placed in contact with each other. Let the object
2

be placed at a point O beyond the focus of the first
lens A (Fig. 9.19). The first lens produces an image
at I . Since image I  is real, it serves as a virtual

1 1
object for the second lens B, producing the final
image at I. It must, however, be borne in mind that
formation of image by the first lens is presumed
only to facilitate determination of the position of the

FIGURE 9.19  Image formation by a
final image. In fact, the direction of rays emerging combination of two thin lenses in contact.
from the first lens gets modified in accordance with
the angle at which they strike the second lens. Since the lenses are thin,
we assume the optical centres of the lenses to be coincident. Let this
central point be denoted by P.

For the image formed by the first lens A, we get

1 1 1
− = (9.27)

v1 u f1

For the image formed by the second lens B, we get

1 1 1
− = (9.28)

v v1 f2

Adding Eqs. (9.27) and (9.28), we get

1 1 1 1
− = + (9.29)

v u f1 f2

If the two lens-system is regarded as equivalent to a single lens of
focal length f, we have 237

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 9.7



Physics

1 1 1
− =

v u f

so that we get

1 1 1
= + (9.30)

f f1 f2

The derivation is valid for any number of thin lenses in contact. If
several thin lenses of focal length f , f , f ,... are in contact, the effective

1 2 3
focal length of their combination is given by

1 1 1 1
= + + + … (9.31)

f f1 f2 f3

In terms of power, Eq. (9.31) can be written as

P = P  + P  + P  + … (9.32)
1 2 3

where P is the net power of the lens combination. Note that the sum in
Eq. (9.32) is an algebraic sum of individual powers, so some of the terms
on the right side may be positive (for convex lenses) and some negative
(for concave lenses). Combination of lenses helps to obtain diverging or
converging lenses of desired magnification. It also enhances sharpness
of the image. Since the image formed by the first lens becomes the object
for the second, Eq. (9.25) implies that the total magnification m of the
combination is a product of magnification (m , m , m ,...) of individual

1 2 3
lenses

m = m m  m   ... (9.33)
1 2 3

Such a system of combination of lenses is commonly used in designing
lenses for cameras, microscopes, telescopes and other optical instruments.

Example 9.8 Find the position of the image formed by the lens
combination given in the Fig. 9.20.

FIGURE 9.20

Solution  Image formed by the first lens

1 1 1
− =

v1 u1 f1

1 1 1
− =

v1 −30 10

or v  = 15 cm
1

238

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 9.8



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

The image formed by the first lens serves as the object for the second.
This is at a distance of (15 – 5) cm = 10 cm to the right of the second
lens. Though the image is real, it serves as a virtual object for the
second lens, which means that the rays appear to come from it for
the second lens.

1 − 1 = 1
v2 10 −10

or v  = ¥
2

The virtual image is formed at an infinite distance to the left of the
second lens. This acts as an object for the third lens.

1 − 1 = 1
v3 u3 f3

1 = 1 1
or   +

v3 ∞ 30

or v  = 30 cm
3

The final image is formed 30 cm to the right of the third lens.

9.6  REFRACTION THROUGH A PRISM

Figure 9.21 shows the passage of light through
a triangular prism ABC. The angles of incidence
and refraction at the first face AB are i and r ,

1
while the angle of incidence (from glass to air) at
the second face AC is r  and the angle of refraction

2

or emergence e. The angle between the emergent
ray RS and the direction of the incident ray PQ
is called the angle of deviation, d.

In the quadrilateral AQNR, two of the angles
(at the vertices Q and R) are right angles.
Therefore, the sum of the other angles of the
quadrilateral is 180°. FIGURE 9.21 A ray of light passing through

a triangular glass prism.
ÐA + ÐQNR = 180°

From the triangle QNR,

r  + r  + ÐQNR = 180°
1 2

Comparing these two equations, we get

r  + r  = A (9.34)
1 2

The total deviation d  is the sum of deviations at the two faces,

d = (i – r  ) + (e – r  )
1 2

that is,

d  = i + e – A (9.35)

Thus, the angle of deviation depends on the angle of incidence. A plot
between the angle of deviation and angle of incidence is shown in
Fig. 9.22. You can see that, in general, any given value of d,  except for
i = e, corresponds to two values i and hence of e. This, in fact, is expected
from the symmetry of i and e in Eq. (9.35), i.e., d  remains the same if i 239

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 9.8



Physics
and e are interchanged. Physically, this is related
to the fact that the path of ray in Fig. 9.21 can be
traced back, resulting in the same angle of
deviation. At the minimum deviation D , the

m
refracted ray inside the prism becomes parallel
to its base.  We have

d = D , i = e which implies r  = r .
m 1 2

Equation (9.34) gives

A
2r = A or r = (9.36)

2
In the same way, Eq. (9.35) gives

D  = 2i – A, or i = (A + D )/2        (9.37)
m m

The refractive index of the prism is
FIGURE 9.22 Plot of angle of deviation (d )

versus angle of incidence (i ) for a n2 sin[(A + Dm )/2]
n21 = =

triangular prism. n1 sin[ 38
A/2] (9. )

The angles A and D  can be measured experimentally.  Equation
m

(9.38) thus provides a method of determining refractive index of the
material of the prism.

For a small angle prism, i.e., a thin prism, D is also very small, and
m  

we get

sin[(A + D )/2] (A + D )
2 = m /2

n m
1 ≃

sin[A/2] A/2

D  = (n –1)A
m 21

It implies that, thin prisms do not deviate light much.

9.7  OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS

A number of optical devices and instruments have been designed utilising
reflecting and refracting properties of mirrors, lenses and prisms.
Periscope, kaleidoscope, binoculars, telescopes, microscopes are some
examples of optical devices and instruments that are in common use.
Our eye is, of course, one of the most important optical device the nature
has endowed us with. We have already studied about the human eye in
Class X. We now go on to describe the principles of working of the
microscope and the telescope.

9.7.1  The microscope
A simple magnifier or microscope is a converging lens of small focal length
(Fig. 9.23). In order to use such a lens as a microscope, the lens is held
near the object, one focal length away or less, and the eye is positioned
close to the lens on the other side. The idea is to get an erect, magnified
and virtual image of the object at a distance so that it can be viewed
comfortably, i.e., at 25 cm or more. If the object is at a distance f, the

240 image is at infinity. However, if the object is at a distance slightly less

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

FIGURE 9.23  A simple microscope; (a) the magnifying lens is located
such that the image is at the near point,  (b) the angle subtanded by the
object, is the same as that at the near point, and  (c) the object near the

focal point of the lens; the image is far off but closer than infinity.

than the focal length of the lens, the image is virtual and closer than
infinity. Although the closest comfortable distance for viewing the image
is when it is at the near point (distance D @ 25 cm), it causes some strain
on the eye. Therefore, the image formed at infinity is often considered
most suitable for viewing by the relaxed eye. We show both cases, the
first in Fig. 9.23(a), and the second in Fig. 9.23(b) and (c).

The linear magnification m, for the image formed at the near point D,
by a simple microscope can be obtained by using the relation 241

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

v  1 1   v 
m = =v  –  = 1– 

u  v f   f 
Now according to our sign convention, v is negative, and is equal in

magnitude to D. Thus, the magnification is


m = 1+ D 

 (9.3 )
f  9

Since D is about 25 cm, to have a magnification of six, one needs a convex
lens of focal length, f = 5 cm.

Note that m = h¢/h where h is the size of the object and h¢ the size of
the image. This is also the ratio of the angle subtended by the image
to that subtended by the object, if placed at D for comfortable viewing.
(Note that this is not the angle actually subtended by the object at the
eye, which is h/u.) What a single-lens simple magnifier achieves is that it
allows the object to be brought closer to the eye than D.

We will now find the magnification when the image is at infinity. In
this case we will have to obtained the angular magnification. Suppose
the object has a height h. The maximum angle it can subtend, and be
clearly visible (without a lens), is when it is at the near point, i.e., a distance
D. The angle subtended is then given by

tan θo =  h 
» (9 4 )

  q . 0
D  o

We now find the angle subtended at the eye by the image when the
object is at u. From the relations

h ′
 = = v

m
h u

we have the angle subtended by the image

 tan θ = h ′ = h ⋅ v = h
i »q . The angle subtended by the object, when it

−v −v u −  
u

is at u = –f.

 
θ = h

i  4 )
f  (9. 1

as is clear from Fig. 9.23(c). The angular magnification is, therefore

 θ 
m = i = D

 2
θo  (9.4 )

f

This is one less than the magnification when the image is at the near
point, Eq. (9.39), but the viewing is more comfortable and the difference
in magnification is usually small. In subsequent discussions of optical
instruments (microscope and telescope) we shall assume the image to be

242 at infinity.

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

FIGURE 9.24  Ray diagram for the formation of image by a
compound microscope.

A simple microscope has a limited maximum magnification (£ 9) for
realistic focal lengths. For much larger magnifications, one uses two lenses,
one compounding the effect of the other. This is known as a compound
microscope. A schematic diagram of a compound microscope is shown
in Fig. 9.24. The lens nearest the object, called the objective, forms a
real, inverted, magnified image of the object. This serves as the object for
the second lens, the eyepiece, which functions essentially like a simple
microscope or magnifier, produces the final image, which is enlarged
and virtual. The first inverted image is thus near (at or within) the focal
plane of the eyepiece, at a distance appropriate for final image formation
at infinity, or a little closer for image formation at the near point. Clearly,
the final image is inverted with respect to the original object.

We now obtain the magnification due to a compound microscope.
The ray diagram of Fig. 9.24 shows that the (linear) magnification due to
the objective, namely h¢/h, equals

h ′ L
mO = = (9.43)

h fo

where we have used the result

 
tan β = h = h ′ 

  f  
o L

Here h¢ is the size of the first image, the object size being h and f
o

being the focal length of the objective. The first image is formed near the
focal point of the eyepiece. The distance L, i.e., the distance between the
second focal point of the objective and the first focal point of the eyepiece
(focal length f ) is called the tube length of the compound microscope. 243

e

Reprint 2025-26

The world’s largest optical telescopes
http://astro.nineplanets.org/bigeyes.html



Physics
As the first inverted image is near the focal point of the eyepiece, we

use the result from the discussion above for the simple microscope to
obtain the (angular) magnification m  due to it  [Eq. (9.39)], when the

e

final image is formed at the near point, is

 D 
me = 1+  [9.44(a)]

 fe 
When the final image is formed at infinity, the angular magnification

due to the eyepiece [Eq. (9.42)] is

m  = (D/f ) [9.44(b)]
e e

Thus, the total magnification [(according to  Eq. (9.33)], when the
image is formed at infinity, is

 
m = L D 

mome =                                                                      (9.45)
 fo  fe 

Clearly, to achieve a large magnification of a small object (hence the
name microscope), the objective and eyepiece should have small focal
lengths. In practice, it is difficult to make the focal length much smaller
than 1 cm. Also large lenses are required to make L large.

For example, with an objective with f  = 1.0 cm, and an eyepiece with
o

focal length f  = 2.0 cm, and a tube length of 20 cm, the magnification is
e

 
m = L D 

mome =  
 fo  fe 

20 25
        250

1 2

Various other factors such as illumination of the object, contribute to
the quality and visibility of the image. In modern microscopes, multi-
component lenses are used for both the objective and the eyepiece to
improve image quality by minimising various optical aberrations (defects)
in lenses.

9.7.2  Telescope

The telescope is used to provide angular magnification of distant objects
(Fig. 9.25). It also has an objective and an eyepiece. But here, the objective
has a large focal length and a much larger aperture than the eyepiece.
Light from a distant object enters the objective and a real image is formed
in the tube at its second focal point. The eyepiece magnifies this image
producing a final inverted image. The magnifying power m is the ratio of
the angle b subtended at the eye by the final image to the angle a which
the object subtends at the lens or the eye. Hence

 h f f
m   . o  o

244                                                                         (9.46)
fe h fe

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

In this case, the length of the telescope tube is f + f .
o e

Terrestrial telescopes have, in addition, a pair of inverting lenses to
make the final image erect. Refracting telescopes can be used both for
terrestrial and astronomical observations. For example, consider
a telescope whose objective has a focal length of 100 cm and the eyepiece
a focal length of 1 cm. The magnifying power of this telescope is
m = 100/1 = 100.

Let us consider a pair of stars of actual separation 1¢ (one minute of
arc). The stars appear as though they are separated by an angle of 100 ×
1¢ = 100¢ =1.67°.

FIGURE 9.25  A refracting telescope.

The main considerations with an astronomical telescope are its light
gathering power and its resolution or resolving power. The former clearly
depends on the area of the objective. With larger diameters, fainter objects
can be observed. The resolving power, or the ability to observe two objects
distinctly, which are in very nearly the same direction, also depends on
the diameter of the objective. So, the desirable aim in optical telescopes is
to make them with objective of large diameter. The largest lens objective
in use has a diameter of 40 inch (~1.02 m). It is at the Yerkes Observatory
in Wisconsin, USA. Such big lenses tend to be very heavy and therefore,
difficult to make and support by their edges. Further, it is rather difficult
and expensive to make such large sized lenses which form images that
are free from any kind of chromatic aberration and distortions.

For these reasons, modern telescopes use a concave mirror rather
than a lens for the objective. Telescopes with mirror objectives are called
reflecting telescopes. There is no chromatic aberration in a mirror.
Mechanical support is much less of a problem since a mirror weighs
much less than a lens of equivalent optical quality, and can be supported
over its entire back surface, not just over its rim. One obvious problem
with a reflecting telescope is that the objective mirror focusses light inside 245

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

FIGURE 9.26  Schematic diagram of a reflecting telescope (Cassegrain).

the telescope tube. One must have an eyepiece and the observer right
there, obstructing some light (depending on the size of the observer cage).
This is what is done in the very large 200 inch (~5.08 m) diameters, Mt.
Palomar telescope, California. The viewer sits near the focal point of the
mirror, in a small cage. Another solution to the problem is to deflect the
light being focussed by another mirror. One such arrangement using a
convex secondary mirror to focus the incident light, which now passes
through a hole in the objective primary mirror, is shown in Fig. 9.26.
This is known as a Cassegrain telescope, after its inventor. It has the
advantages of a large focal length in a short telescope. The largest telescope
in India is in Kavalur, Tamil Nadu. It is a 2.34 m diameter reflecting
telescope (Cassegrain). It was ground, polished, set up, and is being used
by the Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore. The largest reflecting
telescopes in the world are the pair of Keck telescopes in Hawaii, USA,
with a reflector of 10 metre in diameter.

SUMMARY

1. Reflection is governed by the equation Ði = Ðr¢  and refraction by the
Snell’s law, sini/sinr = n, where the incident ray, reflected ray, refracted
ray and normal lie in the same plane. Angles of incidence, reflection
and refraction are i, r ¢ and r, respectively.

2. The critical angle of incidence i  for a ray incident from a denser to rarer
c

medium, is that angle for which the angle of refraction is 90°. For
i > i , total internal reflection occurs. Multiple internal reflections in

c

diamond (i   @ 24.4°), totally reflecting prisms and mirage, are some
c

examples of total internal reflection. Optical fibres consist of glass
fibres coated with a thin layer of material of lower refractive index.
Light incident at an angle at one end comes out at the other, after
multiple internal reflections, even if the fibre is bent.

246

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

3. Cartesian sign convention: Distances measured in the same direction
as the incident light are positive; those measured in the opposite
direction are negative. All distances are measured from the pole/optic
centre of the mirror/lens on the principal axis. The heights measured
upwards above x-axis and normal to the principal axis of the mirror/
lens are taken as positive. The heights measured downwards are taken
as negative.

4. Mirror equation:

1 1 1
+ =

v u f

where u and v are object and image distances, respectively and f is the
focal length of the mirror. f is (approximately) half the radius of
curvature R. f is negative  for concave mirror; f  is positive for a convex
mirror.

5. For a prism of the angle A, of refractive index n  placed in a medium
2

of refractive index n ,
1

n sin (A + D m )/2
n = 2

21 = 
n1 sin (A /2)

where D  is the angle of minimum deviation.
m

6. For refraction through a spherical interface (from medium 1 to 2 of
refractive index n  and n , respectively)

1 2

n2 − n1 = n2 − n1

v u R

Thin lens formula

1 1 1
− =

v u f

Lens maker’s formula

1 (n −
= 2 n1)  1 1 

−
f n1  R1 R2 

R  and R  are the radii of curvature of the lens surfaces. f is positive
1 2

for a converging lens; f is negative for a diverging lens.  The power of a
lens  P = 1/f.

The SI unit for power of a lens is dioptre (D): 1 D = 1 m–1.

If several thin lenses of focal length f , f , f ,.. are in contact, the
1 2 3

effective focal length of their combination, is given by

1 = 1 + 1 + 1 + …
f f1 f2 f3

The total power of a combination of several lenses is

P = P  + P  + P  + …
1 2 3

7. Dispersion is the splitting of light into its constituent colour.
247

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

8. Magnifying power m of a simple microscope is given by m = 1 + (D/f),
where D = 25 cm is the least distance of distinct vision and f is the
focal length of the convex lens. If the image is at infinity, m = D/f. For
a compound microscope, the magnifying power is given by m = m  × m

e 0

where m  = 1 + (D/f ), is the magnification due to the eyepiece and m
e e o

is the magnification produced by the objective. Approximately,

L D
m = ×

fo fe

where f  and f  are the focal lengths of the objective and eyepiece,
o e

respectively, and L is the distance between their focal points.

9. Magnifying power m of a telescope is the ratio of the angle b subtended
at the eye by the image to the angle a subtended at the eye by the
object.

β f
m = = o

α fe

where f  and f  are the focal lengths of the objective and eyepiece,
0 e

respectively.

POINTS TO PONDER

1. The laws of reflection and refraction are true for all surfaces and
pairs of media at the point of the incidence.

2. The real image of an object placed between f and 2f from a convex lens
can be seen on a screen placed at the image location. If the screen is
removed, is the image still there?  This question puzzles many, because
it is difficult to reconcile ourselves with an image suspended in air
without a screen. But the image does exist. Rays from a given point
on the object are converging to an image point in space and diverging
away. The screen simply diffuses these rays, some of which reach our
eye and we see the image. This can be seen by the images formed in
air during a laser show.

3. Image formation needs regular reflection/refraction. In principle, all
rays from a given point should reach the same image point. This is
why you do not see your image by an irregular reflecting object, say
the page of a book.

4. Thick lenses give coloured images due to dispersion. The variety in
colour of objects we see around us is due to the constituent colours
of the light incident on them. A monochromatic light may produce an
entirely different perception about the colours on an object as seen in
white light.

5. For a simple microscope, the angular size of the object equals the
angular size of the image. Yet it offers magnification because we can
keep the small object much closer to the eye than 25 cm and hence
have it subtend a large angle. The image is at 25 cm which we can see.
Without the microscope, you would need to keep the small object at
25 cm which would subtend a very small angle.

248

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

EXERCISES

9.1 A small candle, 2.5 cm in size is placed at 27 cm in front of a concave
mirror of radius of curvature 36 cm. At what distance from the mirror
should a screen be placed in order to obtain a sharp image? Describe
the nature and size of the image. If the candle is moved closer to the
mirror, how would the screen have to be moved?

9.2 A 4.5 cm needle is placed 12 cm away from a convex mirror of focal
length 15 cm. Give the location of the image and the magnification.
Describe what happens as the needle is moved farther from the mirror.

9.3 A tank is filled with water to a height of 12.5 cm. The apparent
depth of a needle lying at the bottom of the tank is measured by a
microscope to be 9.4 cm. What is the refractive index of water?  If
water is replaced by a liquid of refractive index 1.63 up to the same
height, by what distance would the microscope have to be moved to
focus on the needle again?

9.4 Figures 9.27(a) and (b) show refraction of a ray in air incident at 60°
with the normal to a glass-air and water-air interface, respectively.
Predict the angle of refraction in glass when the angle of incidence
in water is 45° with the normal to a water-glass interface [Fig. 9.27(c)].

FIGURE 9.27

9.5 A small bulb is placed at the bottom of a tank containing water to a
depth of 80cm. What is the area of the surface of water through
which light from the bulb can emerge out?  Refractive index of water
is 1.33. (Consider the bulb to be a point source.)

9.6 A prism is made of glass of unknown refractive index. A parallel
beam of light is incident on a face of the prism. The angle of minimum
deviation is measured to be 40°. What is the refractive index of the
material of the prism? The refracting angle of the prism is 60°. If the
prism is placed in water (refractive index 1.33), predict the new
angle of minimum deviation of a parallel beam of light.

9.7 Double-convex lenses are to be manufactured from a glass of
refractive index 1.55, with both faces of the same radius of
curvature. What is the radius of curvature required if the focal length
is to be 20cm?

9.8 A beam of light converges at a point P. Now a lens is placed in the
path of the convergent beam 12cm from P. At what point does the
beam converge if the lens is (a) a convex lens of focal length 20cm,
and (b) a concave lens of focal length 16cm?

9.9 An object of size 3.0cm is placed 14cm in front of a concave lens of
focal length 21cm. Describe the image produced by the lens. What
happens if the object is moved further away from the lens? 249

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
9.10 What is the focal length of a convex lens of focal length 30cm in

contact with a concave lens of focal length 20cm? Is the system a
converging or a diverging lens? Ignore thickness of the lenses.

9.11 A compound microscope consists of an objective lens of focal length
2.0 cm and an eyepiece of focal length 6.25 cm separated by a
distance of 15cm. How far from the objective should an object be
placed in order to obtain the final image at (a) the least distance of
distinct vision (25cm), and (b) at infinity? What is the magnifying
power of the microscope in each case?

9.12 A person with a normal near point (25 cm) using a compound
microscope with objective of focal length 8.0 mm and an eyepiece of
focal length 2.5cm can bring an object placed at 9.0mm from the
objective in sharp focus. What is the separation between the two
lenses? Calculate the magnifying power of the microscope,

9.13 A small telescope has an objective lens of focal length 144cm and
an eyepiece of focal length 6.0cm. What is the magnifying power of
the telescope? What is the separation between the objective and
the eyepiece?

9.14 (a) A giant refracting telescope at an observatory has an objective
lens of focal length 15m. If an eyepiece of focal length 1.0cm is
used, what is the angular magnification of the telescope?

(b) If this telescope is used to view the moon, what is the diameter
of the image of the moon formed by the objective lens? The
diameter of the moon is 3.48 × 106m, and the radius of lunar
orbit is 3.8 × 108m.

9.15 Use the mirror equation to deduce that:
(a) an object placed between f and 2 f of a concave mirror produces

a real image beyond 2 f.
(b) a convex mirror always produces a virtual image independent

of the location of the object.
(c) the virtual image produced by a convex mirror is always

diminished in size and is located between the focus and
the pole.

(d) an object placed between the pole and focus of a concave mirror
produces a virtual and enlarged image.

[Note:  This exercise helps you deduce algebraically properties of
images that one obtains from explicit ray diagrams.]

9.16 A small pin fixed on a table top is viewed from above from a distance
of 50cm. By what distance would the pin appear to be raised if it is
viewed from the same point through a 15cm thick glass slab held
parallel to the table?  Refractive index of glass = 1.5. Does the answer
depend on the location of the slab?

9.17 (a) Figure 9.28 shows a cross-section of a ‘light pipe’ made of a
glass fibre of refractive index 1.68. The outer covering of the
pipe is made of a material of refractive index 1.44. What is the
range of the angles of the incident rays with the axis of the pipe
for which total reflections inside the pipe take place, as shown
in the figure.

250
FIGURE 9.28

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

(b) What is the answer if there is no outer covering of the pipe?

9.18 The image of a small electric bulb fixed on the wall of a room is to be
obtained on the opposite wall 3m away by means of a large convex
lens. What is the maximum possible focal length of the lens required
for the purpose?

9.19 A screen is placed 90cm from an object. The image of the object on
the screen is formed by a convex lens at two different locations
separated by 20cm. Determine the focal length of the lens.

9.20 (a) Determine the ‘effective focal length’ of the combination of
the two lenses in Exercise 9.10, if they are placed 8.0cm apart
with their principal axes coincident. Does the answer depend
on which side of the combination a beam of parallel light is
incident?  Is the notion of effective focal length of this system
useful at all?

(b) An object 1.5 cm in size is placed on the side of the convex lens
in the arrangement (a) above. The distance between the object
and the convex lens is 40 cm. Determine the magnification
produced by the two-lens system, and the size of the image.

9.21 At what angle should a ray of light be incident on the face of a prism
of refracting angle 60° so that it just suffers total internal reflection
at the other face? The refractive index of the material of the prism is
1.524.

9.22 A card sheet divided into squares each of size 1 mm2 is being viewed
at a distance of 9 cm through a magnifying glass (a converging lens
of focal length 9 cm) held close to the eye.

(a) What is the magnification produced by the lens?  How much is
the area of each square in the virtual image?

(b) What is the angular magnification (magnifying power) of the
lens?

(c) Is the magnification in (a) equal to the magnifying power in (b)?
Explain.

9.23 (a) At what distance should the lens be held from the card sheet in
Exercise 9.22 in order to view the squares distinctly with the
maximum possible magnifying power?

(b) What is the magnification in this case?

(c) Is the magnification equal to the magnifying power in this case?
Explain.

9.24 What should be the distance between the object in Exercise 9.23
and the magnifying glass if the virtual image of each square in
the figure is to have an area of 6.25 mm2. Would you be able to
see the squares distinctly with your eyes very close to the
magnifier?

[Note: Exercises 9.22 to 9.24 will help you clearly understand the
difference between magnification in absolute size and the angular
magnification (or magnifying power) of an instrument.]

251

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
9.25 Answer the following questions:

(a) The angle subtended at the eye by an object is equal to the
angle subtended at the eye by the virtual image produced by a
magnifying glass. In what sense then does a magnifying glass
provide angular magnification?

(b) In viewing through a magnifying glass, one usually positions
one’s eyes very close to the lens. Does angular magnification
change if the eye is moved back?

(c) Magnifying power of a simple microscope is inversely proportional
to the focal length of the lens. What then stops us from using a
convex lens of smaller and smaller focal length and achieving
greater and greater magnifying power?

(d) Why must both the objective and the eyepiece of a compound
microscope have short focal lengths?

(e) When viewing through a compound microscope, our eyes should
be positioned not on the eyepiece but a short distance away
from it for best viewing. Why?  How much should be that short
distance between the eye and eyepiece?

9.26 An angular magnification (magnifying power) of 30X is desired using
an objective of focal length 1.25cm and an eyepiece of focal length
5cm. How will you set up the compound microscope?

9.27 A small telescope has an objective lens of focal length 140cm and
an eyepiece of focal length 5.0cm. What is the magnifying power of
the telescope for viewing distant objects when

(a) the telescope is in normal adjustment (i.e., when the final image
is at infinity)?

(b) the final image is formed at the least distance of distinct vision
(25cm)?

9.28 (a) For the telescope described in Exercise 9.27 (a), what is the
separation between the objective lens and the eyepiece?

(b) If this telescope is used to view a 100 m tall tower 3 km away,
what is the height of the image of the tower formed by the objective
lens?

(c) What is the height of the final image of the tower if it is formed at
25cm?

9.29 A Cassegrain telescope uses two mirrors as shown in Fig. 9.26. Such
a telescope is built with the mirrors 20mm apart. If the radius of
curvature of the large mirror is 220mm and the small mirror is
140mm, where will the final image of an object at infinity be?

9.30 Light incident normally on a plane mirror attached to a galvanometer
coil retraces backwards as shown in Fig. 9.29. A current in the coil
produces a deflection of 3.5o of the mirror. What is the displacement
of the reflected spot of light on a screen placed 1.5 m away?

252

Reprint 2025-26



Ray Optics and
Optical Instruments

FIGURE 9.29

9.31 Figure 9.30 shows an equiconvex lens (of refractive index 1.50) in
contact with a liquid layer on top of a plane mirror. A small needle
with its tip on the principal axis is moved along the axis until its
inverted image is found at the position of the needle. The distance of
the needle from the lens is measured to be 45.0cm. The liquid is
removed and the experiment is repeated. The new distance is
measured to be 30.0cm. What is the refractive index of the liquid?

FIGURE 9.30

253

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

Notes

254

Reprint 2025-26



Wave Optics
##10##
Chapter Ten

WAVE OPTICS

10.1  INTRODUCTION

In 1637 Descartes gave the corpuscular model of light and derived Snell’s
law. It explained the laws of reflection and refraction of light at an interface.
The corpuscular model predicted that if the ray of light (on refraction)
bends towards the normal then the speed of light would be greater in the
second medium. This corpuscular model of light was further developed
by Isaac Newton in his famous book entitled OPTICKS and because of
the tremendous popularity of this book, the corpuscular model is very
often attributed to Newton.

In 1678, the Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens put forward the
wave theory of light – it is this wave model of light that we will discuss in
this chapter. As we will see, the wave model could satisfactorily explain
the phenomena of reflection and refraction; however, it predicted that on
refraction if the wave bends towards the normal then the speed of light
would be less in the second medium. This is in contradiction to the
prediction made by using the corpuscular model of light. It was much
later confirmed by experiments where it was shown that the speed of
light in water is less than the speed in air confirming the prediction of the
wave model; Foucault carried out this experiment in 1850.

The wave theory was not readily accepted primarily because of
Newton’s authority and also because light could travel through vacuu2m55

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
and it was felt that a wave would always require a medium to propagate
from one point to the other. However, when Thomas Young performed
his famous interference experiment in 1801, it was firmly established
that light is indeed a wave phenomenon. The wavelength of visible
light was measured and found to be extremely small; for example, the
wavelength of yellow light is about 0.6 mm. Because of the smallness
of the wavelength of visible light (in comparison to the dimensions of
typical mirrors and lenses), light can be assumed to approximately
travel in straight lines. This is the field of geometrical optics, which we
had discussed in the previous chapter. Indeed, the branch of optics in
which one completely neglects the finiteness of the wavelength is called
geometrical optics and a ray is defined as the path of energy
propagation in the limit of wavelength tending to zero.

After the interference experiment of Young in 1801, for the next 40
years or so, many experiments were carried out involving the
interference and diffraction of lightwaves; these experiments could only
be satisfactorily explained by assuming a wave model of light. Thus,
around the middle of the nineteenth century, the wave theory seemed
to be very well established. The only major difficulty was that since it
was thought that a wave required a medium for its propagation, how
could light waves propagate through vacuum. This was explained
when Maxwell put forward his famous electromagnetic theory of light.
Maxwell had developed a set of equations describing the laws of
electricity and magnetism and using these equations he derived what
is known as the wave equation from which he predicted the existence
of electromagnetic waves*. From the wave equation, Maxwell could
calculate the speed of electromagnetic waves in free space and he found
that the theoretical value was very close to the measured value of speed
of l ight. From this, he propounded that l ight must be an
electromagnetic wave. Thus, according to Maxwell, light waves are
associated with changing electric and magnetic fields; changing electric
field produces a time and space varying magnetic field and a changing
magnetic field produces a time and space varying electric field. The
changing electric and magnetic fields result in the propagation of
electromagnetic waves (or light waves) even in vacuum.

In this chapter we will first discuss the original formulation of the
Huygens principle and derive the laws of reflection and refraction. In
Sections 10.4 and 10.5, we will discuss the phenomenon of interference
which is based on the principle of superposition. In Section 10.6 we
will discuss the phenomenon of diffraction which is based on Huygens-
Fresnel principle. Finally in Section 10.7 we will discuss the
phenomenon of polarisation which is based on the fact that the light
waves are transverse electromagnetic waves.

* Maxwell had predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves around 1855; it
was much later (around 1890) that Heinrich Hertz produced radiowaves in the
laboratory. J.C. Bose and G. Marconi made practical applications of the Hertzian

256
waves

Reprint 2025-26



Wave Optics

10.2  HUYGENS PRINCIPLE

We would first define a wavefront: when we drop a small stone on a
calm pool of water, waves spread out from the point of impact. Every
point on the surface starts oscillating with time. At any instant, a
photograph of the surface would show circular rings on which the
disturbance is maximum. Clearly, all points on such a circle are
oscillating in phase because they are at the same distance from the
source. Such a locus of points, which oscillate in phase is called a
wavefront; thus a wavefront is defined as a surface of constant
phase. The speed with which the wavefront moves outwards from the FIGURE 10.1 (a) A

diverging spherical
source is called the speed of the wave. The energy of the wave travels

wave emanating from
in a direction perpendicular to the wavefront. a point source. The

If we have a point source emitting waves uniformly in all directions, wavefronts are
then the locus of points which have the same amplitude and vibrate in spherical.
the same phase are spheres and we have what is known as a spherical
wave as shown in Fig. 10.1(a). At a large distance from the source, a
small portion of the sphere can be considered as a plane and we have
what is known as a plane wave [Fig. 10.1(b)].

Now, if we know the shape of the wavefront at t = 0, then Huygens
principle allows us to determine the shape of the wavefront at a later
time t. Thus, Huygens principle is essentially a geometrical construction,
which given the shape of the wafefront at any time allows us to determine
the shape of the wavefront at a later time. Let us consider a diverging FIGURE 10.1 (b) At a
wave and let F F  represent a portion of the spherical wavefront at t = 0

1 2 large distance from
(Fig. 10.2). Now, according to Huygens principle, each point of the the source, a small
wavefront is the source of a secondary disturbance and the wavelets portion of the
emanating from these points spread out in all directions with the speed spherical wave can

of the wave. These wavelets emanating from the wavefront are usually be approximated by a
plane wave.

referred to as secondary wavelets and if we draw a common tangent
to all these spheres, we obtain the new position of the wavefront at a
later time.

FIGURE 10.2 F F  represents the spherical wavefront (with O as
1 2

centre) at t = 0. The envelope of the secondary wavelets
emanating from F F  produces the forward moving  wavefront G G .

1 2 1 2

The backwave D D  does not exist.
1 2 257

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
Thus, if we wish to determine the shape of the wavefront at t = t, we

draw spheres of radius vt from each point on the spherical wavefront
where v represents the speed of the waves in the medium. If we now draw
a common tangent to all these spheres, we obtain the new position of the
wavefront at t = t.  The new wavefront shown as G G  in Fig. 10.2 is again

1 2
spherical with point O as the centre.

The above model has one shortcoming: we also have a backwave which
is shown as D D  in Fig. 10.2. Huygens argued that the amplitude of the

1 2
secondary wavelets is maximum in the forward direction and zero in the
backward direction; by making this adhoc assumption, Huygens could
explain the absence of the backwave. However, this adhoc assumption is
not satisfactory and the absence of the backwave is really justified from
more rigorous wave theory.

In a similar manner, we can use Huygens principle to determine the
shape of the wavefront for a plane wave propagating through a medium

FIGURE 10.3 (Fig. 10.3).

Huygens geometrical
construction for a 10.3 REFRACTION AND REFLECTION OF

plane wave PLANE WAVES USING HUYGENS PRINCIPLE
propagating to the
right. F  F  is the

1 2 10.3.1  Refraction of a plane wave
plane wavefront at

t = 0 and G G  is the
1 2 We will now use Huygens principle to derive the laws of refraction. Let PP¢

wavefront at a later represent the surface separating medium 1 and medium 2, as shown in
time t. The lines A A ,

1 2 Fig. 10.4. Let v  and v  represent the speed of light in medium 1 and
1 2

B B  … etc., are
1 2 medium 2, respectively. We assume a plane wavefront AB propagating in

normal to both F F
1 2 the direction A¢A incident on the interface at an angle i as shown in the

and G G and
1 2 figure. Let t be the time taken by the wavefront to travel the distance BC.

represent rays.
Thus,

BC = v  t
1

FIGURE 10.4 A plane wave AB is incident at an angle i on the surface
PP¢  separating medium 1 and medium 2. The plane wave undergoes

refraction and CE represents the refracted wavefront. The figure
corresponds to v  < v  so that the refracted waves bends towards the

2 1
258 normal.

Reprint 2025-26



Wave Optics

In order to determine the shape of the refracted
wavefront, we draw a sphere of radius v2t from the point
A in the second medium (the speed of the wave in the
second medium is v2). Let CE represent a tangent plane
drawn from the point C on to the sphere. Then, AE = v2 t

and CE would represent the refracted wavefront.  If we
now consider the triangles ABC and AEC, we readily
obtain

BC
sin i = = v τ

1
(10.1)

AC AC

and

AE
2

sin r = = v τ
(10.2)

AC AC Christiaan Huygens
where i and r are the angles of incidence and refraction, (1629 – 1695) Dutch
respectively. Thus we obtain physicist, astronomer,

mathematician and the
sin i v

= 1 founder of the wave
(10.3)

sinr v
2 theory of light. His book,

From the above equation, we get the important result Treatise on light, makes
fascinating reading even

that if r < i (i.e., if the ray bends toward the normal), the
today. He brilliantly

speed of the light wave in the second medium (v2) will be
explained the double

less then the speed of the light wave in the first medium refraction shown by the
(v ). This prediction is opposite to the prediction from

1 mineral calcite in this
the corpuscular model of light and as later experiments work in addition to
showed, the prediction of the wave theory is correct. Now, reflection and refraction.
if c represents the speed of light in vacuum, then, He was the first to

analyse circular and
c

n = simple harmonic motion
1 (10.4)

v
1 and designed and built

and improved clocks and
telescopes. He discovered

c the true geometry of
n  = (10.5)

2 v Saturn’s rings.
2

are known as the refractive indices of medium 1 and
medium 2, respectively. In terms of the refractive indices, Eq. (10.3) can
be written as

n1 sin i = n2 sin r (10.6)
This is the Snell’s law of refraction. Further, if  l  and l  denote the

1  2
wavelengths of light in medium 1 and medium 2, respectively and if the
distance BC is equal to l  then the distance AE will be equal to l  (because

 1  2
if the crest from B has reached C in time t, then the crest from A should
have also reached E in time t ); thus,

λ BC v
1 = = 1

λ AE v
2 2

or

v v
1 = 2 259

λ λ (10.7)
1 2

Reprint 2025-26

CHRISTIAAN HUYGENS (1629 – 1695)



Physics
The above equation implies that when a wave gets refracted into a

denser medium (v  > v ) the wavelength and the speed of propagation
1 2

decrease but the frequency  n (= v/l) remains the same.

10.3.2  Refraction at a rarer medium
We now consider refraction of a plane wave at a rarer medium, i.e.,
v  > v . Proceeding in an exactly similar manner we can construct a

2 1
refracted wavefront as shown in Fig. 10.5. The angle of refraction
will now be greater than angle of incidence; however, we will still have
n  sin i = n  sin r . We define an angle i  by the following equation

1 2 c

n
sin i 2

c = (10.8)
n1

Thus, if i = i  then sin r = 1 and r = 90°. Obviously, for i > i , there can
c c

not be any refracted wave. The angle i is known as the critical angle and
c 

for all angles of incidence greater than the critical angle, we will not have
any refracted wave and the wave will undergo what is known as total
internal reflection. The phenomenon of total internal reflection and its
applications was discussed in Section 9.4.

FIGURE 10.5 Refraction of a plane wave incident on a
rarer medium for which v  > v . The plane wave bends

2 1

away from the normal.

10.3.3  Reflection of a plane wave by a plane surface
We next consider a plane wave AB incident at an angle i on a reflecting
surface MN. If v represents the speed of the wave in the medium and if t
represents the time taken by the wavefront to advance from the point B
to C then the distance

BC =  vt

In order to construct the reflected wavefront we draw a sphere of
radius vt from the point A as shown in Fig. 10.6. Let CE represent the
tangent plane drawn from the point C to this sphere. Obviously

260 AE = BC = vt

Reprint 2025-26

Demonstration of interference, diffraction, refraction, resonance and Doppler effect
http://www.falstad.com/ripple/



Wave Optics

FIGURE 10.6 Reflection of a plane wave AB by the reflecting surface MN.
AB and CE represent incident and reflected wavefronts.

If we now consider the triangles EAC and BAC we will find that they
are congruent and therefore, the angles i and r (as shown in Fig. 10.6)
would be equal. This is the law of reflection.

Once we have the laws of reflection and refraction, the behaviour of
prisms, lenses, and mirrors can be understood. These phenomena were
discussed in detail in Chapter 9 on the basis of rectilinear propagation of
light. Here we just describe the behaviour of the wavefronts as they
undergo reflection or refraction. In Fig. 10.7(a) we consider a plane wave
passing through a thin prism. Clearly, since the speed of light waves is
less in glass, the lower portion of the incoming wavefront (which travels
through the greatest thickness of glass) will get delayed resulting in a tilt
in the emerging wavefront as shown in the figure. In Fig. 10.7(b) we
consider a plane wave incident on a thin convex lens; the central part of
the incident plane wave traverses the thickest portion of the lens and is
delayed the most. The emerging wavefront has a depression at the centre
and therefore the wavefront becomes spherical and converges to the point
F which is known as the focus. In Fig. 10.7(c) a plane wave is incident on
a concave mirror and on reflection we have a spherical wave converging
to the focal point F. In a similar manner, we can understand refraction
and reflection by concave lenses and convex mirrors.

From the above discussion it follows that the total time taken from a
point on the object to the corresponding point on the image is the same
measured along any ray. For example, when a convex lens focusses light
to form a real image, although the ray going through the centre traverses
a shorter path, but because of the slower speed in glass, the time taken
is the same as for rays travelling near the edge of the lens.

FIGURE 10.7 Refraction of a plane wave by (a) a thin prism, (b) a convex lens.
261

(c) Reflection of a plane wave by a concave mirror.

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

Example 10.1

(a) When monochromatic light is incident on a surface separating
two media, the reflected and refracted light both have the same
frequency as the incident frequency. Explain why?

(b) When light travels from a rarer to a denser medium, the speed
decreases. Does the reduction in speed imply a reduction in the
energy carried by the light wave?

(c) In the wave picture of light, intensity of light is determined by the
square of the amplitude of the wave. What determines the intensity
of light in the photon picture of light.

Solution
(a) Reflection and refraction arise through interaction of incident light

with the atomic constituents of matter. Atoms may be viewed as
oscillators, which take up the frequency of the external agency
(light) causing forced oscillations. The frequency of light emitted by
a charged oscillator equals its frequency of oscillation. Thus, the
frequency of scattered light equals the frequency of incident light.

(b) No. Energy carried by a wave depends on the amplitude of the
wave, not on the speed of wave propagation.

(c) For a given frequency, intensity of light in the photon picture is
determined by the number of photons crossing an unit area per
unit time.

10.4  COHERENT AND INCOHERENT

ADDITION OF WAVES

In this section we will discuss the
interference pattern produced by the
superposition of two waves. You may recall
that we had discussed the superposition
principle in Chapter 14 of your Class XI
textbook. Indeed the entire field of
interference is based on the superposition

(a) (b) principle according to which at a particular

FIGURE 10.8 (a) Two needles oscillating in point in the medium, the resultant

phase in water represent two coherent sources. displacement produced by a number of
(b) The pattern of displacement of water waves is the vector sum of the displace-

molecules at an instant on the surface of water ments produced by each of the waves.
showing nodal N (no displacement) and Consider two needles S  and S  moving

1 2
antinodal A (maximum displacement) lines. periodically up and down in an identical

fashion in a trough of water [Fig. 10.8(a)]. They produce two water waves,
and at a particular point, the phase difference between the displacements
produced by each of the waves does not change with time; when this
happens the two sources are said to be coherent.  Figure 10.8(b) shows
the position of crests (solid circles) and troughs (dashed circles) at a given
instant of time. Consider a point P for which

262
S  P = S  P

1 2

Reprint 2025-26

EXAMPLE 10.1



Wave Optics

Since the distances S  P and S  P are equal, waves from S  and S  will
1 2 1 2

take the same time to travel to the point P and waves that emanate from
S  and S  in phase will also arrive, at the point P, in phase.

1 2
Thus, if the displacement produced by the source S  at the point P is

1
given by

y  = a cos wt
1

then, the displacement produced by the source S  (at the point P) will
2

also be given by

y  = a cos wt
2

Thus, the resultant of displacement at P would be given by

y = y  + y  = 2 a cos wt
1 2

Since the intensity is proportional to the square of the amplitude, the
resultant intensity will be given by

I = 4 I
0

where I  represents the intensity produced by each one of the individual
0

sources; I  is proportional to a2. In fact at any point on the perpendicular
0

bisector of S S , the intensity will be 4I . The two sources are said to
1 2 0

interfere constructively and we have what is referred to as constructive FIGURE 10.9
(a) Constructive

interference. We next consider a point Q [Fig. 10.9(a)]
interference at a

for which point Q for which the

S Q –S Q = 2l path difference is 2l.
2 1

(b) Destructive
The waves emanating from S will arrive exactly two cycles earlier

1 interference at a
than the waves from S  and will again be in phase [Fig. 10.9(a)]. Thus, if

2 point R for which the
the displacement produced by  S  is given by path difference is

1 

y  = a cos 2.5 l .
wt

1

then the displacement produced by  S  will be given by
2 

y  = a cos (wt – 4p)  =  a cos wt
2

where we have used the fact that a path difference of 2l corresponds to a
phase difference of 4p. The two displacements are once again in phase
and the intensity will again be 4 I  giving rise to constructive interference.

0
In the above analysis we have assumed that the distances S Q and S Q

1 2
are much greater than d (which represents the distance between S  and

1
S ) so that although S Q and S Q are not equal, the amplitudes of the

2 1 2
displacement produced by each wave are very nearly the same.

We next consider a point R [Fig. 10.9(b)] for which

S R – S R = –2.5l
2 1

The waves emanating from S will arrive exactly two and a half cycles
1 

later than the waves from S   [Fig. 10.10(b)]. Thus if the displacement
2 FIGURE 10.10 Locus

produced by  S  is given by
1 of points for which

y  = a cos wt S P – S P is equal to
1 1 2

zero, ±l, ± 2l, ± 3l .
then the displacement produced by  S  will be given by

2 

y  = a cos (wt + 5p)  = – a cos wt
2 263

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
where we have used the fact that a path difference of 2.5l corresponds to
a phase difference of 5p. The two displacements are now out of phase
and the two displacements will cancel out to give zero intensity. This is
referred to as destructive interference.

To summarise: If we have two coherent sources S  and S  vibrating
1 2

in phase, then for an arbitrary point P whenever the path difference,

S P  ~ S P =  nl     (n = 0, 1, 2, 3,...) (10.9)
1 2

we will have constructive interference and the resultant intensity will be
4I ; the sign ~ between  S P and S  P represents the difference between

0 1 2

S P and S  P. On the other hand, if the point P is such that the path
1 2

difference,

1
S P  ~ S P = (n+ ) l     (n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...) (10.10)

1 2
2

we will have destructive interference and the resultant intensity will be
zero. Now, for any other arbitrary point G (Fig. 10.10) let the phase
difference between the two displacements be f. Thus, if the displacement
produced by S  is given by

1

y  = a cos wt
1

then, the displacement produced by S  would be
2

y  = a cos (wt + f )
2

and the resultant displacement will be given by
y = y + y

1 2

   = a [cos wt + cos (wt +f )]
   = 2 a cos (f/2) cos (wt + f/2)

The amplitude of the resultant displacement is 2a cos (f/2) and
therefore the intensity at that point will be

I = 4 I  cos2 (f/2) (10.11)
0

If f = 0, ± 2 p, ± 4 p,… which corresponds to the condition given by
Eq. (10.9) we will have constructive interference leading to maximum
intensity. On the other hand, if f = ± p, ± 3p, ± 5p … [which corresponds to
the condition given by Eq. (10.10)] we will have destructive interference
leading to zero intensity.

Now if the two sources are coherent (i.e., if the two needles are going
up and down regularly) then the phase difference f at any point will not
change with time and we will have a stable interference pattern; i.e., the
positions of maxima and minima will not change with time. However, if
the two needles do not maintain a constant phase difference, then the
interference pattern will also change with time and, if the phase difference
changes very rapidly with time, the positions of maxima and minima will
also vary rapidly with time and we will see a “time-averaged” intensity
distribution. When this happens, we will observe an average intensity
that will be given by

I = 2 I (10.12)
0

264 at all points.

Reprint 2025-26

Ripple Tank experiments on wave interference
http://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulation/legacy/wave-interference



Wave Optics

When the phase difference between the two vibrating sources changes
rapidly with time, we say that the two sources are incoherent and when
this happens the intensities just add up. This is indeed what happens
when two separate light sources illuminate a wall.

10.5 INTERFERENCE OF LIGHT WAVES AND YOUNG’S
EXPERIMENT

We will now discuss interference using light waves. If
we use two sodium lamps illuminating two pinholes
(Fig. 10.11) we will not observe any interference fringes.
This is because of the fact that the light wave emitted
from an ordinary source (like a sodium lamp) undergoes
abrupt phase changes in times of the order of 10–10

seconds. Thus the light waves coming out from two
independent sources of light will not have any fixed
phase relationship and would be incoherent, when this FIGURE 10.11 If two sodium
happens, as discussed in the previous section, the lamps illuminate two pinholes
intensities on the screen will add up. S  and S , the intensities will add

1 2

The British physicist Thomas Young used an up and no interference fringes will

ingenious technique to “lock” the phases of the waves be observed on the screen.

emanating from S  and S . He made two pinholes S
1 2 1

and S  (very close to each other) on an opaque screen [Fig. 10.12(a)].
2

These were illuminated by another pinholes that was in turn, lit by a
bright source. Light waves spread out from S and fall on both S  and S .

1 2
S  and S  then behave like two coherent sources because light waves

1 2
coming out from S  and S  are derived from the same original source

1 2
and any abrupt phase change in S will manifest in exactly similar phase
changes in the light coming out from S  and S . Thus, the two sources S

1 2 1
and S  will be locked in phase; i.e., they will be coherent like the two

2
vibrating needle in our water wave example [Fig. 10.8(a)].

The spherical waves emanating from S  and S  will produce
1 2

interference fringes on the screen GG¢, as shown in Fig. 10.12(b). The
positions of maximum and minimum intensities can be calculated by
using the analysis given in Section 10.4.

(a) (b)

FIGURE 10.12 Young’s arrangement to produce interference pattern. 265

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
We will have constructive interference resulting in a bright

xd
region when  = nl. That is,

D
nλD

x = x  = ; n = 0, ± 1, ± 2, ...                    (10.13)
n d

On the other hand, we will have destructive
xd 1

interference resulting in a dark region when = (n+ ) l
D 2

that is
1 D

x = x  = (n+ ) ; n  0,1, 2 (10.14)
n 2 d

Thomas Young
Thus dark and bright bands appear on the screen,

(1773 – 1829) English
as shown in Fig. 10.13. Such bands are called fringes.

physicist, physician and
Egyptologist. Young worked Equations (10.13) and (10.14) show that dark and

on a wide variety of bright fringes are equally spaced.
scientific problems, ranging
from the structure of the eye
and the mechanism of
vision to the decipherment
of the Rosetta stone. He
revived the wave theory of
light and recognised that
interference phenomena
provide proof of the wave
properties of light.

FIGURE 10.13 Computer generated fringe pattern produced by two point
source S  and S  on the screen GG¢ (Fig. 10.12); d = 0.025 mm, D = 5 cm

1 2

and l = 5 × 10–5 cm.) (Adopted from OPTICS by A. Ghatak, Tata McGraw
Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 2000.)

10.6  DIFFRACTION

If we look clearly at the shadow cast by an opaque object, close to the
region of geometrical shadow, there are alternate dark and bright regions
just like in interference. This happens due to the phenomenon of
diffraction. Diffraction is a general characteristic exhibited by all types of
waves, be it sound waves, light waves, water waves or matter waves. Since
the wavelength of light is much smaller than the dimensions of most

266
obstacles; we do not encounter diffraction effects of light in everyday

Reprint 2025-26

THOMAS YOUNG (1773 – 1829)



Wave Optics

observations. However, the finite resolution of our eye or of optical
instruments such as telescopes or microscopes is limited due to the
phenomenon of diffraction. Indeed the colours that you see when a CD is
viewed is due to diffraction effects. We will now discuss the phenomenon
of diffraction.

10.6.1  The single slit

In the discussion of Young’s experiment, we stated that a single narrow
slit acts as a new source from which light spreads out. Even before Young,
early experimenters – including Newton – had noticed that light spreads
out from narrow holes and slits. It seems to turn around corners and
enter regions where we would expect a shadow. These effects, known as
diffraction, can only be properly understood using wave ideas. After all,
you are hardly surprised to hear sound
waves from someone talking around a corner!

When the double slit in Young’s
experiment is replaced by a single narrow
slit (illuminated by a monochromatic
source), a broad pattern with a central bright
region is seen. On both sides, there are
alternate dark and bright regions, the
intensity becoming weaker away from the
centre (Fig. 10.15). To understand this, go
to Fig. 10.14, which shows a parallel beam
of light falling normally on a single slit LN of
width a. The diffracted light goes on to meet

FIGURE 10.14  The geometry of path
a screen. The midpoint of the slit is M. differences for diffraction by a single slit.

A straight line through M perpendicular
to the slit plane meets the screen at C. We want the
intensity at any point P on the screen. As before, straight
lines joining P to the different points L,M,N, etc., can be
treated as parallel, making an angle q with the
normal MC.

The basic idea is to divide the slit into much smaller
parts, and add their contributions at P with the proper
phase differences. We are treating different parts of the
wavefront at the slit as secondary sources. Because the
incoming wavefront is parallel to the plane of the slit, these
sources are in phase.

It is observed that the intensity has a central
maximum at q = 0 and other secondary maxima at q l
(n+1/2) l/a, which go on becoming weaker and weaker
with increasing n. The minima (zero intensity) are at q l
nl/a, n = ±1, ±2, ±3, .... FIGURE 10.15 Intensity

The photograph and intensity pattern corresponding distribution and photograph of
to it is shown in Fig. 10.15. fringes due to diffraction

There has been prolonged discussion about at single slit.
difference between intereference and diffraction among 267

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
scientists since the discovery of these phenomena. In this context, it is
interesting to note what Richard Feynman* has said in his famous
Feynman Lectures on Physics:

No one has ever been able to define the difference between
interference and diffraction satisfactorily. It is just a question
of usage, and there is no specific, important physical difference
between them. The best we can do is, roughly speaking, is to
say that when there are only a few sources, say two interfering
sources, then the result is usually called interference, but if there
is a large number of them, it seems that the word diffraction is
more often used.

In the double-slit experiment, we must note that the pattern on the
screen is actually a superposition of single-slit diffraction from each slit
or hole, and the double-slit interference pattern.

10.6.2  Seeing the single slit diffraction pattern
It is surprisingly easy to see the single-slit diffraction pattern for oneself.
The equipment needed can be found in most homes –– two razor blades
and one clear glass electric bulb preferably with a straight filament. One
has to hold the two blades so that the edges are parallel and have a
narrow slit in between. This is easily done with the thumb and forefingers
(Fig. 10.16).

Keep the slit parallel to the filament, right in front of the eye. Use
spectacles if you normally do. With slight adjustment of the width of
the slit and the parallelism of the edges, the pattern should be seen
with its bright and dark bands. Since the position of all the bands
(except the central one) depends on wavelength, they will show some
colours. Using a filter for red or blue will make the fringes clearer.
With both filters available, the wider fringes for red compared to blue

FIGURE 10.16
can be seen.

Holding two blades to
form a single slit. A In this experiment, the filament plays the role of the first slit S in

bulb filament viewed Fig. 10.15. The lens of the eye focuses the pattern on the screen (the
through this shows retina of the eye).

clear diffraction With some effort, one can cut a double slit in an aluminium foil with
bands. a blade. The bulb filament can be viewed as before to repeat Young’s

experiment. In daytime, there is another suitable bright source subtending
a small angle at the eye. This is the reflection of the Sun in any shiny
convex surface (e.g., a cycle bell). Do not try direct sunlight – it can damage
the eye and will not give fringes anyway as the Sun subtends an angle
of (1/2)°.

In interference and diffraction, light energy is redistributed. If it
reduces in one region, producing a dark fringe, it increases in another
region, producing a bright fringe. There is no gain or loss of energy,
which is consistent with the principle of conservation of energy.

* Richard Feynman was one of the recipients of the 1965 Nobel Prize in Physics
268 for his fundamental work in quantum electrodynamics.

Reprint 2025-26



Wave Optics

10.7  POLARISATION

Consider holding a long string that is held horizontally, the other end of
which is assumed to be fixed. If we move the end of the string up and
down in a periodic manner, we will generate a wave propagating  in the
+x direction (Fig. 10.17). Such a wave could be described by the following
equation

FIGURE 10.17 (a) The curves represent the displacement of a string at
t = 0 and at t = Dt, respectively when a sinusoidal wave is propagating

in the +x-direction. (b) The curve represents the time variation
of the displacement at x = 0 when a sinusoidal wave is propagating

in the +x-direction. At  x = Dx, the time variation of the
displacement will be slightly displaced to the right.

y (x,t ) = a sin (kx – wt) (10.15)

where a and w (= 2pn ) represent the amplitude and the angular frequency
of the wave, respectively; further,

λ = 2π
(10.16)

k

represents the wavelength associated with the wave. We had discussed
propagation of such waves in Chapter 14 of Class XI textbook. Since the
displacement (which is along the y direction) is at right angles to the
direction of propagation of the wave, we have what is known as a
transverse wave. Also, since the displacement is in the y direction, it is
often referred to as a y-polarised wave. Since each point on the string
moves on a straight line, the wave is also referred to as a linearly polarised 269

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
wave. Further, the string always remains confined to the x-y plane and
therefore it is also referred to as a plane polarised wave.

In a similar manner we can consider the vibration of the string in the
x-z plane generating a z-polarised wave whose displacement will be given
by

z (x,t ) = a sin (kx – wt ) (10.17)

It should be mentioned that the linearly polarised waves [described
by Eqs. (10.15) and (10.17)] are all transverse waves; i.e., the
displacement of each point of the string is always at right angles to the
direction of propagation of the wave. Finally, if the plane of vibration of
the string is changed randomly in very short intervals of time, then we
have what is known as an unpolarised wave. Thus, for an unpolarised
wave the displacement will be randomly changing with time though it
will always be perpendicular to the direction of propagation.

Light waves are transverse in nature; i.e., the electric field associated
with a propagating light wave is always at right angles to the direction of
propagation of the wave. This can be easily demonstrated using a simple
polaroid. You must have seen thin plastic like sheets, which are called
polaroids. A polaroid consists of long chain molecules aligned in a
particular direction. The electric vectors (associated with the propagating
light wave) along the direction of the aligned molecules get absorbed.
Thus, if an unpolarised light wave is incident on such a polaroid then
the light wave will get linearly polarised with the electric vector oscillating
along a direction perpendicular to the aligned molecules; this direction
is known as the pass-axis of the polaroid.

Thus, if the light from an ordinary source (like a sodium lamp) passes
through a polaroid sheet P  it is observed that its intensity is reduced by

1,

half. Rotating P  has no effect on the transmitted beam and transmitted
1

intensity remains constant. Now, let an identical piece of polaroid P  be
2

placed before P . As expected, the light from the lamp is reduced in
1

intensity on passing through P  alone. But now rotating P  has a dramatic
2 1

effect on the light coming from P . In one position, the intensity transmitted
2

by P  followed by P  is nearly zero. When turned by 90° from this position,
2 1

P  transmits nearly the full intensity emerging from P  (Fig. 10.18).
1 2

The experiment at figure 10.18 can be easily understood by assuming
that light passing through the polaroid P  gets polarised along  the pass-

2
axis of  P . If the pass-axis of  P makes an angle q with the pass-axis of

2 2 
P , then  when the polarised beam passes through the polaroid P , the

1 2
component  E cos q  (along the pass-axis of P ) will pass through P .

2 2
Thus, as we rotate the polaroid P (or P ), the intensity will vary as:

1 2

I = I  cos2
q (10.18)

0

where I  is the intensity of the polarized light after passing through
0

P . This is known as Malus’ law. The above discussion shows that the
1  

270

Reprint 2025-26



Wave Optics

FIGURE 10.18 (a) Passage of light through two polaroids P  and P . The
2 1

transmitted fraction falls from 1 to 0 as the angle between them varies
from  0° to 90°. Notice that the light seen through a single polaroid

P
1 does not vary with angle. (b) Behaviour of the electric vector
when light passes through two polaroids. The transmitted
polarisation is the component parallel to the polaroid axis.

The double arrows show the oscillations of the electric vector.

intensity coming out of a single polaroid is half of the incident intensity.
By putting a second polaroid, the intensity can be further controlled
from 50% to zero of the incident intensity by adjusting the angle between
the pass-axes of two polaroids.

Polaroids can be used to control the intensity, in sunglasses,
windowpanes, etc. Polaroids are also used in photographic cameras and
3D movie cameras.

Example 10.2 Discuss the intensity of transmitted light when a
polaroid sheet is rotated between two crossed polaroids?

Solution Let I  be the intensity of polarised light after passing through
0

the first polariser P . Then the intensity of light after passing through
1

second polariser P  will be
2

= 2
I I0cos θ ,

where q is the angle between pass axes of P  and P . Since P  and P
1 2 1 3

are crossed the angle between the pass axes of P  and P will be
2 3 

(p/2–q ). Hence the intensity of light emerging from P  will be
3

2 2  π 
I = I0cos θ cos


– θ

2 

  = I  cos2
q  sin2

q =(I /4) sin22q
0 0

Therefore, the transmitted intensity will be maximum when q = p/4.

271

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 10.2



Physics

SUMMARY

1. Huygens’ principle tells us that each point on a wavefront is a source
of secondary waves, which add up to give the wavefront at a later time.

2. Huygens’ construction tells us that the new wavefront is the forward
envelope of the secondary waves. When the speed of light is
independent of direction, the secondary waves are spherical. The rays
are then perpendicular to both the wavefronts and the time of travel
is the same measured along any ray. This principle leads to the well
known laws of reflection and refraction.

3. The principle of superposition of waves applies whenever two or more
sources of light illuminate the same point. When we consider the
intensity of light due to these sources at the given point, there is an
interference term in addition to the sum of the individual intensities.
But this term is important only if it has a non-zero average, which
occurs only if the sources have the same frequency and a stable phase
difference.

4. Young’s double slit of separation d gives equally spaced interference
fringes.

5. A single slit of width a gives a diffraction pattern with a central

maximum. The intensity falls to zero at angles of ± λ 2λ
,± ,  etc.,

a a
with successively weaker secondary maxima in between.

6. Natural light, e.g., from the sun is unpolarised. This means the electric
vector takes all possible directions in the transverse plane, rapidly
and randomly, during a measurement. A polaroid transmits only one
component (parallel to a special axis). The resulting light is called
linearly polarised or plane polarised. When this kind of light is viewed
through a second polaroid  whose axis turns through 2p, two maxima
and minima of intensity are seen.

POINTS TO PONDER

1. Waves from a point source spread out in all directions, while light was
seen to travel along  narrow  rays. It required the insight and experiment
of Huygens, Young and Fresnel to understand how a wave theory could
explain all aspects of the behaviour of light.

2. The crucial new feature of waves is interference of amplitudes from different
sources which can be both constructive and destructive, as shown in
Young’s experiment.

3. Diffraction phenomena define the limits of ray optics. The limit of the
ability of microscopes and telescopes to distinguish very close objects is
set by the wavelength of light.

4. Most interference and diffraction effects exist even for longitudinal waves
like sound in air. But polarisation phenomena are special to transverse
waves like light waves.

272

Reprint 2025-26



Wave Optics

EXERCISES

10.1 Monochromatic light of wavelength 589 nm is incident from air on a
water surface. What are the wavelength, frequency and speed of
(a) reflected, and (b) refracted light?  Refractive index of water is
1.33.

10.2 What is the shape of the wavefront in each of the following cases:

(a) Light diverging from a point source.

(b) Light emerging out of a convex lens when a point source is placed
at its focus.

(c) The portion of the wavefront of light from a distant star intercepted
by the Earth.

10.3 (a) The refractive index of glass is 1.5. What is the speed of light in
glass? (Speed of light in vacuum is 3.0 × 108 m s–1)

(b) Is the speed of light in glass independent of the colour of light?  If
not, which of  the two colours red and violet travels slower in a
glass prism?

10.4 In a Young’s double-slit experiment, the slits are separated by
0.28 mm and the screen is placed 1.4 m away. The distance between
the central bright fringe and the fourth bright fringe is measured
to be 1.2 cm. Determine the wavelength of light used in the
experiment.

10.5 In Young’s double-slit experiment using monochromatic light of
wavelength l, the intensity of light at a point on the screen where
path difference is l, is K units. What is the intensity of light at a
point where path difference is l/3?

10.6 A beam of light consisting of two wavelengths, 650 nm and 520 nm,
is used to obtain interference fringes in a Young’s double-slit
experiment.

(a) Find the distance of the third bright fringe on the screen from
the central maximum for wavelength 650 nm.

(b) What is the least distance from the central maximum where the
bright fringes due to both the wavelengths coincide?

273

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
##11##
Chapter Eleven

DUAL NATURE OF
RADIATION AND
MATTER

11.1  INTRODUCTION

The Maxwell’s equations of electromagnetism and Hertz experiments on
the generation and detection of electromagnetic waves in 1887 strongly
established the wave nature of light. Towards the same period at the end
of 19th century, experimental investigations on conduction of electricity
(electric discharge) through gases at low pressure in a discharge tube led
to many historic discoveries. The discovery of X-rays by Roentgen in 1895,
and of electron by J. J. Thomson in 1897, were important milestones in
the understanding of atomic structure. It was found that at sufficiently
low pressure of about 0.001 mm of mercury column, a discharge took
place between the two electrodes on applying the electric field to the gas
in the discharge tube. A fluorescent glow appeared on the glass opposite
to cathode. The colour of glow of the glass depended on the type of glass,
it  being  yellowish-green for soda glass. The cause of this fluorescence
was attributed to the radiation which appeared to be coming from the
cathode. These cathode rays were discovered, in 1870, by William
Crookes who later, in 1879, suggested that these rays consisted of streams
of fast moving negatively charged particles. The British physicist
J. J. Thomson (1856-1940) confirmed this hypothesis. By applying
mutually perpendicular electric and magnetic fields across the discharge

274 tube, J. J. Thomson was the first to determine experimentally the speed

Reprint 2025-26



Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter

and the specific charge [charge to mass ratio (e/m )] of the cathode ray
particles. They were found to travel with speeds ranging from about 0.1
to 0.2 times the speed of light (3 ×108 m/s). The presently accepted value
of e/m is 1.76 × 1011 C/kg. Further, the value of e/m was found to be
independent of the nature of the material/metal used as the cathode
(emitter), or the gas introduced in the discharge tube. This observation
suggested the universality of the cathode ray particles.

Around the same time, in 1887, it was found that certain metals, when
irradiated by ultraviolet light, emitted negatively charged particles having
small speeds. Also, certain metals when heated to a high temperature were
found to emit negatively charged particles. The value of e/m of these particles
was found to be the same as that for cathode ray particles. These
observations thus established that all these particles, although produced
under different conditions, were identical in nature. J. J. Thomson, in 1897,
named these particles as electrons, and suggested that they were
fundamental, universal  constituents of matter. For his epoch-making
discovery of electron, through his theoretical and experimental
investigations on conduction of electricity by gasses, he was awarded the
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1906. In 1913, the American physicist R. A.
Millikan (1868-1953) performed the pioneering oil-drop experiment for
the precise measurement of the charge on an electron. He found that  the
charge on an oil-droplet was always an integral multiple of an elementary
charge, 1.602 × 10–19 C. Millikan’s experiment established that electric
charge is quantised. From the values of charge (e ) and specific charge
(e/m ), the mass (m) of the electron could be determined.

11.2  ELECTRON EMISSION

We know that metals have free electrons (negatively charged particles) that
are responsible for their conductivity. However, the free electrons cannot
normally escape out of the metal surface. If an electron attempts to come
out of the metal, the metal surface acquires a positive charge  and pulls the
electron back to  the metal. The free electron is thus held inside the metal
surface by the attractive forces of the ions. Consequently, the electron can
come out of the metal surface only if it has got sufficient energy to overcome
the attractive pull. A certain minimum amount of energy is required to be
given  to an electron to pull it out from the surface of the metal. This
minimum energy required by an electron to escape from the metal surface
is called the work function of the metal. It is generally denoted by f0 and
measured in eV (electron volt). One electron volt is the energy gained by an
electron when it has been accelerated by  a  potential difference  of 1 volt, so
that  1 eV = 1.602 ×10–19 J.

This unit of energy is commonly used in atomic and nuclear physics.
The work function (f0)  depends on the properties of the metal and the
nature of its surface.

The minimum energy required for the electron emission from the metal
surface can be supplied to the free electrons by any one of the following
physical processes:
(i) Thermionic emission: By suitably heating, sufficient thermal energy

can be imparted to the free electrons to enable them to come out of the
metal. 275

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
(ii) Field emission : By applying a very strong electric field (of the order of

108 V m–1) to a metal, electrons can be pulled out of the metal, as in a
spark plug.

(iii) Photoelectric emission : When light of suitable frequency illuminates
a metal surface, electrons are emitted from the metal surface. These
photo(light)-generated electrons are called photoelectrons.

11.3  PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT

11.3.1  Hertz’s observations
The phenomenon of photoelectric emission was discovered in 1887 by
Heinrich Hertz (1857-1894), during his electromagnetic wave experiments.
In his experimental investigation on the production of electromagnetic
waves by means of a spark discharge, Hertz observed that high voltage
sparks across the detector loop were enhanced when the emitter plate
was illuminated by ultraviolet light from an arc lamp.

Light shining on the metal surface somehow facilitated the escape of
free, charged particles which we now know as electrons. When light falls
on a metal surface, some electrons near the surface absorb enough energy
from the incident radiation to overcome the attraction of the positive ions
in the material of the surface. After gaining sufficient energy from the
incident light, the electrons escape from the surface of the metal into the
surrounding space.

11.3.2  Hallwachs’ and Lenard’s observations
Wilhelm Hallwachs and Philipp Lenard investigated the phenomenon of
photoelectric emission in detail during 1886-1902.

Lenard (1862-1947) observed that when ultraviolet radiations were
allowed to fall on the emitter plate of an evacuated glass tube enclosing
two electrodes (metal plates), current flows in the circuit (Fig. 11.1). As
soon as the ultraviolet radiations were stopped, the current flow also
stopped. These observations indicate that when ultraviolet radiations fall
on the emitter plate C, electrons are ejected from it which are attracted
towards the positive, collector plate A by the electric field. The electrons
flow through the evacuated glass tube, resulting in the current flow. Thus,
light falling on the surface of the emitter causes current in the external
circuit. Hallwachs and Lenard studied how this photo current varied with
collector plate potential, and with frequency and intensity of incident light.

Hallwachs, in 1888, undertook the study further and connected a
negatively charged zinc plate to an electroscope. He observed that the
zinc plate lost its charge when it was illuminated by ultraviolet light.
Further, the uncharged zinc plate became positively charged when it was
irradiated by ultraviolet light. Positive charge on a  positively charged
zinc plate was found to be further enhanced when it was illuminated by
ultraviolet light. From these observations he concluded that negatively
charged particles were emitted from the zinc plate under the action of
ultraviolet light.

After the discovery of the electron in 1897, it became evident that the

276 incident light causes electrons to be emitted from the emitter plate. Due

Reprint 2025-26



Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter

to negative charge, the emitted electrons are pushed towards the collector
plate by the electric field. Hallwachs and  Lenard also observed that when
ultraviolet light fell on the emitter plate, no electrons were emitted at all
when the frequency of the incident light was smaller than a certain
minimum value, called the threshold frequency. This minimum frequency
depends on the nature of the material of the emitter plate.

It was found that certain metals like zinc, cadmium, magnesium, etc.,
responded only to ultraviolet light, having short wavelength, to cause
electron emission from the surface. However, some alkali metals such as
lithium, sodium, potassium, caesium and rubidium were sensitive
even to visible light. All these photosensitive substances emit electrons
when they are illuminated by light. After the discovery of electrons, these
electrons were termed as photoelectrons. The phenomenon is called
photoelectric effect.

11.4 EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF PHOTOELECTRIC

EFFECT

Figure 11.1 depicts a  schematic view of the arrangement used for the
experimental study of the photoelectric effect. It consists of an evacuated
glass/quartz tube having a thin photosensitive plate C and another metal
plate A. Monochromatic light from the source S of sufficiently short
wavelength passes through the window W and falls on the photosensitive
plate C  (emitter). A transparent quartz window is sealed on to the glass
tube, which permits ultraviolet radiation to pass through it and irradiate
the photosensitive plate C. The electrons are emitted by the plate C and
are collected by the plate A (collector), by the electric field created by the
battery. The battery maintains the potential difference between the plates
C and A, that can be varied. The polarity of the plates C and A can be
reversed by a commutator. Thus, the plate A can be maintained at a desired
positive or negative potential with respect to emitter C.
When the collector plate A is positive with respect to the
emitter plate C, the electrons are attracted to it. The
emission of electrons causes flow of electric current in
the circuit. The potential difference between the emitter
and collector plates is measured by a voltmeter (V)
whereas the resulting photo current flowing in the circuit
is measured by a microammeter (mA). The photoelectric
current can be increased or decreased by varying the
potential of collector plate A with respect to the emitter
plate C. The intensity and frequency of the incident light
can be varied, as can the potential difference V between
the emitter C and the collector A.

We can use the experimental arrangement of Fig.
11.1 to study the variation of photocurrent with (a)
intensity of radiation, (b) frequency of incident radiation,

FIGURE 11.1 Experimental
(c) the potential difference between the plates A and C,

arrangement for  study of
and (d) the nature of the material of plate C. Light of photoelectric effect.
different frequencies can be used by putting appropriate
coloured filter or coloured glass in the path of light falling 277

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
on the emitter C. The intensity of light is varied by changing
the distance of the light source from the emitter.

11.4.1  Effect of intensity of light on photocurrent
The collector A is maintained at a positive potential with
respect to emitter C so that electrons ejected from C are
attracted towards collector A. Keeping the frequency of the
incident radiation and the potential fixed, the intensity of
light is varied and the resulting photoelectric current is
measured each time. It is found that the photocurrent
increases linearly with intensity of incident light as shown
graphically in Fig. 11.2. The photocurrent is directly
proportional to the number of photoelectrons emitted per

FIGURE 11.2 Variation of
Photoelectric current with second. This implies that the number of photoelectrons

intensity of light. emitted per second is directly proportional to the intensity
of incident radiation.

11.4.2  Effect of potential on photoelectric current
We first keep the plate A at some positive potential with respect to the
plate C and illuminate the plate C with light of fixed frequency n  and fixed
intensity I1. We next vary the positive potential of plate A gradually and
measure the resulting photocurrent each time. It is found that the
photoelectric current increases with increase in positive (accelerating)
potential. At some stage, for a certain positive potential of plate A, all the
emitted electrons are  collected by the plate A and the photoelectric current
becomes maximum or  saturates. If we increase the accelerating potential
of plate A further, the photocurrent does not increase. This maximum
value of the photoelectric current is called  saturation current. Saturation
current corresponds to the case when all the photoelectrons emitted by
the emitter plate C reach the collector plate A.

We now apply a negative (retarding)
potential to the plate A with respect to the
plate C and make it increasingly negative
gradually. When the polarity is reversed,
the electrons are repelled and only the
sufficiently energetic electrons are able to
reach the collector A. The photocurrent
is found to decrease rapidly until it drops
to zero at a certain sharply defined,
critical value of the negative potential V0
on the plate A. For a particular frequency
of incident radiation, the minimum
negative (retarding) potential V0 given to
the plate A for which the photocurrent
stops or becomes zero is called the cut-
off or stopping potential.

The interpretation of the observation
FIGURE 11.3 Variation of  photocurrent with in terms of photoelectrons is

collector plate potential for different straightforward. All the photoelectrons
278 intensity of incident radiation. emitted from the metal do not have the

Reprint 2025-26



Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter

same energy. Photoelectric current is zero when the stopping potential is
sufficient to repel even the most energetic photoelectrons, with the
maximum kinetic energy (Kmax), so that

Kmax = e V0 (11.1)

We can now repeat this experiment with incident radiation of the same
frequency but of higher intensity I2 and I3 (I3 > I2 > I1). We note that the
saturation currents are now found to be at higher values. This shows
that more electrons are being emitted per second, proportional to the
intensity of incident radiation. But the stopping potential remains the
same as that for the incident radiation of intensity I1, as shown graphically
in Fig. 11.3. Thus, for a given frequency of the incident radiation, the
stopping potential is independent of its intensity. In other words, the
maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons depends on the light source
and the emitter plate material, but is independent of intensity of incident
radiation.

11.4.3 Effect of frequency of incident radiation on
stopping potential

We now study the relation between the frequency
n of the incident radiation and the stopping
potential V0. We suitably adjust the same
intensity of light radiation at various frequencies
and study the variation of photocurrent with
collector plate potential. The resulting variation
is shown in Fig. 11.4. We obtain different values
of stopping potential but the same value of the
saturation current for incident radiation of
different frequencies. The energy of the emitted
electrons depends on the frequency of the
incident radiations. The stopping potential is FIGURE 11.4 Variation of photoelectric current
more negative for higher frequencies of incident with collector plate potential for different

radiation. Note from Fig. 11.4  that the stopping frequencies of incident radiation.

potentials are in the order V03 > V02 > V01 if the
frequencies are in the order n3 > n2 > n1 . This
implies that greater the frequency of incident
light, greater is the maximum kinetic energy of
the photoelectrons. Consequently, we need
greater retarding potential to stop them
completely. If we plot a graph between the
frequency of incident radiation and the
corresponding stopping potential for different
metals we get a straight line, as shown in Fig. 11.5.

The graph shows that
(i) the stopping potential V0 varies linearly with

the frequency of incident radiation for a given
photosensitive material. FIGURE 11.5 Variation of stopping potential V

0

(ii) there exists a certain minimum cut-off with frequency n of incident radiation for a

frequency n0 for which the stopping potential given photosensitive material.
279

is zero.

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
These observations have two implications:
(i) The maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons varies linearly

with the frequency of incident radiation, but is independent of its
intensity.

(ii) For a frequency n of incident radiation, lower than the cut-off
frequency n0, no photoelectric emission is possible even if the
intensity is large.
This minimum, cut-off frequency n0, is called the threshold frequency.

It is different for different metals.
Different photosensitive materials respond differently to light. Selenium

is more sensitive than zinc or copper. The same photosensitive substance
gives different response to light of different wavelengths. For example,
ultraviolet light gives rise to  photoelectric effect in copper  while green or
red light does not.

Note that in all the above experiments, it is found that, if frequency of
the incident radiation exceeds the threshold frequency, the photoelectric
emission starts instantaneously without any apparent time lag, even if
the incident radiation is very dim. It is now known that emission starts in
a time of the order of 10– 9 s or less.

We now summarise the experimental features and observations
described in this section.
(i) For a given photosensitive material and frequency of incident radiation

(above the threshold frequency), the photoelectric current is directly
proportional to the intensity of incident light (Fig. 11.2).

(ii) For a given photosensitive material and frequency of incident radiation,
saturation current is found to be proportional to the intensity of
incident radiation whereas the stopping potential is independent of
its intensity (Fig. 11.3).

(iii) For a given photosensitive material, there exists a certain minimum
cut-off frequency of the incident radiation, called the threshold
frequency, below which no emission of photoelectrons takes place,
no matter how intense the incident light is. Above the threshold
frequency, the stopping potential or equivalently the maximum kinetic
energy of the emitted photoelectrons increases linearly with the
frequency of the incident radiation, but is independent of its intensity
(Fig. 11.5).

(iv) The photoelectric emission is an instantaneous process without any
apparent time lag (~10– 9s or less), even when the incident radiation is
made exceedingly dim.

11.5 PHOTOELECTRIC EFFECT AND WAVE THEORY
OF LIGHT

The wave nature of light was well established by the end of the nineteenth
century. The phenomena of interference, diffraction and polarisation were
explained in a natural and satisfactory way by the wave picture of light.
According to this picture, light is an electromagnetic wave consisting  of
electric and magnetic fields with continuous distribution of energy over

280 the region of space over which the wave is extended. Let us now see if this

Reprint 2025-26



Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter

wave picture of light can explain the observations on photoelectric
emission given in the previous section.

According to the wave picture of light, the free electrons at the surface
of the metal (over which the beam of radiation falls) absorb the radiant
energy continuously. The greater the intensity of radiation, the greater are
the amplitude of electric and magnetic fields. Consequently, the greater
the intensity, the greater should be the energy absorbed by each electron.
In this picture, the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons on the
surface is then expected to increase with increase in intensity. Also, no
matter what the frequency of radiation is, a sufficiently intense beam of
radiation (over sufficient time) should be able to impart enough energy to
the electrons, so that they exceed the minimum energy needed to escape
from the metal surface . A threshold frequency, therefore, should not exist.
These expectations of the wave theory directly contradict observations (i),
(ii) and (iii) given at the end of sub-section 11.4.3.

Further, we should note that in the wave picture, the absorption of
energy by electron takes place continuously over the entire
wavefront of the radiation. Since a large number of electrons absorb energy,
the energy absorbed per electron per unit time turns out to be small.
Explicit calculations estimate that it can take hours or more for a single
electron to pick up sufficient energy to overcome the work function and
come out of the metal. This conclusion is again in striking contrast to
observation (iv) that the photoelectric emission is instantaneous. In short,
the wave picture is unable to explain the most basic features of
photoelectric  emission.

11.6 EINSTEIN’S PHOTOELECTRIC EQUATION: ENERGY

QUANTUM OF RADIATION

In 1905, Albert Einstein (1879-1955) proposed a radically new picture
of electromagnetic radiation to explain photoelectric effect. In this picture,
photoelectric emission does not take place by continuous absorption of
energy from radiation. Radiation energy is built up of discrete units – the
so called quanta of energy of radiation. Each quantum of radiant energy
has energy hn, where h is Planck’s constant and n the frequency of light.
In photoelectric effect, an electron absorbs a quantum of energy (hn ) of
radiation. If this quantum of energy absorbed exceeds the minimum
energy needed for the electron to escape from the metal surface (work
function f0), the electron is emitted with maximum kinetic energy

Kmax = hn – f0 (11.2)

More tightly bound electrons will emerge with kinetic energies less
than the maximum value. Note that the intensity of light of a given
frequency is determined by the number of photons incident per second.
Increasing the intensity will increase the number of emitted electrons per
second. However, the maximum kinetic energy of the emitted
photoelectrons is determined by the energy of each photon.

Equation (11.2) is known as Einstein’s photoelectric equation. We
now see how this equation accounts in a simple and elegant manner all
the observations on photoelectric effect given at the end of  sub-section 281
11.4.3.

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
· According to Eq. (11.2), Kmax depends linearly on n,

and is independent of intensity of radiation, in
agreement with observation. This has happened
because in Einstein’s picture, photoelectric effect arises
from the absorption of a single quantum of radiation
by a single electron. The intensity of radiation (that is
proportional to the number of energy quanta per unit
area per unit time) is irrelevant to this basic process.

· Since Kmax must be non-negative, Eq. (11.2 ) implies
that photoelectric emission is possible only if
h n > f0
or n > n0 , where

φ
Albert Einstein (1879 – 0

n0 = (11.3)
1955) Einstein, one of the h
greatest physicists of all Equation (11.3) shows that the greater the work
time, was born in Ulm, function f0, the higher the minimum or threshold
Germany. In 1905, he

frequency n0 needed to emit photoelectrons. Thus,
published three path-
breaking papers.  In the there exists a threshold frequency n0 (= f0/h) for the
first paper, he introduced metal surface, below which no photoelectric  emission
the notion of light quanta is possible, no matter how intense the incident
(now called photons) and radiation may be or how long it falls on the surface.
used it to explain the
features of photoelectric · In this picture, intensity of radiation as noted above,
effect.  In the second paper, is proportional to the number of energy quanta per
he developed a theory of unit area per unit time. The greater the number of
Brownian motion, energy quanta available, the greater is the number of
confirmed experimentally a electrons absorbing the energy quanta  and greater,
few years later and provided
a convincing evidence of therefore, is the number of electrons coming out of
the atomic picture of matter. the metal (for n > n0). This explains why, for n > n0 ,
The third paper gave birth photoelectric current is proportional to intensity.
to the special theory of · In Einstein’s picture, the basic elementary process
relativity. In 1916, he involved in photoelectric effect is the absorption of a
published the general
theory of relativity. Some of light quantum by an electron. This process is
Einstein’s most significant instantaneous. Thus, whatever may be the intensity
later contributions are: the i.e., the number of quanta of radiation per unit area
notion of stimulated per unit time, photoelectric emission is instantaneous.
emission introduced in an Low intensity does not mean delay in emission, since
alternative derivation of
Planck’s blackbody the basic elementary process is the same. Intensity
radiation law, static model only determines how many electrons are able to
of the universe which participate in the elementary process (absorption of a
started modern cosmology, light quantum by a single electron) and, therefore, the
quantum statistics of a gas photoelectric current.
of massive bosons, and a
critical analysis of the Using Eq. (11.1), the photoelectric equation, Eq. (11.2),
foundations of quantum can be written as
mechanics. In 1921, he was e V0 = h n  – f 0;  for ν ≥ ν
awarded the Nobel Prize in 0

physics for his contribution
to theoretical physics and  h φ

or  
 V0 =    ν − 0 (11.4)

the photoelectric effect. e  e
This is an important result. It predicts that the V0

282 versus n  curve is a straight line with slope = (h/e),

Reprint 2025-26

ALBERT EINSTEIN (1879 – 1955)



Dual Nature of Radiation

and Matter

independent of the nature of the material. During 1906-1916, Millikan
performed a series of experiments on photoelectric effect, aimed at disproving
Einstein’s photoelectric equation. He measured the slope of the straight
line obtained for sodium, similar to that shown in Fig. 11.5. Using the
known value of e, he determined the value of Planck’s constant h. This
value was close to the value of Planck’s contant (= 6.626 × 10–34J s)
determined in an entirely different context. In this way, in 1916, Millikan
proved the validity of Einstein’s photoelectric equation, instead of
disproving it.

The successful explanation of photoelectric effect using the hypothesis
of light quanta and the experimental determination of values of h and φ0,
in agreement with values obtained from other experiments, led to the
acceptance of Einstein’s picture of photoelectric effect. Millikan verified
photoelectric equation with great precision, for a number of alkali metals
over a wide range of radiation frequencies.

11.7  PARTICLE NATURE OF LIGHT: THE PHOTON

Photoelectric effect thus gave evidence to the strange fact that light in
interaction with matter behaved as if it was made of quanta or packets of
energy, each of energy h ν.

Is the light quantum of energy to be associated with a particle? Einstein
arrived at the important result, that the light quantum can also be
associated with momentum (h ν/c ). A definite value of energy as well as
momentum is a strong sign that the light quantum can be associated
with a particle. This particle was later named photon. The particle-like
behaviour of light was further confirmed, in 1924, by the experiment of
A.H. Compton (1892-1962) on scattering of X-rays from electrons. In
1921, Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for his contribution
to theoretical physics and the photoelectric effect. In 1923, Millikan was
awarded the Nobel Prize in physics for his work on the elementary
charge of electricity and on the photoelectric effect.

We can summarise the photon picture of electromagnetic  radiation
as follows:
(i) In interaction of radiation with matter, radiation behaves as if it is

made up of particles called photons.
(ii) Each photon has energy E (=hν) and momentum p (= h ν/c), and

speed c, the speed of light.
(iii) All photons of light of a particular frequency  ν, or wavelength λ, have

the same energy E (=hν = hc/λ) and momentum  p (= hν/c= h/λ),
whatever the intensity of radiation may be. By increasing the intensity
of light of given wavelength, there is only an increase in the number of
photons per second crossing a given area, with each photon having
the same energy. Thus, photon energy is independent of intensity of
radiation.

(iv) Photons are electrically neutral and are not deflected by electric and
magnetic fields.

(v) In a photon-particle collision (such as photon-electron collision), the
total energy and total momentum are conserved. However, the number
of photons may not be conserved in a collision. The photon may be
absorbed or a new photon may be created. 283

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

Example 11.1 Monochromatic light of frequency 6.0 ´1014 Hz is
produced by a laser. The power emitted is 2.0 ´10–3 W. (a) What is the
energy of a photon in the light beam? (b) How many photons per second,
on an average, are emitted by the source?

Solution
(a) Each photon has an energy

E = h n = ( 6.63 ´10–34 J s) (6.0 ´1014 Hz)
   = 3.98 ´ 10–19 J

(b) If N is the number of photons emitted by the source per second,
the power P transmitted in the beam equals N times the energy
per photon E, so that P = N E. Then

P 2.0×10−3 W
N = =

E 3.98×10−19 J

         = 5.0 ´1015 photons per second.

Example 11.2 The work function of caesium is 2.14 eV. Find (a) the
threshold frequency for caesium, and (b) the wavelength of the incident
light if the photocurrent is brought to zero by a stopping potential of
0.60 V.

Solution
(a) For the cut-off or threshold frequency, the energy h n0 of  the incident

radiation must be equal to work function f0, so that

n0 =
φ

  0 = 2.14eV
h 6.63 ×10−34 Js

2.14 ×1.6 ×10−19 J
5.16 1014

    = − = × Hz
6.63 ×10 34 J s

Thus, for frequencies less than this threshold frequency, no
photoelectrons are ejected.

(b) Photocurrent reduces to zero, when maximum kinetic energy of
the emitted photoelectrons equals the potential energy e V0 by the
retarding potential V0. Einstein’s Photoelectric equation is

hc
eV0 = hn – f0  =  – f

λ 0

or, l = hc/(eV0 + f0 )

(6.63 ×10−34 Js) × (3 ×108m/s)
=

(0.60eV + 2.14eV)

19.89 ×10−26 Jm
=

(2.74eV)

19.89 10−26

λ = × J m = 454 nm
2.74 ×1.6 ×10−19 J

11.8  WAVE NATURE OF MATTER

The dual (wave-particle) nature of light (electromagnetic radiation, in
general) comes out clearly from what we have learnt in this and the
preceding chapters. The wave nature of light shows up in the phenomena

284
of interference, diffraction and polarisation. On the other hand, in

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 11.2  EXAMPLE 11.1



Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter

photoelectric effect and Compton effect which involve
energy and momentum transfer, radiation behaves as if it
is made up of a bunch of particles – the photons. Whether
a particle or wave description is best suited for
understanding an experiment depends on the nature of
the experiment. For example, in the familiar  phenomenon
of seeing an object by our eye, both descriptions are
important. The gathering and focussing mechanism of
light by the eye-lens is well described in the wave picture.
But its absorption by the rods and cones (of the retina)
requires the photon picture of light.

A natural question arises: If radiation has a dual (wave-
particle) nature, might not the particles of nature (the
electrons, protons, etc.) also exhibit wave-like character?
In 1924, the French physicist Louis Victor de Broglie Louis Victor de Broglie

(pronounced as de Broy) (1892-1987) put forward the (1892 – 1987) French
physicist who put forth

bold hypothesis that moving particles of matter should
revolutionary idea of wave

display wave-like properties under suitable conditions.
nature of matter.  This idea

He reasoned that nature was symmetrical and that the was developed by Erwin
two basic physical entities – matter and energy, must have Schródinger into a full-
symmetrical character. If radiation shows dual aspects, fledged theory of quantum
so should matter. De Broglie proposed that the wave mechanics commonly
length l  associated with a particle of momentum p is known as wave mechanics.

given as In 1929, he was awarded the
Nobel Prize in Physics for his

h h
l  = = (11.5) discovery of the wave nature

p m v of electrons.

where m  is the mass of the particle and v its speed.
Equation (11.5) is known as the de Broglie relation and
the wavelength l of the matter wave is called de Broglie wavelength. The
dual aspect of matter is evident in the de Broglie relation. On the left hand
side of Eq. (11.5), l  is the attribute of a wave while on the right hand side
the momentum p is a typical attribute of a particle. Planck’s constant  h
relates the two attributes.

Equation (11.5) for a material particle is basically a hypothesis whose
validity can be tested only by experiment. However, it is interesting to see
that it is satisfied also by a photon. For a photon, as we have seen,

p = hn /c (11.6)

Therefore,

h c
= = λ

ν (11.7)
p

That is, the de Broglie wavelength of a photon given by Eq. (11.5) equals
the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation of which the photon is a
quantum of energy and momentum.

Clearly, from Eq. (11.5 ), l  is smaller for a heavier particle ( large m ) or
more energetic particle (large v). For example, the de Broglie wavelength
of a ball of mass 0.12 kg moving with a speed of 20 m s–1 is easily
calculated:

285

Reprint 2025-26

LOUIS VICTOR DE BROGLIE (1892 – 1987)



Physics
p = m v = 0.12 kg × 20 m s–1 = 2.40 kg m s–1

34
h 6.63 ×10− J s

l =  =  =
2.40 kg  s−1  2.76 × 10–34 m

p m

This wavelength is so small that it is beyond any measurement. This
is the reason why macroscopic objects in our daily life do not show wave-
like properties. On the other hand, in the sub-atomic domain, the wave
character of particles is significant and measurable.

Example 11.3 What is the de Broglie wavelength associated with (a) an
electron moving with a speed of 5.4´106 m/s, and (b) a ball of mass 150 g
travelling at 30.0 m/s?

Solution
(a) For the electron:

Mass m = 9.11´10–31 kg, speed v = 5.4´106 m/s. Then, momentum
p  = m v = 9.11´10–31 (kg) ´ 5.4 ´ 106 (m/s)
p  = 4.92 ´ 10–24 kg m/s
de Broglie wavelength, l = h/p

6 –34
.63 ×10 Js

   = 
4 92 10–24
. × kg  m/s

 l = 0.135 nm

(b) For the ball:
Mass m ’ = 0.150 kg, speed v ’ = 30.0 m/s.
Then momentum p ’ = m’ v ’ = 0.150 (kg) ´ 30.0 (m/s)
p ’= 4.50 kg m/s
de Broglie wavelength l’ = h/p’.

6 63×10–34
. Js

=
4.50 × kg m/s

l ’= 1.47 ´10–34 m
The de Broglie wavelength of electron is comparable with X-ray
wavelengths. However, for the ball it is about 10–19 times the size of
the proton, quite beyond experimental measurement.

SUMMARY

1. The minimum energy needed by an electron to come out from a  metal
surface is called the work function of the metal. Energy (greater than
the work function (f ) required for electron emission from the metal

o  

surface can be supplied by suitably heating or applying strong electric
field or irradiating it by light of suitable frequency.

2. Photoelectric effect is the phenomenon of emission of electrons by metals
when illuminated by light of suitable frequency. Certain metals respond
to ultraviolet light while others are sensitive even to the visible light.
Photoelectric effect involves conversion of light energy into electrical
energy. It follows the law of conservation of energy. The photoelectric
emission is an instantaneous process and possesses certain special
features.

286

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 11.3



Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter

3. Photoelectric current depends on (i) the intensity of incident light, (ii)
the potential difference applied between the two electrodes, and (iii)
the nature of the emitter material.

4. The stopping potential (V ) depends on (i) the frequency of incident
o

light, and (ii) the nature of the emitter material. For a given frequency
of incident light, it is independent of its intensity. The stopping potential
is directly related to the maximum kinetic energy of electrons emitted:
e V  = (1/2) m v2  = K .

0 max max

5. Below a certain frequency (threshold frequency) n , characteristic of
0

the metal, no photoelectric emission takes place, no matter how large
the intensity may be.

6. The classical wave theory could not explain the main features of
photoelectric effect. Its picture of continuous absorption of energy
from radiation could not explain the independence of K  on

max

intensity, the existence of n  and the instantaneous nature of the
o

process. Einstein explained these features on the basis of photon
picture of light. According to this, light is composed of discrete
packets of energy called quanta or photons. Each photon carries an
energy E (= h n) and momentum p (= h/l), which depend on the
frequency (n ) of incident light and not on its intensity. Photoelectric
emission from the metal surface occurs due to absorption of a photon
by an electron.

7. Einstein’s photoelectric equation is in accordance with the energy
conservation law as applied to the photon absorption by an electron in
the metal. The maximum kinetic energy (1/2)m v2  is equal to

max

the photon energy (hn ) minus the work function f (= hn ) of the
0 0

target metal:

1
m v2  = V  e = hn – f = h (n – n )

2 max 0 0 0

This photoelectric equation explains all the features of the photoelectric
effect. Millikan’s first precise measurements confirmed the Einstein’s
photoelectric equation and obtained an accurate value of Planck’s
constant h . This led to the acceptance of particle or photon description
(nature) of electromagnetic radiation, introduced by Einstein.

8. Radiation has dual nature: wave and particle. The nature of experiment
determines whether a wave or particle description is best suited for
understanding the experimental result. Reasoning that radiation and
matter should be symmetrical in nature, Louis Victor de Broglie
attributed a wave-like character to matter (material particles). The waves
associated with the moving material particles are called matter waves
or de Broglie waves.

 9. The de Broglie wavelength (l) associated with a moving particle is
related to its momentum p as:  l = h/p. The dualism of matter is
inherent in the de Broglie relation which contains a wave concept
(l) and a particle concept (p). The de Broglie wavelength is
independent of the charge and nature of the material  particle. It is
significantly measurable (of the order of the atomic-planes spacing
in crystals) only in case of sub-atomic particles like electrons,
protons, etc. (due to smallness of their masses and hence, momenta).
However, it is indeed very small, quite beyond measurement, in case
of macroscopic objects, commonly  encountered in everyday life.

287

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

Physical Symbol Dimensions Unit Remarks
Quantity

Planck’s h [ML2 T –1] J s E = hn
constant

Stopping V [ML2 T –3A–1] V e V = K
0 0 max

potential

Work f [ML2 T –2] J; eV K = E –f
0 max 0

function

Threshold n [T –1] Hz n = f /h
0 0 0

frequency

de Broglie l [L] m = h/p
wavelength

POINTS TO PONDER

1. Free electrons in a metal are free in the sense that they move inside the
metal in a constant potential (This is only an approximation). They are
not free to move out of the metal. They need additional energy to get
out of the metal.

2. Free electrons in a metal do not all have the same energy. Like molecules
in a gas jar, the electrons have a certain energy distribution at a given
temperature. This distribution is different from the usual Maxwell’s
distribution that you have learnt in the study of kinetic theory of gases.
You will learn about it in later courses, but the difference has to do
with the fact that electrons obey Pauli’s exclusion principle.

3. Because of the energy distribution of free electrons in a metal, the energy
required by an electron to come out of the metal is different for different
electrons. Electrons with higher energy require less additional energy to
come out of the metal than those with lower energies. Work function is
the least energy required by an electron to come out of the metal.

4. Observations on photoelectric effect imply that in the event of matter-
light interaction, absorption of energy takes place in discrete units of hn.
This is not quite the same as saying that light consists of particles,
each of energy hn.

5. Observations on the stopping potential (its independence of intensity
and dependence on frequency) are the crucial discriminator between
the wave-picture and photon-picture of photoelectric effect.

λ h
6. The wavelength of a matter wave given by =   has physical

p
significance; its phase velocity  vp has no physical significance. However,
the group velocity of the matter wave is physically meaningful and
equals the velocity of the particle.

EXERCISES

11.1 Find the
(a) maximum frequency, and

288 (b) minimum wavelength of X-rays produced by 30 kV electrons.

Reprint 2025-26



Dual Nature of Radiation
and Matter

11.2 The work function of caesium metal is 2.14 eV. When light of
frequency 6 ×1014Hz is incident on the metal surface, photoemission
of electrons occurs. What is the

(a) maximum kinetic energy of the emitted electrons,

(b) Stopping potential, and

(c) maximum speed of the emitted photoelectrons?

11.3 The photoelectric cut-off voltage in a certain experiment is 1.5 V.
What is the maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons emitted?

11.4 Monochromatic light of wavelength 632.8 nm is produced by a
helium-neon laser. The power emitted is 9.42 mW.

(a) Find the energy and momentum of each photon in the light beam,

(b) How many photons per second, on the average, arrive at a target
irradiated by this beam? (Assume the beam to have uniform
cross-section which is less than the target area ), and

(c) How fast does a hydrogen atom have to travel in order to have
the same momentum as that of the photon?

11.5 In an experiment on photoelectric effect, the slope of the cut-off voltage
versus frequency of incident light is found to be 4.12 × 10–15 V s. Calculate
the value of Planck’s constant.

11.6 The threshold frequency for a certain metal is 3.3 × 1014 Hz. If light
of frequency 8.2 × 1014 Hz is incident on the metal, predict the cut-
off voltage for the photoelectric emission.

11.7 The work function for a certain metal is 4.2 eV. Will this metal give
hotoelectric emission for incident radiation of wavelength 330 nm?

11.8 Light of frequency 7.21 × 1014 Hz is incident on a metal surface.
Electrons with a maximum speed of 6.0 × 105 m/s are ejected from
the surface. What is the threshold frequency for photoemission of
electrons?

11.9 Light of wavelength 488 nm is produced by an argon laser which is
used in the photoelectric effect. When light from this spectral line is
incident on the emitter, the stopping (cut-of f) potential of
photoelectrons is 0.38 V. Find the work function of the material from
which the emitter is made.

11.10 What is the de Broglie wavelength of
(a) a bullet of mass 0.040 kg travelling at the speed of 1.0 km/s,
(b) a ball of mass 0.060 kg  moving at a speed of 1.0 m/s, and
(c) a dust particle of mass 1.0 × 10–9 kg drifting with a speed of 2.2

m/s ?

11.11 Show that the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation is equal to
the de Broglie wavelength of its quantum (photon).

289

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
##12##
Chapter Twelve

ATOMS

12.1  INTRODUCTION

By the nineteenth century, enough evidence had accumulated in favour of
atomic hypothesis of matter. In 1897, the experiments on electric discharge
through gases carried out by the English physicist J. J. Thomson (1856 –
1940) revealed that atoms of different elements contain negatively charged
constituents (electrons) that are identical for all atoms. However, atoms on a
whole are electrically neutral. Therefore, an atom must also contain some
positive charge to neutralise the negative charge of the electrons. But what
is the arrangement of the positive charge and the electrons inside the atom?
In other words, what is the structure of an atom?

The first model of atom was proposed by J. J. Thomson in 1898.
According to this model, the positive charge of the atom is uniformly
distributed throughout the volume of the atom and the negatively charged
electrons are embedded in it like seeds in a watermelon. This model was
picturesquely called plum pudding model of the atom. However
subsequent studies on atoms, as described in this chapter, showed that
the distribution of the electrons and positive charges are very different
from that proposed in this model.

We know that condensed matter (solids and liquids) and dense gases at
all temperatures emit electromagnetic radiation in which a continuous
distribution of several wavelengths is present, though with different

290 intensities. This radiation is considered to be due to oscillations of atoms

Reprint 2025-26



Atoms

and molecules, governed by the interaction of each atom or
molecule with its neighbours. In contrast, light emitted from
rarefied gases heated in a flame, or excited electrically in a
glow tube such as the familiar neon sign or mercury vapour
light has only certain discrete wavelengths. The spectrum
appears as a series of bright lines. In such gases, the
average spacing between atoms is large. Hence, the
radiation emitted can be considered due to individual atoms
rather than because of interactions between atoms or
molecules.

In the early nineteenth century it was also established
that each element is associated with a characteristic
spectrum of radiation, for example, hydrogen always gives
a set of lines with fixed relative position between the lines.

Ernst Rutherford (1871 –
This fact suggested an intimate relationship between the 1937)  New Zealand born,
internal structure of an atom and the spectrum of British physicist who did
radiation emitted by it. In 1885, Johann Jakob Balmer pioneering work on
(1825 – 1898) obtained a simple empirical formula which radioactive radiation. He
gave the wavelengths of a group of lines emitted by atomic discovered alpha-rays and
hydrogen. Since hydrogen is simplest of the elements beta-rays. Along with
known, we shall consider its spectrum in detail in this Federick Soddy, he created
chapter. the modern theory of

Ernst Rutherford (1871–1937), a former research radioactivity. He studied
student of J. J. Thomson, was engaged in experiments on the ‘emanation’ of thorium
α-particles emitted by some radioactive elements. In 1906, and discovered a new noble
he proposed a classic experiment of scattering of these gas, an isotope of radon,

α-particles by atoms to investigate the atomic structure. now known as thoron. By

This experiment was later performed around 1911 by Hans scattering alpha-rays from

Geiger (1882–1945) and Ernst Marsden (1889–1970, who the metal foils, he

was 20 year-old student and had not yet earned his discovered the atomic
nucleus and proposed the

bachelor’s degree). The details are discussed in Section
planetary model of the

12.2. The explanation of the results led to the birth of
atom. He also estimated the

Rutherford’s planetary model of atom (also called the
approximate size of the

nuclear model of the atom). According to this the entire
nucleus.

positive charge and most of the mass of the atom is
concentrated in a small volume called the nucleus with electrons revolving
around the nucleus just as planets revolve around the sun.

Rutherford’s nuclear model was a major step towards how we see
the atom today. However, it could not explain why atoms emit light of
only discrete wavelengths. How could an atom as simple as hydrogen,
consisting of a single electron and a single proton, emit a complex
spectrum of specific wavelengths? In the classical picture of an atom, the
electron revolves round the nucleus much like the way a planet revolves
round the sun. However, we shall see that there are some serious
difficulties in accepting such a model.

12.2 ALPHA-PARTICLE SCATTERING AND

RUTHERFORD’S NUCLEAR MODEL OF ATOM

At the suggestion of Ernst Rutherford, in 1911, H. Geiger and E. Marsden
performed some experiments. In one of their experiments, as shown in 291

Reprint 2025-26

ERNST RUTHERFORD (1871 – 1937)



Physics
Fig. 12.1, they directed a beam of
5.5 MeV a-particles emitted from a
214
83Bi  radioactive source at a thin metal

foil made of gold. Figure 12.2 shows a
schematic diagram of this experiment.
Alpha-particles emitted by a 214

83Bi
radioactive source were collimated into
a narrow beam by their passage
through lead bricks. The beam was
allowed to fall on a thin foil of gold of
thickness 2.1 × 10–7 m. The scattered
alpha-particles were observed through
a rotatable detector consisting of zinc
sulphide screen and a microscope. The
scattered alpha-particles on striking
the screen produced brief light flashes
or scintillations. These flashes may be
viewed through a microscope and the

FIGURE 12.1 Geiger-Marsden scattering experiment. distribution of the number of scattered
The entire apparatus is placed in a vacuum chamber particles may be studied as a function

(not shown in this figure).
of angle of scattering.

FIGURE 12.2 Schematic arrangement of the Geiger-Marsden experiment.

A typical graph of the total number of a-particles scattered at different
angles, in a given interval of time, is shown in Fig. 12.3. The dots in this
figure represent the data points and the solid curve is the theoretical
prediction based on the assumption that the target atom has a small,
dense, positively charged nucleus. Many of the a-particles pass through
the foil. It means that they do not suffer any collisions. Only about 0.14%
of the incident a-particles scatter by more than 1°; and about 1 in 8000
deflect by more than 90°. Rutherford argued that, to deflect the a-particle

292 backwards, it must experience a large repulsive force. This force could

Reprint 2025-26



Atoms

be provided if the greater part of the
mass of the atom and its positive charge
were concentrated tightly at its centre.
Then the incoming α-particle could get
very close to the positive charge without
penetrating it, and such a close
encounter would result in a large
deflection. This agreement supported
the hypothesis of the nuclear atom. This
is why Rutherford is credited with the
discovery of the nucleus.

In Rutherford’s nuclear model of
the atom, the entire positive charge and
most of the mass of the atom are
concentrated in the nucleus with the
electrons some distance away. The
electrons would be moving in orbits
about the nucleus just as the planets FIGURE 12.3 Experimental data points (shown by

dots) on scattering of α-particles by a thin foil at
do around the sun. Rutherford’s

different angles obtained by Geiger and Marsden
experiments suggested the size of using the setup shown in Figs. 12.1 and
the nucleus to be about 10–15 m to 12.2. Rutherford’s nuclear model predicts the solid
10–14 m. From kinetic theory, the size curve which is seen to be in good agreement with
of an atom was known to be 10–10 m, experiment.

about 10,000 to 100,000 times larger
than the size of the nucleus. Thus, the electrons would seem to be at a
distance from the nucleus of about 10,000 to 100,000 times the size of
the nucleus itself. Thus, most of an atom is empty space. With the atom
being largely empty space, it is easy to see why most α-particles go right
through a thin metal foil. However, when α-particle happens to come
near a nucleus, the intense electric field there scatters it through a large
angle. The atomic electrons, being so light, do not appreciably affect the
α-particles.

The scattering data shown in Fig. 12.3 can be analysed by employing
Rutherford’s nuclear model of the atom. As the gold foil is very thin, it
can be assumed that α-particles will suffer not more than one scattering
during their passage through it. Therefore, computation of the trajectory
of an alpha-particle scattered by a single nucleus is enough. Alpha-
particles are nuclei of helium atoms and, therefore, carry two units, 2e,
of positive charge and have the mass of the helium atom. The charge of
the gold nucleus is Ze, where Z is the atomic number of the atom; for
gold Z = 79. Since the nucleus of gold is about 50 times heavier than an
α-particle, it is reasonable to assume that it remains stationary
throughout the scattering process. Under these assumptions, the
trajectory of an alpha-particle can be computed employing Newton’s
second law of motion and the Coulomb’s law for electrostatic
force of repulsion between the alpha-particle and the positively
charged nucleus. 293

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
The magnitude of this force is

1 (2e )(Ze )
F =

2 (12. )
4πε 1

0 r
where r is the distance between the a-particle and the nucleus. The force
is directed along the line joining the a-particle and the nucleus. The
magnitude and direction of the force on an a-particle continuously
changes as it approaches the nucleus and recedes away from it.

12.2.1  Alpha-particle trajectory
The trajectory traced by an a-particle depends on the impact parameter,
b of collision. The impact parameter is the perpendicular distance of the
initial velocity vector of the a-particle from the centre of the nucleus (Fig.

12.4). A given beam of a-particles has a
distribution of impact parameters b, so that
the beam is scattered in various directions
with different probabilities (Fig. 12.4). (In
a beam, all particles have nearly same
kinetic energy.) It is seen that an a-particle
close to the nucleus (small impact
parameter) suffers large scattering. In case
of head-on collision, the impact parameter
is minimum and the a-particle rebounds
back (q  @ p). For a large impact parameter,
the a-particle goes nearly undeviated and
has a small deflection (q  @ 0).

FIGURE 12.4 Trajectory of a-particles in the The fact that only a small fraction of the
coulomb field of a target nucleus. The impact

number of incident particles rebound back
parameter, b and scattering angle q

indicates that the number of a-particles
are also depicted.

undergoing head on collision is small. This,
in turn, implies that the mass and positive charge of the atom is
concentrated in a small volume. Rutherford scattering therefore, is a
powerful way to determine an upper limit to the size of the nucleus.

Example 12.1 In the Rutherford’s nuclear model of the atom, the
nucleus (radius about 10–15 m) is analogous to the sun about which
the electron move in orbit (radius » 10–10 m) like the earth orbits
around the sun. If the dimensions of the solar system had the same
proportions as those of the atom, would the earth be closer to or
farther away from the sun than actually it is? The radius of earth’s
orbit is about 1.5 ´ 1011 m. The radius of sun is taken as 7 ´ 108 m.

Solution The ratio of the radius of electron’s orbit to the radius of
nucleus is (10–10 m)/(10–15 m) = 105, that is, the radius of the electron’s
orbit is 105 times larger than the radius of nucleus. If the radius of
the earth’s orbit around the sun were 105 times larger than the radius
of the sun, the radius of the earth’s orbit would be 105 ´ 7 ´ 108 m =
7 ´ 1013 m. This is more than 100 times greater than the actual
orbital radius of earth. Thus, the earth would be much farther away
from the sun.
It implies that an atom contains a much greater fraction of empty

294 space than our solar system does.

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 12.1



Atoms

Example 12.2 In a Geiger-Marsden experiment, what is the distance
of closest approach to the nucleus of a 7.7 MeV a-particle before it
comes momentarily to rest and reverses its direction?

Solution The key idea here is that throughout the scattering process,
the total mechanical energy of the system consisting of an a-particle
and a gold nucleus is conserved. The system’s initial mechanical
energy is E , before the particle and nucleus interact, and it is equal

i
to its mechanical energy E  when the a-particle momentarily stops.

f
The initial energy E  is just the kinetic energy K of the incoming

i  
a- particle. The final energy E  is just the electric potential energy U

f
of the system. The potential energy U can be calculated from
Eq. (12.1).
Let d be the centre-to-centre distance between the a-particle and
the gold nucleus when the a-particle is at its stopping point. Then
we can write the conservation of energy E  = E  as

i f

1 (2e )(Ze) 2Ze2

K = =
4πε0 d 4πε0d

Thus the distance of closest approach d is given by

2Ze2

d =
4πε0K

The maximum kinetic energy found in a-particles of natural origin is
7.7 MeV or 1.2 × 10–12 J. Since 1/4pe  = 9.0 × 109 N m2/C2. Therefore

0
with e = 1.6 × 10–19 C, we have,

9 2 2 –19 2

= (2)(9.0 ×10 Nm /C )(1.6 ×10 C ) Z
d

1.2 ×10−12 J
   = 3.84 × 10–16 Z m
The atomic number of foil material gold is Z = 79, so that

d (Au) = 3.0 × 10–14 m = 30 fm. (1 fm (i.e. fermi) = 10–15 m.)

The radius of gold nucleus is, therefore, less than 3.0 × 10–14 m. This
is not in very good agreement with the observed result as the actual
radius of gold nucleus is 6 fm. The cause of discrepancy is that the
distance of closest approach is considerably larger than the sum of
the radii of the gold nucleus and the a-particle. Thus, the a-particle
reverses its motion without ever actually touching the gold nucleus.

12.2.2  Electron orbits
The Rutherford nuclear model of the atom which involves classical
concepts, pictures the atom as an electrically neutral sphere consisting
of a very small, massive and positively charged nucleus at the centre
surrounded by the revolving electrons in their respective dynamically
stable orbits. The electrostatic force of attraction, F  between the revolving

e
electrons and the nucleus provides the requisite centripetal force  (F )  to

c
keep them in their orbits. Thus, for a  dynamically stable orbit in a
hydrogen atom

    F  = F
e c

1 e2 mv2

=
4πε 2 (12.2)

0 r r 295

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 12.2



Physics
Thus the relation between the orbit radius and the electron
velocity is

e2

r =
4πε 2 (12.3)

0mv

The kinetic energy (K ) and electrostatic potential energy (U ) of the electron
in hydrogen atom are

1 e2 e2

K = mv2 =  and U = −
2 8πε0r 4πε0r

(The negative sign in U signifies that the electrostatic force is in the –r
direction.) Thus the total energy E of the electron in a hydrogen atom is

e2 e2

E = K + U = −
8πε0r 4πε0r

e2

                 = −
8πε (12.4)

0r

The total energy of the electron is negative. This implies the fact that
the electron is bound to the nucleus. If E were positive, an electron will
not follow a closed orbit around the nucleus.

Example 12.3 It is found experimentally that 13.6 eV energy is
required to separate a hydrogen atom into a proton and an electron.
Compute the orbital radius and the velocity of the electron in a
hydrogen atom.

Solution Total energy of the electron in hydrogen atom is –13.6 eV =
–13.6 × 1.6 × 10–19 J = –2.2 ×10–18 J. Thus from Eq. (12.4), we have

e2

E = − = −2.2 ×10−18  J
8πε0r

This gives the orbital radius

e2 (9 ×109  N m2/C2 )(1.6 ×10−19C)2
 r = − = −

8πε E (2)(–2.2 ×10−18
0  J)

    = 5.3 × 10–11 m.
The velocity of the revolving electron can be computed from Eq. (12.3)
with m = 9.1 × 10–31 kg,

e
v = = 2.2 ×106  m/s.

4πε0mr

12.3  ATOMIC SPECTRA

As mentioned in Section 12.1, each element has a characteristic spectrum
of radiation, which it emits. When an atomic gas or vapour is excited at
low pressure, usually by passing an electric current through it, the emitted
radiation has a spectrum which contains certain specific wavelengths

296 only. A spectrum of this kind is termed as emission line spectrum and it

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 12.3



Atoms

consists of bright lines on a
dark background. The
spectrum emitted by atomic
hydrogen is shown in
Fig. 12.5. Study of emission
line spectra of a material can
therefore serve as a type of
“fingerprint” for identification
of the gas. When white light
passes through a gas and we
analyse the transmitted light
using a spectrometer we find
some dark lines in the FIGURE 12.5 Emission lines in the spectrum of hydrogen.
spectrum. These dark lines
correspond precisely to those wavelengths which were found in the
emission line spectrum of the gas. This is called the absorption spectrum
of the material of the gas.

12.4  BOHR MODEL OF THE HYDROGEN

   ATOM

The model of the atom proposed by Rutherford assumes
that the atom, consisting of a central nucleus and
revolving electron is stable much like sun-planet system
which the model imitates. However, there are some
fundamental differences between the two situations.
While the planetary system is held by gravitational
force, the nucleus-electron system being charged
objects, interact by Coulomb’s Law of force. We know
that an object which moves in a circle is being
constantly accelerated – the acceleration being
centripetal in nature. According to classical
electromagnetic theory, an accelerating charged particle
emits radiation in the form of electromagnetic waves.
The energy of an accelerating electron should therefore, Niels Henrik David Bohr
continuously decrease. The electron would spiral (1885 – 1962)  Danish
inward and eventually fall into the nucleus (Fig. 12.6). physicist who explained the
Thus, such an atom can not be stable. Further, spectrum of hydrogen atom

according to the classical electromagnetic theory, the based on quantum ideas.

frequency of the electromagnetic waves emitted by the He gave a theory of nuclear

revolving electrons is equal to the frequency of fission based on the liquid-
drop model of nucleus.

revolution. As the electrons spiral inwards, their angular
Bohr contributed to the

velocities and hence their frequencies would change clarification of conceptual
continuously, and so will the frequency of the light problems in quantum
emitted. Thus, they would emit a continuous spectrum, mechanics, in particular by
in contradiction to the line spectrum actually observed. proposing the comple-
Clearly Rutherford model tells only a part of the story mentary principle.
implying that the classical ideas are not sufficient to
explain the atomic structure. 297

Reprint 2025-26

NIELS HENRIK DAVID BOHR (1885 – 1962)



Physics

FIGURE 12.6 An accelerated atomic electron must spiral into the
nucleus as it loses energy.

Example 12.4 According to the classical electromagnetic theory,
calculate the initial frequency of the light emitted by the electron
revolving around a proton in hydrogen atom.

Solution From Example 12.3 we know that velocity of electron moving
around a proton in hydrogen atom in an orbit of radius 5.3 × 10–11 m
is 2.2 × 10–6 m/s. Thus, the frequency of the electron moving around
the proton is

v 2.2 ×106

ν  m s−1

= =
2πr 2π (5.3 ×10−11  m)

» 6.6 × 1015 Hz.
According to the classical electromagnetic theory we know that the
frequency of the electromagnetic waves emitted by the revolving
electrons is equal to the frequency of its revolution around the nucleus.
Thus the initial frequency of the light emitted is 6.6 × 1015 Hz.

It was Niels Bohr (1885 – 1962) who made certain modifications in
this model by adding the ideas of the newly developing quantum
hypothesis. Niels Bohr studied in Rutherford’s laboratory for several
months in 1912 and he was convinced about the validity of Rutherford
nuclear model. Faced with the dilemma as discussed above, Bohr, in
1913, concluded that in spite of the success of electromagnetic theory in
explaining large-scale phenomena, it could not be applied to the processes
at the atomic scale. It became clear that a fairly radical departure from
the established principles of classical mechanics and electromagnetism
would be needed to understand the structure of atoms and the relation
of atomic structure to atomic spectra. Bohr combined classical and early
quantum concepts and gave his theory in the form of three postulates.
These are :

(i) Bohr’s first postulate was that an electron in an atom could revolve
in certain stable orbits without the emission of radiant energy,
contrary to the predictions of electromagnetic theory. According to

298 this postulate, each atom has certain definite stable states in which it

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 12.4



Atoms

can exist, and each possible state has definite total energy. These are
called the stationary states of the atom.

(ii) Bohr’s second postulate defines these stable orbits. This postulate
states that the electron revolves around the nucleus only in those
orbits for which the angular momentum is some integral multiple of
h/2π where h is the Planck’s constant (= 6.6 × 10–34 J s). Thus the
angular momentum (L) of the orbiting electron is quantised. That is

L = nh/2π (12.5)

(iii) Bohr’s third postulate incorporated into atomic theory the early
quantum concepts that had been developed by Planck and Einstein.
It states that an electron might make a transition from one of its
specified non-radiating orbits to another of lower energy. When it
does so, a photon is emitted having energy equal to the energy
difference between the initial and final states. The frequency of the
emitted photon is then given by

hν  =   E  – E (12.6)
i f

where E  and E  are the energies of the initial and final states and E  > E .
i f i f

For a hydrogen atom, Eq. (12.4) gives the expression to determine
the energies of different energy states. But then this equation requires
the radius r of the electron orbit. To calculate r, Bohr’s second postulate
about the angular momentum of the electron–the quantisation
condition – is used.

The radius of nth possible orbit thus found is

2
n 2   h  4πε

rn = 0
    (12.7)
 m   2π  e2

The total energy of the electron in the stationary states of the hydrogen
atom can be obtained by substituting the value of orbital radius in
Eq. (12.4) as

2
 e2   m   2π   e2 

En = −        
8πε 2
 0  n   h   4πε0 

me4

or En = − (1 .
8n2ε2h2 2 8)

0

Substituting values, Eq. (12.8) yields

2.18 ×10−18

En = − J (12
n 2 .9)

Atomic energies are often expressed in electron volts (eV) rather than
joules. Since 1 eV = 1.6 × 10–19 J, Eq. (12.9) can be rewritten as

13.6
En = −   eV

2 (12.10)
n

The negative sign of the total energy of an electron moving in an orbit
means that the electron is bound with the nucleus. Energy will thus be
required to remove the electron from the hydrogen atom to a distance

299
infinitely far away from its nucleus (or proton in hydrogen atom).

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
12.4.1  Energy levels
The energy of an atom is the least (largest negative value)
when its electron is revolving in an orbit closest to the
nucleus i.e., the one for which n = 1. For n = 2, 3, ... the
absolute value of the energy E is smaller, hence the energy
is progressively larger in the outer orbits. The lowest state
of the atom, called the ground state, is that of the lowest
energy, with the electron revolving in the orbit of smallest
radius, the Bohr radius, a . The energy of this state (n = 1),

0
E  is –13.6 eV. Therefore, the minimum energy required to

1
free the electron from the ground state of the hydrogen atom
is 13.6 eV. It is called the ionisation energy of the hydrogen
atom. This prediction of the Bohr’s model is in excellent
agreement with the experimental value of ionisation energy.

At room temperature, most of the hydrogen atoms are
in ground state. When a hydrogen atom receives energy
by processes such as electron collisions, the atom may
acquire sufficient energy to raise the electron to higher
energy states. The atom is then said to be in an excited
state. From Eq. (12.10), for n = 2; the energy E  is

2
–3.40 eV. It means that the energy required to excite an
electron in hydrogen atom to its first excited state, is an

FIGURE 12.7 The energy level
energy equal to E  – E  = –3.40 eV – (–13.6) eV = 10.2 eV.

diagram for the hydrogen atom. 2 1

The electron in a hydrogen atom Similarly, E  = –1.51 eV and E  – E  = 12.09 eV, or to excite
3 3 1

at room temperature spends the hydrogen atom from its ground state (n = 1) to second
most of its time in the ground excited state (n = 3), 12.09 eV energy is required, and so

state. To ionise a hydrogen on. From these excited states the electron can then fall back
atom an electron from the to a state of lower energy, emitting a photon in the process.

ground state, 13.6 eV of energy Thus, as the excitation of hydrogen atom increases (that is
must be supplied. (The horizontal as n increases) the value of minimum energy required to

lines specify the presence of free the electron from the excited atom decreases.
allowed energy states.) The energy level diagram* for the stationary states of a

hydrogen atom, computed from Eq. (12.10), is given in
Fig. 12.7. The principal quantum number n labels the stationary
states in the ascending order of energy. In this diagram, the highest
energy state corresponds to n =¥ in Eq, (12.10) and has an energy
of 0 eV. This is the energy of the atom when the electron is
completely removed (r = ¥) from the nucleus and is at rest. Observe how
the energies of the excited states come closer and closer together as
n increases.

12.5  THE LINE SPECTRA OF THE HYDROGEN ATOM

According to the third postulate of Bohr’s model, when an atom makes a
transition from the higher energy state with quantum number n  to the

i
lower energy state with quantum number n  (n  < n ), the difference of

f f i
energy is carried away by a photon of frequency n  such that

if

* An electron can have any total energy above E = 0 eV. In such situations the
300 electron is free. Thus there is a continuum of energy states above E = 0 eV, as

shown in Fig. 12.7.
Reprint 2025-26



Atoms

hv  = E – E (12.11)
if ni nf

Since both n  and n  are integers, this immediately shows that  in
f i

transitions between different atomic levels, light is radiated in various
discrete frequencies.

The various lines in the atomic spectra are produced when electrons
jump from higher energy state to a lower energy state and photons are
emitted. These spectral lines are called emission lines. But when an atom
absorbs a photon that has precisely the same energy needed by the
electron in a lower energy state to make transitions to a higher energy
state, the process is called absorption. Thus if photons with a continuous
range of frequencies pass through a rarefied gas and then are analysed
with a spectrometer, a series of dark spectral absorption lines appear in
the continuous spectrum. The dark lines indicate the frequencies that
have been absorbed by the atoms of the gas.

The explanation of the hydrogen atom spectrum provided by Bohr’s
model was a brilliant achievement, which greatly stimulated progress
towards the modern quantum theory. In 1922, Bohr was awarded Nobel
Prize in Physics.

12.6 DE BROGLIE’S EXPLANATION OF BOHR’S
SECOND POSTULATE OF QUANTISATION

Of all the postulates, Bohr made in his model of the atom,
perhaps the most puzzling is his second postulate. It states
that the angular momentum of the electron orbiting around
the nucleus is quantised (that is, L  = nh/2p; n  = 1, 2, 3 …).

n
Why should the angular momentum have only those values
that are integral multiples of h/2p? The French physicist Louis
de Broglie explained this puzzle in 1923, ten years after Bohr
proposed his model.

We studied, in Chapter 11, about the de Broglie’s
hypothesis that material particles, such as electrons, also
have a wave nature. C. J. Davisson and L. H. Germer later
experimentally verified the wave nature of electrons in 1927.
Louis de Broglie argued that the electron in its circular orbit,
as proposed by Bohr, must be seen as a particle wave. In
analogy to waves travelling on a string, particle waves too
can lead to standing waves under resonant conditions. From FIGURE 12.8 A standing wave
Chapter 14 of Class XI Physics  textbook, we know that when is shown on a circular orbit

a string is plucked, a vast number of wavelengths are excited. where four de Broglie

However only those wavelengths survive which have nodes wavelengths fit into the
circumference of the orbit.

at the ends and form the standing wave in the string. It means
that in a string, standing waves are formed when the total distance
travelled by a wave down the string and back is one wavelength, two
wavelengths, or any integral number of wavelengths. Waves with other
wavelengths interfere with themselves upon reflection and their
amplitudes quickly drop to zero. For an electron moving in nth circular
orbit of radius r , the total distance is the circumference of the orbit,

n
2pr . Thus 301

n

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
2p r  = nl,      n = 1, 2, 3... (12.12)

n

Figure 12.8 illustrates a standing particle wave on a circular orbit
for n = 4, i.e., 2pr  = 4l, where l is the de Broglie wavelength of the electron

n
moving in nth orbit. From Chapter 11, we have l = h/p, where p is the
magnitude of the electron’s momentum. If the speed of the electron is
much less than the speed of light, the momentum is mv . Thus, l = h/

n
mv . From Eq. (12.12), we have

n

2p r  =  n h/mv       or     m v r =  nh/2p
n n n n  

This is the quantum condition proposed by Bohr for the angular
momentum of the electron [Eq. (12.15)]. In Section 12.5, we saw that
this equation is the basis of explaining the discrete orbits and energy
levels in hydrogen atom. Thus de Broglie hypothesis provided an
explanation for Bohr’s second postulate for the quantisation of angular
momentum of the orbiting electron. The quantised electron orbits and
energy states are due to the wave nature of the electron and only resonant
standing waves can persist.

Bohr’s model, involving classical trajectory picture (planet-like electron
orbiting the nucleus), correctly predicts the gross features of the
hydrogenic atoms*, in particular, the frequencies of the radiation emitted
or selectively absorbed. This model however has many limitations.
Some are:
(i) The Bohr model is applicable to hydrogenic atoms. It cannot be

extended even to mere two electron atoms such as helium. The analysis
of atoms with more than one electron was attempted on the lines of
Bohr’s model for hydrogenic atoms but did not meet with any success.
Difficulty lies in the fact that each electron interacts not only with the
positively charged nucleus but also with all other electrons.
The formulation of Bohr model involves electrical force between
positively charged nucleus and electron. It does not include the
electrical forces between electrons which necessarily appear in
multi-electron atoms.

(ii) While the Bohr’s model correctly predicts the frequencies of the light
emitted by hydrogenic atoms, the model is unable to explain the
relative intensities of the frequencies in the spectrum. In emission
spectrum of hydrogen, some of the visible frequencies have weak
intensity, others strong. Why? Experimental observations depict that
some transitions are more favoured than others. Bohr’s model is
unable to account for the intensity variations.

Bohr’s model presents an elegant picture of an atom and cannot be
generalised to complex atoms. For complex atoms we have to use a new
and radical theory based on Quantum Mechanics, which provides a more
complete picture of the atomic structure.

* Hydrogenic atoms are the atoms consisting of a nucleus with positive charge
+Ze and a single electron, where Z is the proton number. Examples are hydrogen
atom, singly ionised helium, doubly ionised lithium, and so forth. In these

302 atoms more complex electron-electron interactions are nonexistent.

Reprint 2025-26



Atoms

SUMMARY

1. Atom, as a whole, is electrically neutral and therefore contains equal
amount of positive and negative charges.

2. In Thomson’s model, an atom is a spherical cloud of positive charges
with electrons embedded in it.

3. In Rutherford’s model, most of the mass of the atom and all its positive
charge are concentrated in a tiny nucleus (typically one by ten thousand
the size of an atom), and the electrons revolve around it.

4. Rutherford nuclear model has two main difficulties in explaining the
structure of atom: (a) It predicts that atoms are unstable because the
accelerated electrons revolving around the nucleus must spiral into
the nucleus. This contradicts the stability of matter. (b) It cannot
explain the characteristic line spectra of atoms of different elements.

5. Atoms of most of the elements are stable and emit characteristic
spectrum. The spectrum consists of a set of isolated parallel lines
termed as line spectrum. It provides useful information about the
atomic structure.

6. To explain the line spectra emitted by atoms, as well as the stability
of atoms, Niel’s Bohr proposed a model for hydrogenic (single elctron)
atoms. He introduced three postulates and laid the foundations of
quantum mechanics:
(a) In a hydrogen atom, an electron revolves in certain stable orbits

(called stationary orbits) without the emission of radiant energy.
(b) The stationary orbits are those for which the angular momentum

is some integral multiple of h/2p. (Bohr’s quantisation condition.)
That is L = nh/2p, where n is an integer called the principal
quantum number.

(c) The third postulate states that an electron might make a transition
from one of its specified non-radiating orbits to another of lower
energy. When it does so, a photon is emitted having energy equal
to the energy difference between the initial and final states. The
frequency (n) of the emitted photon is then given by
hn  = E  – E

i f

An atom absorbs radiation of the same frequency the atom emits,
in which case the electron is transferred to an orbit with a higher
value of n.

E  + hn  =  E
i f

7. As a result of the quantisation condition of angular momentum, the
electron orbits the nucleus at only specific radii. For a hydrogen atom
it is given by

 n 2  2
 h  4πε

r 0
n =

 m   2π e2

The total energy is also quantised:

me4

En = −
8n2ε2 2

0h

     = –13.6 eV/n2

The n = 1 state is called ground state. In hydrogen atom the ground
state energy is  –13.6 eV. Higher values of n correspond to excited
states (n > 1). Atoms are excited to these higher states by collisions
with other atoms or electrons or by absorption of a photon of right
frequency. 303

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

8. de Broglie’s hypothesis that electrons have a wavelength λ = h/mv gave
an explanation for Bohr’s quantised orbits by bringing in the wave-
particle duality. The orbits correspond to circular standing waves in
which the circumference of the orbit equals a whole number of
wavelengths.

9. Bohr’s model is applicable only to hydrogenic (single electron) atoms.
It cannot be extended to even two electron atoms such as helium.
This model is also unable to explain for the relative intensities of the
frequencies emitted even by hydrogenic atoms.

POINTS TO PONDER

1. Both the Thomson’s as well as the Rutherford’s models constitute an
unstable system. Thomson’s model is unstable electrostatically, while
Rutherford’s model is unstable because of electromagnetic radiation
of orbiting electrons.

2. What made Bohr quantise angular momentum (second postulate) and
not some other quantity? Note, h has dimensions of angular
momentum, and for circular orbits, angular momentum is a very
relevant quantity. The second postulate is then so natural!

3. The orbital picture in Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom was
inconsistent with the uncertainty principle. It was replaced by modern
quantum mechanics in which Bohr’s orbits are regions where the
electron may be found with large probability.

4. Unlike the situation in the solar system, where planet-planet
gravitational forces are very small as compared to the gravitational
force of the sun on each planet (because the mass of the sun is so
much greater than the mass of any of the planets), the electron-electron
electric force interaction is comparable in magnitude to the electron-
nucleus electrical force, because the charges and distances are of the
same order of magnitude. This is the reason why the Bohr’s model
with its planet-like electron is not applicable to many electron atoms.

5. Bohr laid the foundation of the quantum theory by postulating specific
orbits in which electrons do not radiate. Bohr’s model include only
one quantum number n. The new theory called quantum mechanics
supports Bohr’s postulate. However in quantum mechanics (more
generally accepted), a given energy level may not correspond to just
one quantum state. For example, a state is characterised by four
quantum numbers (n, l, m, and s), but for a pure Coulomb potential
(as in hydrogen atom) the energy depends only on n.

6. In Bohr model, contrary to ordinary classical expectation, the frequency
of revolution of an electron in its orbit is not connected to the frequency
of spectral line. The later is the difference between two orbital energies
divided by h. For transitions between large quantum numbers (n to n
– 1, n very large), however, the two coincide as expected.

7. Bohr’s semiclassical model based on some aspects of classical physics
and some aspects of modern physics also does not provide a true picture
of the simplest hydrogenic atoms. The true picture is quantum
mechanical affair which differs from Bohr model in a number of
fundamental ways. But then if the Bohr model is not strictly correct,
why do we bother about it? The reasons which make Bohr’s model
still useful are:

304

Reprint 2025-26



Atoms

(i) The model is based on just three postulates but accounts for almost
all the general features of the hydrogen spectrum.

(ii) The model incorporates many of the concepts we have learnt in
classical physics.

(iii) The model demonstrates how a theoretical physicist occasionally
must quite literally ignore certain problems of approach in hopes
of being able to make some predictions. If the predictions of the
theory or model agree with experiment, a theoretician then must
somehow hope to explain away or rationalise the problems that
were ignored along the way.

EXERCISES

12.1 Choose the correct alternative from the clues given at the end of
the each statement:
(a) The size of the atom in Thomson’s model is .......... the atomic

size in Rutherford’s model. (much greater than/no different
from/much less than.)

(b) In the ground state of .......... electrons are in stable equilibrium,
while in .......... electrons always experience a net force.
(Thomson’s model/ Rutherford’s model.)

(c) A classical atom based on .......... is doomed to collapse.
(Thomson’s model/ Rutherford’s model.)

(d) An atom has a nearly continuous mass distribution in a ..........
but has a highly non-uniform mass distribution in ..........
(Thomson’s model/ Rutherford’s model.)

(e) The positively charged part of the atom possesses most of the
mass in .......... (Rutherford’s model/both the models.)

12.2 Suppose you are given a chance to repeat the alpha-particle
scattering experiment using a thin sheet of solid hydrogen in place
of the gold foil. (Hydrogen is a solid at temperatures below 14 K.)
What results do you expect?

12.3 A difference of 2.3 eV separates two energy levels in an atom. What
is the frequency of radiation emitted when the atom make a
transition from the upper level to the lower level?

12.4 The ground state energy of hydrogen atom is –13.6 eV. What are the
kinetic and potential energies of the electron in this state?

12.5 A hydrogen atom initially in the ground level absorbs a photon,
which excites it to the n = 4 level. Determine the wavelength and
frequency of photon.

12.6 (a) Using the Bohr’s model calculate the speed of the electron in a
hydrogen atom in the n = 1, 2, and 3 levels. (b) Calculate the orbital
period in each of these levels.

12.7 The radius of the innermost electron orbit of a hydrogen atom is
5.3×10–11 m. What are the radii of the n = 2 and n =3 orbits?

12.8 A 12.5 eV electron beam is used to bombard gaseous hydrogen at
room temperature. What series of wavelengths will be emitted?

12.9 In accordance with the Bohr’s model, find the quantum number
that characterises the earth’s revolution around the sun in an orbit
of radius 1.5 × 1011 m with orbital speed 3 × 104 m/s. (Mass of  earth 305
= 6.0 × 1024 kg.)

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
##13##
Chapter Thirteen

NUCLEI

13.1  INTRODUCTION

In the previous chapter, we have learnt that in every atom, the positive
charge and mass are densely concentrated at the centre of the atom
forming its nucleus. The overall dimensions of a nucleus are much smaller
than those of an atom. Experiments on scattering of a-particles
demonstrated that the radius of a nucleus was smaller than the radius
of an atom by a factor of about 104. This means the volume of a nucleus
is about 10–12 times the volume of the atom. In other words, an atom is
almost empty. If an atom is enlarged to the size of a classroom, the nucleus
would be of the size of pinhead. Nevertheless, the nucleus contains most
(more than 99.9%) of the mass of an atom.

Does the nucleus have a structure, just as the atom does?  If so, what
are the constituents of the nucleus?  How are these held together? In this
chapter, we shall look for answers to such questions. We shall discuss
various properties of nuclei such as their size, mass and stability, and
also associated nuclear phenomena such as radioactivity, fission and fusion.

13.2  ATOMIC MASSES AND COMPOSITION OF NUCLEUS

The mass of an atom is very small, compared to a kilogram;  for example,
the mass of a carbon atom, 12C, is 1.992647 × 10–26 kg. Kilogram is not

306 a very convenient unit to measure such small quantities. Therefore, a

Reprint 2025-26



Nuclei

different mass unit is used for expressing atomic masses. This unit is the
atomic mass unit (u), defined as 1/12th of the mass of the carbon (12C)
atom. According to this definition

 mass of one 12C atom
1u = 

12

1.992647 ×10−26 kg
     =

12

     = 1.660539 ×10−27 kg (13.1)

The atomic masses of various elements expressed in atomic mass
unit (u) are close to being integral multiples of the mass of a hydrogen
atom. There are, however, many striking exceptions to this rule. For
example, the atomic mass of chlorine atom is 35.46 u.

Accurate measurement of atomic masses is carried out with a mass
spectrometer, The measurement of atomic masses reveals the existence
of different types of atoms of the same element, which exhibit the same
chemical properties, but differ in mass. Such atomic species of the same
element differing in mass are called isotopes. (In Greek, isotope means
the same place, i.e. they occur in the same place in the periodic table of
elements.) It was found that practically every element consists of a mixture
of several isotopes.  The relative abundance of different isotopes differs
from element to element. Chlorine, for example, has two isotopes having
masses 34.98 u and 36.98 u, which are nearly integral multiples of the
mass of a hydrogen atom.  The relative abundances of these isotopes are
75.4 and 24.6 per cent, respectively.  Thus, the average mass of a chlorine
atom is obtained by the weighted average of the masses of the two
isotopes,  which works out to be

75.4 × 34.98 + 24.6 × 36.98
= 

100
=  35.47 u

which agrees with the atomic mass of chlorine.
Even the lightest element, hydrogen has three isotopes having masses

1.0078 u, 2.0141 u, and 3.0160 u.  The nucleus of the lightest atom of
hydrogen, which has a relative abundance of 99.985%, is called the
proton.  The mass of a proton is

m 2
p = 1.00727 u = 1.67262 × 10− 7 kg (13.2)

This is equal to the mass of the hydrogen atom (= 1.00783u), minus
the mass of a single electron (m = 0.00055 u).  The other two isotopes of

e 
hydrogen are called deuterium and tritium. Tritium nuclei, being
unstable, do not occur naturally and are produced artificially in
laboratories.

The positive charge in the nucleus is that of the protons. A proton
carries one unit of fundamental charge and is stable. It was earlier thought
that the nucleus may contain electrons, but this was ruled out later using
arguments based on quantum theory. All the electrons of an atom are
outside the nucleus. We know that the number of these electrons outside
the nucleus of the atom is Z, the atomic number. The total charge of the 307

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
atomic electrons is thus (–Ze), and since the atom is neutral, the charge
of the nucleus is (+Ze). The number of protons in the nucleus of the atom
is, therefore, exactly Z, the atomic number.

Discovery of Neutron

Since the nuclei of deuterium and tritium are isotopes of hydrogen, they
must contain only one proton each.  But the masses of the nuclei of
hydrogen, deuterium and tritium are in the ratio of 1:2:3.  Therefore, the
nuclei of deuterium and tritium must contain,  in addition to a proton,
some neutral matter.  The amount of neutral matter present in the nuclei
of these isotopes, expressed in units of mass of a proton, is approximately
equal to one and two, respectively.  This fact indicates that the nuclei of
atoms contain, in addition to protons, neutral matter in multiples of a
basic unit.  This hypothesis was verified in 1932 by James Chadwick
who observed emission of neutral radiation when beryllium nuclei were
bombarded with alpha-particles (a-particles are helium nuclei, to be
discussed in a later section). It was found that this neutral radiation
could knock out protons from light nuclei such as those of helium, carbon
and nitrogen. The only neutral radiation known at that time was photons
(electromagnetic radiation). Application of the principles of conservation
of energy and momentum showed that if the neutral radiation consisted
of photons, the energy of photons would have to be much higher than is
available from the bombardment of beryllium nuclei with a-particles.
The clue to this puzzle, which Chadwick satisfactorily solved, was to
assume that the neutral radiation consists of a new type of neutral
particles called neutrons.  From conservation of energy and momentum,
he was able to determine the mass of new particle ‘as very nearly the
same as mass of proton’.

The mass of a neutron is now known to a high degree of accuracy. It is

m  = 1.00866 u = 1.6749×10–27 kg (13.3)
n

Chadwick was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his
discovery of the neutron.

A free neutron, unlike a free proton, is unstable.  It decays into a
proton, an electron and a antineutrino (another elementary particle), and
has a mean life of about 1000s.  It is, however, stable inside the nucleus.

The composition of a nucleus can now be described using the following
terms and symbols:

Z - atomic number = number of protons [13.4(a)]

N - neutron number = number of neutrons [13.4(b)]

A - mass number = Z + N

                              = total number of protons and neutrons [13.4(c)]
One also uses the term nucleon for a proton or a neutron. Thus the

number of nucleons in an atom is its mass number A.
Nuclear species or nuclides are shown by the notation A X  where X is

Z

the chemical symbol of the species.  For example, the nucleus of gold is
denoted by 197

79 Au .  It contains 197 nucleons, of which 79 are protons
308 and the rest118 are neutrons.

Reprint 2025-26



Nuclei

The composition of isotopes of an element can now be readily
explained.  The nuclei of isotopes of a given element contain the same
number of protons, but differ from each other in their number of neutrons.
Deuterium, 2

1 H , which is an isotope of hydrogen, contains one proton
and one neutron.  Its other isotope tritium, 3

1 H , contains one proton and
two neutrons.  The element gold has 32 isotopes, ranging from A =173 to
A = 204.  We have already mentioned that chemical properties of elements
depend on their electronic structure.  As the atoms of isotopes have
identical electronic structure they have identical chemical behaviour and
are placed in the same location in the periodic table.

All nuclides with same mass number A are called isobars.  For
example, the nuclides 3

1 H  and 3
2 He  are isobars.  Nuclides with same

neutron number N but different atomic number Z, for example 198
80 Hg

and 197
79 Au , are called isotones.

13.3  SIZE OF THE NUCLEUS

As we have seen in Chapter 12, Rutherford was the pioneer who
postulated and established the existence of the atomic nucleus. At
Rutherford’s suggestion, Geiger and Marsden performed their classic
experiment: on the scattering of a-particles from thin gold foils. Their
experiments revealed that the distance of closest approach to a gold
nucleus of an a-particle of kinetic energy 5.5 MeV is about 4.0 × 10–14 m.
The scattering of a-particle by the gold sheet could be understood by
Rutherford by assuming that the coulomb repulsive force was solely
responsible for scattering. Since the positive charge is confined to the
nucleus, the actual size of the nucleus has to be less than 4.0 × 10–14 m.

If we use a-particles of higher energies than 5.5 MeV, the distance of
closest approach to the gold nucleus will be smaller and at some point
the scattering will begin to be affected by the short range nuclear forces,
and differ from Rutherford’s calculations. Rutherford’s calculations are
based on pure coulomb repulsion between the positive charges of the a-
particle and the gold nucleus. From the distance at which deviations set
in, nuclear sizes can be inferred.

By performing scattering experiments in which fast electrons, instead
of a-particles, are projectiles that bombard targets made up of various
elements, the sizes of nuclei of various elements have been accurately
measured.

It has been found that a nucleus of mass number A has a radius

R = R A1/3 (13.5)
0 

where R  = 1.2 × 10–15 m (=1.2 fm; 1 fm = 10–15 m). This means the volume
0

of the nucleus, which is proportional to R3 is proportional to A. Thus the
density of nucleus is a constant, independent of A,  for all nuclei. Different
nuclei are like a drop of liquid of constant density. The density of nuclear
matter is approximately 2.3 × 1017 kg m–3. This density is very large
compared to ordinary matter, say water, which is 103 kg m–3. This is
understandable, as we have already seen that most of the atom is empty.
Ordinary matter consisting of atoms has a large amount of empty space. 309

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

Example 13.1 Given the mass of iron nucleus as 55.85u and A=56,
find the nuclear density?

Solution
m  = 55.85,    u = 9.27 × 10–26  kg

Fe

× −26
mass 9.27 10 1

Nuclear density =  = 15
volume (4π/3)(1.2 ×10− ×

)3 56
 = 2.29 × 1017 kg m–3

The density of matter in neutron stars (an astrophysical object) is
comparable to this density. This shows that matter in these objects
has been compressed to such an extent that they resemble a big nucleus.

13.4  MASS-ENERGY AND NUCLEAR BINDING ENERGY

13.4.1  Mass – Energy
Einstein showed from his theory of special relativity that it is necessary
to treat mass as another form of energy. Before the advent of this theory
of special relativity it was presumed  that mass and energy were conserved
separately in a reaction. However, Einstein showed that mass is another
form of energy and one can convert mass-energy into other forms of
energy, say kinetic energy and vice-versa.

Einstein gave the famous mass-energy equivalence relation

E = mc2 (13.6)

Here the energy equivalent of mass m is related by the above equation
and c is the velocity of light in vacuum and is approximately equal to
3×108 m s–1.

Example 13.2 Calculate the energy equivalent of 1 g of substance.

Solution

Energy, E = 10–3  × ( 3 × 108)2 J

     E = 10–3 × 9 × 1016 = 9 × 1013 J

Thus, if one gram of matter is converted to energy, there is a release
of enormous amount of energy.

Experimental verification of the Einstein’s mass-energy relation has
been achieved in the study of nuclear reactions amongst nucleons, nuclei,
electrons and other more recently discovered particles. In a reaction the
conservation law of energy states that the initial energy and the final
energy are equal provided the energy associated with mass is also
included. This concept is important in understanding nuclear masses
and the interaction of nuclei with one another. They form the subject
matter of the next few sections.

13.4.2  Nuclear binding energy
In Section 13.2 we have seen that the nucleus is made up of neutrons
and protons.  Therefore it may be expected that the mass of the nucleus

310 is equal to the total mass of its individual protons and neutrons.  However,

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 13.2  EXAMPLE 13.1



Nuclei

the nuclear mass M is found to be always less than this.  For example, let
us consider 16

8 O ; a nucleus which has 8 neutrons and 8 protons.  We
have

Mass of 8 neutrons = 8 × 1.00866 u

Mass of 8 protons   = 8 × 1.00727 u

Mass of 8 electrons = 8 × 0.00055 u

Therefore the expected mass of 16
8 O  nucleus

= 8 × 2.01593 u = 16.12744 u.
The atomic mass of 16

8 O  found from mass spectroscopy experiments
is seen to be 15.99493 u. Substracting the mass of 8 electrons (8 × 0.00055 u)
from this, we get the experimental mass of 16

8 O  nucleus to be 15.99053 u.
Thus, we find that the mass of the 16

8 O  nucleus is less than the total
mass of its constituents by 0.13691u. The difference in mass of a nucleus
and its constituents, ∆M, is called the mass defect, and is given by

∆M = [Zm p + (A − Z )mn ]− M (13.7)

What is the meaning of the mass defect? It is here that Einstein’s
equivalence  of mass and energy plays a role. Since the mass of the oxygen
nucleus is less that the sum of the masses of its constituents (8 protons
and 8 neutrons, in the unbound state), the equivalent energy of the oxygen
nucleus is less than that of the sum of the equivalent energies of its
constituents. If one wants to break the oxygen nucleus into 8 protons
and 8 neutrons, this extra energy ∆M c2, has to be supplied. This energy
required E  is related to the mass defect by

b

E  = ∆ M c2 (13.8)
b

Example 13.3  Find the energy equivalent of one atomic mass unit,
first in Joules and then in MeV.  Using this, express the mass defect
of 16

8 O  in MeV/c2.

Solution
1u = 1.6605 × 10–27 kg
To convert it into energy units, we multiply it by c2 and find that
energy equivalent = 1.6605 × 10–27 × (2.9979 × 108)2 kg m2/s2

      = 1.4924 × 10–10 J

1.4924 ×10−10

      =   eV
1.602×10−19

      =   0.9315 × 109 eV
      =   931.5 MeV

or, 1u = 931.5 MeV/c2

For 16
8 O ,   ∆M = 0.13691 u = 0.13691×931.5 MeV/c2

= 127.5 MeV/c2

The energy needed to separate 16
8 O  into its constituents is thus

127.5 MeV/c2.

If a certain number of neutrons and protons are brought together to
form a nucleus of a certain charge and mass, an energy E  will be released 311

b

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 13.3



Physics
in the process.  The energy E  is called the binding energy of the nucleus.

b
If we separate a nucleus into its nucleons, we would have to supply a
total energy equal to E , to those particles.  Although we cannot tear

b
apart a nucleus in this way, the nuclear binding energy is still a convenient
measure of how well a nucleus is held together.  A more useful measure
of the binding between the constituents of the nucleus is the binding
energy per nucleon, E , which is the ratio of the binding energy E  of a

bn b
nucleus to the number of the nucleons, A, in that nucleus:

E  =  E  / A (13.9)
bn  b

We can think of binding energy per nucleon as the average energy
per nucleon needed to separate a nucleus into its individual nucleons.

Figure 13.1 is a plot of the
binding energy per nucleon E

bn
versus the mass number A for a
large number of nuclei. We notice
the following main features of
the plot:
(i) the binding energy per

nucleon, E , is practically
bn

constant, i.e. practically
independent of the atomic
number for nuclei of middle
mass number ( 30 < A < 170).
The curve has a maximum of
about 8.75 MeV for A = 56
and has a value of 7.6 MeV

FIGURE 13.1 The binding energy per nucleon for A = 238.
as a function of mass number.

(ii) E  is lower for both light
bn

nuclei (A<30) and heavy
nuclei (A>170).

We can draw some conclusions from these two observations:
(i) The force is attractive and sufficiently strong to produce a binding

energy of a few MeV per nucleon.
(ii) The constancy of the binding energy in the range 30 < A < 170 is a

consequence of the fact that the nuclear force is short-ranged. Consider
a particular nucleon inside a sufficiently large nucleus. It will be under
the influence of only some of its neighbours, which come within the
range of the nuclear force. If any other nucleon is at a distance more
than the range of the nuclear force from the particular nucleon it will
have no influence on the binding energy of the nucleon under
consideration. If a nucleon can have a maximum of p neighbours
within the range of nuclear force, its binding energy would be
proportional to p. Let the binding energy of the nucleus be pk, where
k is a constant having the dimensions of energy. If we increase A by
adding nucleons they will not change the binding energy of a nucleon
inside. Since most of the nucleons in a large nucleus reside inside it
and not on the surface, the change in binding energy per nucleon
would be small. The binding energy per nucleon is a constant and is

312 approximately equal to pk. The property that a given nucleon

Reprint 2025-26



Nuclei

influences only nucleons close to it is also referred to as saturation
property of the nuclear force.

(iii) A very heavy nucleus, say A = 240, has lower binding energy per
nucleon compared to that of a  nucleus with A = 120. Thus if a
nucleus A = 240 breaks into two A = 120 nuclei, nucleons get more
tightly bound. This implies energy would be released in the process.
It has very important implications for energy production through
fission, to be discussed later in Section 13.7.1.

(iv) Consider two very light nuclei (A ≤ 10) joining to form a heavier
nucleus. The binding energy  per nucleon of the fused heavier nuclei
is more than the binding energy per nucleon of the lighter nuclei.
This means that the final system is more tightly bound than the initial
system. Again energy would be released in such a process of
fusion. This is the energy source of sun, to be discussed later in
Section 13.7.2.

13.5  NUCLEAR FORCE

The force that determines the motion of atomic electrons is the familiar
Coulomb force. In Section 13.4,  we have seen that for average mass
nuclei the binding energy per nucleon is  approximately 8 MeV, which is
much larger than the binding energy in atoms. Therefore, to bind a
nucleus together there must be a strong attractive force of a totally
different kind. It must be strong enough to overcome the repulsion
between the (positively charged) protons and to bind both protons and
neutrons into the tiny nuclear volume. We have already seen
that the constancy of binding energy per nucleon can be
understood in terms of its short-range. Many features of the
nuclear binding force are summarised below. These are
obtained from a variety of experiments carried out during 1930
to 1950.
(i) The nuclear force is much stronger than the Coulomb force

acting between charges or the gravitational forces between
masses. The nuclear binding force has to dominate over
the Coulomb repulsive force between protons inside the
nucleus. This happens only because the nuclear force is
much stronger than the coulomb force. The gravitational
force is much weaker  than even Coulomb force.

(ii) The nuclear force between two nucleons falls rapidly to FIGURE 13.2 Potential energy
of a pair of nucleons as a

zero as their distance is more than a few femtometres. This
function of their separation.

leads to saturation of forces in a medium or a large-sized For a separation greater
nucleus, which is the reason for the constancy of the than r , the force is attractive

0
binding energy per nucleon. and for separations less
A rough plot of the potential energy between two nucleons than r , the force is

0

as a function of distance is shown in the Fig. 13.2. The strongly repulsive.

potential energy is a minimum at a distance r  of about
0

0.8 fm. This means that the force is attractive for distances larger
than 0.8 fm and repulsive if they are separated by distances less
than 0.8 fm. 313

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
(iii) The nuclear force between neutron-neutron, proton-neutron and

proton-proton is approximately the same. The nuclear force does not
depend on the electric charge.
Unlike Coulomb’s law or the Newton’s law of gravitation there is no

simple mathematical form of the nuclear force.

13.6  RADIOACTIVITY

A. H. Becquerel discovered radioactivity in 1896 purely by accident.  While
studying the fluorescence and phosphorescence of compounds irradiated
with visible light, Becquerel observed an interesting phenomenon.  After
illuminating some pieces of uranium-potassium sulphate with visible
light, he wrapped them in black paper and separated the package from a
photographic plate by a piece of silver.  When, after several hours of
exposure, the photographic plate was developed, it showed blackening
due to something that must have been emitted by the compound and
was able to penetrate both black paper and the silver.

Experiments performed subsequently showed that radioactivity was
a nuclear phenomenon in which an unstable nucleus undergoes a decay.
This is referred to as radioactive decay. Three types of radioactive decay
occur in nature :
(i) a-decay in which a helium nucleus 4 He  is emitted;

2

(ii) b-decay in which electrons or positrons (particles with the same mass
as electrons, but with a charge exactly opposite to that of electron)
are emitted;

(iii) g-decay in which high energy (hundreds of keV or more) photons are
emitted.

13.7  NUCLEAR ENERGY

The curve of binding energy per nucleon E , given in Fig. 13.1, has
bn

a long flat middle region between A = 30 and A = 170. In this region
the binding energy per nucleon is nearly constant (8.0 MeV). For
the lighter nuclei region, A < 30, and for the heavier nuclei region,
A > 170, the binding energy per nucleon is less than 8.0 MeV, as we
have noted earlier. Now, the greater the binding energy, the less is the
total mass of a bound system, such as a nucleus. Consequently, if nuclei
with less total binding energy transform to nuclei with greater binding
energy, there will be a net energy release. This is what happens when a
heavy nucleus decays into two or more intermediate mass fragments
(fission) or when light nuclei fuse into a havier nucleus (fusion.)

Exothermic chemical reactions underlie conventional energy sources
such as coal or petroleum. Here the energies involved are in the range of
electron volts. On the other hand,  in a nuclear reaction, the energy release
is of the order of MeV. Thus for the same quantity of matter, nuclear
sources produce a million times more energy than a chemical source.
Fission of 1 kg of uranium, for example, generates 1014 J of energy;

314 compare it with burning of 1 kg of coal that gives 107 J.

Reprint 2025-26



Nuclei

13.7.1  Fission
New possibilities emerge when we go beyond natural radioactive decays
and study nuclear reactions by bombarding nuclei with other nuclear
particles such as proton, neutron, a-particle, etc.

A most important neutron-induced nuclear reaction is fission. An

example of fission is when a uranium isotope 235 bombarded with a
92 U  

neutron breaks into two intermediate mass nuclear fragments
1 n +235U →236 144 89 1
0 92 92 U → 56Ba +36 Kr + 3 0n (13.10)

The same reaction can produce other pairs of intermediate mass
fragments

1 n + 235U → 236U → 133Sb + 99Nb + 4 1
0 92 92 51 41 0n (13.11)

Or, as another example,
1 n + 235U → 140 Xe + 94Sr + 2 1 (13.12)
0 92 54 38 0n
The fragment products are radioactive nuclei; they emit b particles in

succession to achieve stable end products.
The energy released (the Q value ) in the fission reaction of nuclei like

uranium is of the order of 200 MeV per fissioning nucleus. This is
estimated as follows:

Let us take a nucleus with A = 240 breaking into two fragments each
of A = 120. Then

E  for A = 240 nucleus is about 7.6 MeV,
bn

E for the two A = 120 fragment nuclei is about 8.5 MeV.
bn 

\ Gain in binding energy for nucleon is about 0.9 MeV.

Hence the total gain in binding energy is 240×0.9 or 216 MeV.

The disintegration energy in fission events first appears as the kinetic
energy of the fragments and neutrons. Eventually it is transferred to the
surrounding matter appearing as heat. The source of energy in nuclear
reactors, which produce electricity, is nuclear fission. The enormous
energy released in an atom bomb comes from uncontrolled nuclear
fission.

13.7.2  Nuclear fusion – energy generation in stars
When two light nuclei fuse to form a larger nucleus, energy is released,
since the larger nucleus is more tightly bound, as seen from the binding
energy curve in Fig.13.1. Some examples of such energy liberating nuclear
fusion reactions are :

1H + 1 → 2 42 MeV [13.13(a)]
1 1H 1H + e+ + n + 0.

2H + 2 → 3 + 3.27 MeV [13.13(b)]
1 1H 2He+ n 

2 + 2 → 3 + 1 + 4.03 MeV [13.13(c)]
1H 1H 1H 1H

In the first reaction, two protons combine to form a deuteron and
a positron with a release of 0.42 MeV energy. In reaction [13.13(b)], two 315

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
deuterons combine to form the light isotope of helium. In reaction
(13.13c), two deuterons combine to form a triton and a proton. For
fusion to take place, the two nuclei must come close enough so that
attractive short-range nuclear force is able to affect them. However,
since they are both positively charged particles, they experience coulomb
repulsion. They, therefore, must have enough energy to overcome this
coulomb barrier. The height of the barrier depends on the charges and
radii of the two interacting nuclei. It can be shown, for example, that
the barrier height for two protons is ~ 400 keV, and is higher for nuclei
with higher charges. We can estimate the temperature at which two
protons in a proton gas would (averagely) have enough energy to
overcome the coulomb barrier:

(3/2)k T = K ≃  400 keV, which gives T ~ 3 × 109 K.
When fusion is achieved by raising the temperature of the system so

that particles have enough kinetic energy to overcome the coulomb
repulsive behaviour, it is called thermonuclear fusion.

Thermonuclear fusion is the source of energy output in the interior
of stars. The interior of the sun has a temperature of 1.5×107 K, which
is considerably less than the estimated temperature required for fusion
of particles of average energy. Clearly, fusion in the sun involves protons
whose energies are much above the average energy.

The fusion reaction in the sun is a multi-step process in which the
hydrogen is burned into helium. Thus, the fuel in the sun is the hydrogen
in its core. The proton-proton (p, p) cycle by which this occurs is
represented by the following sets of reactions:

1 1 2
1H + +

1H→ 1H + e  + n + 0.42 MeV (i)

e + + e – ® g + g + 1.02 MeV (ii)

2H + 1H → 3
1 1 He+ g + 5.49 MeV (iii)

2

3H + 3
2 e He → 4

2 + 1 + 1
2 He 1H 1H + 12.86 MeV (iv) (13.14)

For the fourth reaction to occur, the first three reactions must occur
twice, in which case two light helium nuclei unite to form ordinary helium
nucleus. If we consider the combination 2(i) + 2(ii) + 2(iii) +(iv), the net
effect is

41H + 2e − → 4
1 2He + 2ν + 6γ + 26.7 MeV

or (41 4
1H + 4e− ) → ( 2He + 2e − ) + 2ν + 6γ + 26.7MeV (13.15)

Thus, four hydrogen atoms combine to form an 4
2He  atom with a

release of 26.7 MeV of energy.

Helium is not the only element that can be synthesized in the interior of
a star. As the hydrogen in the core gets depleted and becomes  helium, the
core starts to cool. The star begins to collapse under its own gravity which
increases the temperature of the core. If this temperature increases to about
108 K, fusion takes place again, this time of helium nuclei into carbon.
This kind of process can generate through fusion higher and higher mass
number elements. But elements more massive than those near the peak of

316 the binding energy curve in Fig. 13.1 cannot be so produced.

Reprint 2025-26



Nuclei

The age of the sun is about 5×109 y and it is estimated that there is
enough hydrogen in the sun to keep it going for another 5 billion years.
After that, the hydrogen burning will stop and the sun will begin to cool
and will start to collapse under gravity, which will raise the core
temperature. The outer envelope of the sun will expand, turning it into
the so called red giant.

13.7.3  Controlled thermonuclear fusion
The natural thermonuclear fusion process in a star is replicated in a
thermonuclear fusion device. In controlled fusion reactors, the aim is to
generate steady power by heating the nuclear fuel to a temperature in the
range of 108 K. At these temperatures, the fuel is a mixture of positive
ions and electrons (plasma). The challenge is to confine this plasma, since
no container can stand such a high temperature. Several countries
around the world including India are developing techniques in this
connection. If successful, fusion reactors will hopefully supply almost
unlimited power to humanity.

Example 13.4 Answer the following questions:
(a) Are the equations of nuclear reactions (such as those given in

Section 13.7) ‘balanced’ in the sense a chemical equation (e.g.,
2H  + O ® 2 H O)  is? If not, in what sense are they balanced on

2 2 2

both sides?
(b) If both the number of protons and the number of neutrons are

conserved in each nuclear reaction, in what way is mass converted
into energy (or vice-versa) in a nuclear reaction?

(c) A general impression exists that  mass-energy interconversion
takes place only in nuclear reaction and never in chemical
reaction. This is strictly speaking, incorrect. Explain.

Solution

(a) A chemical equation is balanced in the sense that the number of
atoms of each element is the same on both sides of the equation.
A chemical reaction merely alters the original combinations of
atoms. In a nuclear reaction, elements may be transmuted. Thus,
the number of atoms of each element is not necessarily conserved
in a nuclear reaction. However, the number of protons and the
number of neutrons are both separately conserved in a nuclear
reaction. [Actually, even this is not strictly true in the realm of
very high energies – what is strictly conserved is the total charge
and total ‘baryon number’. We need not pursue this matter here.]

In nuclear reactions (e.g., Eq. 13.10), the number of protons and
the number of neutrons are the same on the two sides of the equation.

(b) We know that the binding energy of a nucleus gives a negative
contribution to the mass of the nucleus (mass defect). Now, since
proton number and neutron number are conserved in a nuclear
reaction, the total rest mass of neutrons and protons is the same
on either side of a reaction. But the total binding energy of nuclei
on the left side need not be the same as that on the right hand
side. The difference in these binding energies appears as energy
released or absorbed in a nuclear reaction. Since binding energy 317

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 13.4



Physics

contributes to mass, we say that the difference in the total mass
of nuclei on the two sides get converted into energy or vice-versa.
It is in these sense that a nuclear reaction is an example of mass-
energy interconversion.

(c) From the point of view of mass-energy interconversion, a chemical
reaction is similar to a nuclear reaction in principle. The energy
released or absorbed in a chemical reaction can be traced to the
difference in chemical (not nuclear) binding energies of atoms
and molecules on the two sides of a reaction. Since, strictly
speaking, chemical binding energy also gives a negative
contribution (mass defect) to the total mass of an atom or molecule,
we can equally well say that the difference in the total mass of
atoms or molecules, on the two sides of the chemical reaction
gets converted into energy or vice-versa. However, the mass
defects involved in a chemical reaction are almost a million times
smaller than those in a nuclear reaction.This is the reason for
the general impression, (which is incorrect ) that mass-energy
interconversion does not take place in a chemical reaction.

SUMMARY

1. An atom has a nucleus. The nucleus is positively charged. The radius
of the nucleus is smaller than the radius of an atom by a factor of
104. More than 99.9% mass of the atom is concentrated in the nucleus.

2. On the atomic scale, mass is measured in atomic mass units (u). By
definition, 1 atomic mass unit (1u) is 1/12th mass of one atom of 12C;

1u = 1.660563 × 10–27 kg.

3. A nucleus contains a neutral particle called neutron. Its mass is almost
the same as that of proton

4. The atomic number Z is the number of protons in the atomic nucleus
of an element. The mass number A is the total number of protons and
neutrons in the atomic nucleus; A = Z+N; Here N denotes the number
of neutrons in the nucleus.

A
A nuclear species or a nuclide is represented as  Z X , where X is the
chemical symbol of the species.

Nuclides with the same atomic number Z, but different neutron number
N are called isotopes. Nuclides with the same A are isobars and those
with the same N are isotones.

Most elements are mixtures of two or more isotopes. The atomic mass
of an element is a weighted average of the masses of its isotopes and
calculated in accordance to the relative abundances of the isotopes.

5. A nucleus can be considered to be spherical in shape and assigned a
radius. Electron scattering experiments allow determination of the
nuclear radius; it is found that radii of nuclei fit the formula

R = R  A1/3,
0

where R  = a constant = 1.2 fm. This implies that the nuclear density
0

is independent of A. It is of the order of 1017 kg/m3.

6. Neutrons and protons are bound in a nucleus by the short-range strong
nuclear force. The nuclear force does not distinguish between neutron

318 and proton.

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 13.4



Nuclei

7. The nuclear mass M is always less than the total mass, Sm, of its
constituents. The difference in mass of a nucleus and its constituents
is called the mass defect,

DM = (Z m  + (A – Z )m ) – M
p n

Using Einstein’s mass energy relation, we express this mass difference
in terms of energy as

DE  = DM c2
b

The energy DE  represents the binding energy of the nucleus. In the
b

mass number range A = 30 to 170, the binding energy per nucleon is
nearly constant, about 8 MeV/nucleon.

8. Energies associated with nuclear processes are about a million times
larger than chemical process.

9. The Q-value of a nuclear process is

      Q = final kinetic energy – initial kinetic energy.

Due to conservation of mass-energy, this is also,

Q = (sum of initial masses – sum of final masses)c2

10. Radioactivity is the phenomenon in which nuclei of a given species
transform by giving out a or b or g rays; a-rays are helium nuclei;
b-rays are electrons. g-rays are electromagnetic radiation of wavelengths
shorter than X-rays.

11. Energy is released when less tightly bound nuclei are transmuted into

more tightly bound nuclei. In fission, a heavy nucleus like 235
92 U  breaks

into two smaller fragments, e.g., 235 1 133 99 1
92 U+0n → 51 Sb + 41 Nb + 4 0n

12. In fusion, lighter nuclei combine to form a larger nucleus. Fusion of
hydrogen nuclei into helium nuclei is the source of energy of all stars
including our sun.

Physical Quantity Symbol Dimensions Units Remarks

Atomic mass unit [M] u Unit of mass for
expressing atomic or
nuclear masses. One
atomic mass unit equals
1/12th of the mass of 12C
atom.

Disintegration or l [T –1] s–1

decay constant

Half-life T [T ] s Time taken for the decay
1/2

of one-half of the initial
number of nuclei present
in a radioactive sample.

Mean life t [T ] s Time at which number of
nuclei has been reduced to
e–1 of its initial value

Activity of a radio- R [ T–1] Bq Measure of the activity
active sample of a radioactive source.

319

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

POINTS TO PONDER

1. The density of nuclear matter is independent of the size of the nucleus.
The mass density of the atom does not follow this rule.

2. The radius of a nucleus determined by electron scattering is found to
be slightly different from that determined by alpha-particle scattering.
This is because electron scattering senses the charge distribution of
the nucleus, whereas alpha and similar particles sense the nuclear
matter.

3. After Einstein showed the equivalence of mass and energy, 2
E = mc ,

we cannot any longer speak of separate laws of conservation of mass
and conservation of energy, but we have to speak of a unified law of
conservation of mass and energy. The most convincing evidence that
this principle operates in nature comes from nuclear physics. It is
central to our understanding of nuclear energy and harnessing it as a
source of power. Using the principle, Q of a nuclear process (decay or
reaction) can be expressed also in terms of initial and final masses.

4. The nature of the binding energy (per nucleon) curve shows that
exothermic nuclear reactions are possible, when two light nuclei fuse
or when a heavy nucleus undergoes fission into nuclei with intermediate
mass.

5. For fusion, the light nuclei must have sufficient initial energy to
overcome the coulomb potential barrier. That is why fusion requires
very high temperatures.

6. Although the binding energy (per nucleon) curve is smooth and slowly
varying, it shows peaks at nuclides like 4He, 16O etc. This is considered
as evidence of atom-like shell structure in nuclei.

7. Electron and positron are a particle-antiparticle pair. They are identical
in mass; their charges are equal in magnitude and opposite. ( It is
found that when an electron and a positron come together, they
annihilate each other giving energy in the form of gamma-ray photons.)

8. Radioactivity is an indication of the instability of nuclei. Stability
requires the ratio of neutron to proton to be around 1:1 for light
nuclei. This ratio increases to about 3:2 for heavy nuclei. (More
neutrons are required to overcome the effect of repulsion among the
protons.) Nuclei which are away from the stability ratio, i.e., nuclei
which have an excess of neutrons  or protons are unstable. In fact,
only about 10% of knon isotopes (of all elements), are stable. Others
have been either artificially produced in the laboratory by bombarding
α, p, d, n or other particles on targets of stable nuclear species or
identified in astronomical observations of matter in the universe.

320

Reprint 2025-26



Nuclei

EXERCISES

You may find the following data useful in solving the exercises:

e = 1.6×10–19C N = 6.023×1023 per mole
1/(4pe ) = 9 × 109 N m2/C2 k = 1.381×10–23J K–1

0

1 MeV = 1.6×10–13J 1 u = 931.5 MeV/c2

1 year = 3.154×107 s

m = 1.007825 u m = 1.008665 u
H n

m( 4
2He ) = 4.002603 u m = 0.000548 u

e

13.1 Obtain the binding energy (in MeV) of a nitrogen nucleus (14
7 N) ,

given 14
m ( 7 N)=14.00307 u

13.2 Obtain the binding energy of the nuclei 56
26Fe  and 209

83 Bi  in units of
MeV from the following data:

m ( 56
26Fe ) = 55.934939 u        m ( 209

83 Bi ) = 208.980388 u

13.3 A given coin has a mass of 3.0 g. Calculate the nuclear energy that
would be required to separate all the neutrons and protons from
each other. For simplicity assume that the coin is entirely made of
63
29Cu  atoms (of mass 62.92960 u).

13.4 Obtain approximately the ratio of the nuclear radii of the gold isotope
197
79 Au  and the silver isotope 107

47 Ag .

13.5 The Q value of a nuclear reaction A + b ® C + d is defined by

Q = [ m  + m  – m  – m ]c2
A b C d

         where the masses refer to the respective nuclei. Determine from the
given data the Q-value of the following reactions and state whether
the reactions are exothermic or endothermic.

(i) 1H 3 2 2
1 +1H →1 H+1H

(ii) 12C+12 20 4
6 6C →10 Ne+2He

Atomic masses are given to be

m ( 2
1 H ) = 2.014102 u

m ( 3
1 H ) = 3.016049 u

m (12
6 C ) = 12.000000 u

m ( 20
10 Ne ) = 19.992439 u

13.6 Suppose, we think of fission of a 56
26Fe  nucleus into two equal

fragments, 28
13 Al . Is the fission energetically possible? Argue by

working out Q of the process. Given m ( 56
26Fe ) = 55.93494 u and

m ( 28
13 Al ) = 27.98191 u.

321

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
13.7 The fission properties of 239

94 Pu  are very similar to those of 235
92 U . The

average energy released per fission is 180 MeV. How much energy,
in MeV, is released if all the atoms in 1 kg of pure 239

94 Pu  undergo
fission?

13.8 How long can an electric lamp of 100W be kept glowing by fusion of
2.0 kg of deuterium? Take the fusion reaction as

2 2 3
1H+ 1H→ 2He+n+3.27 MeV

13.9 Calculate the height of the potential barrier for a head on collision
of two deuterons. (Hint: The height of the potential barrier is given
by the Coulomb repulsion between the two deuterons when they
just touch each other. Assume that they can be taken as hard
spheres of radius 2.0 fm.)

13.10 From the relation R = R A1/3, where R  is a constant and A is the
0 0

mass number of a nucleus, show that the nuclear matter density is
nearly constant (i.e. independent of A).

322

Reprint 2025-26


##14##
Chapter Fourteen

SEMICONDUCTOR
ELECTRONICS:
MATERIALS, DEVICES
AND SIMPLE CIRCUITS

14.1  INTRODUCTION

Devices in which a controlled flow of electrons can be obtained are the
basic building blocks of all the electronic circuits. Before the discovery of
transistor in 1948, such devices were mostly vacuum tubes (also called
valves) like the vacuum diode which has two electrodes, viz., anode (often
called plate) and cathode; triode which has three electrodes – cathode,
plate and grid; tetrode and pentode (respectively with 4 and 5 electrodes).
In a vacuum tube, the electrons are supplied by a heated cathode and
the controlled flow of these electrons in vacuum is obtained by varying
the voltage between its different electrodes. Vacuum is required in the
inter-electrode space; otherwise the moving electrons may lose their
energy on collision with the air molecules in their path. In these devices
the electrons can flow only from the cathode to the anode (i.e., only in one
direction). Therefore, such devices are generally referred to as valves.
These vacuum tube devices are bulky, consume high power, operate
generally at high voltages (~100 V) and have limited life and low reliability.
The seed of the development of modern solid-state semiconductor
electronics goes back to 1930’s when it was realised that some solid-
state semiconductors and their junctions offer the possibility of controlling
the number and the direction of flow of charge carriers through them.
Simple excitations like light, heat or small applied voltage can change
the number of mobile charges in a semiconductor. Note that the supply

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
and flow of charge carriers in the semiconductor devices are within the
solid itself, while in the earlier vacuum tubes/valves, the mobile electrons
were obtained from a heated cathode and they were made to flow in an
evacuated space or vacuum. No external heating or large evacuated space
is required by the semiconductor devices. They are small in size, consume
low power, operate at low voltages and have long life and high reliability.
Even the Cathode Ray Tubes (CRT) used in television and computer
monitors which work on the principle of vacuum tubes are being replaced
by Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) monitors with supporting solid state
electronics. Much before the full implications of the semiconductor devices
was formally understood, a naturally occurring crystal of galena (Lead
sulphide, PbS) with a metal point contact attached to it was used as
detector of radio waves.

In the following sections, we will introduce the basic concepts of
semiconductor physics and discuss some semiconductor devices like
junction diodes (a 2-electrode device) and bipolar junction transistor (a
3-electrode device). A few circuits illustrating their applications will also
be described.

14.2 CLASSIFICATION OF METALS, CONDUCTORS AND

SEMICONDUCTORS

On the basis of conductivity
On the basis of the relative values of electrical conductivity (s ) or resistivity
(r = 1/s ), the solids are broadly classified as:
(i) Metals: They possess very low resistivity (or high conductivity).

r ~ 10–2 – 10–8 W m
s ~ 102 – 108 S m–1

(ii) Semiconductors: They have resistivity or conductivity intermediate
to metals and insulators.
r ~ 10–5 – 106 W m
s ~ 105 – 10–6 S m–1

(iii)Insulators: They have high resistivity (or low conductivity).
r ~ 1011 – 1019 W m
s ~ 10–11 – 10–19 S m–1

The values of r and s given above are indicative of magnitude and
could well go outside the ranges as well. Relative values of the resistivity
are not the only criteria for distinguishing metals, insulators and
semiconductors from each other. There are some other differences, which
will become clear as we go along in this chapter.

Our interest in this chapter is in the study of semiconductors which
could be:
(i) Elemental semiconductors: Si and Ge
(ii) Compound semiconductors: Examples are:

· Inorganic: CdS, GaAs, CdSe, InP, etc.
· Organic: anthracene, doped pthalocyanines, etc.
· Organic polymers:  polypyrrole, polyaniline, polythiophene, etc.
Most of the currently available semiconductor devices are based on

324 elemental semiconductors Si or Ge and compound inorganic
semiconductors. However, after 1990, a few semiconductor devices using

Reprint 2025-26



Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and

Simple Circuits

organic semiconductors and semiconducting polymers have been
developed signalling the birth of a futuristic technology of polymer-
electronics and molecular-electronics. In this chapter, we will restrict
ourselves to the study of inorganic semiconductors, particularly
elemental semiconductors Si and Ge. The general concepts introduced
here for discussing the elemental semiconductors, by-and-large, apply
to most of the compound semiconductors as well.

On the basis of energy bands

According to the Bohr atomic model, in an isolated atom the energy of
any of its electrons is decided by the orbit in which it revolves. But when
the atoms come together to form a solid they are close to each other. So
the outer orbits of electrons from neighbouring atoms would come very
close or could even overlap. This would make the nature of electron motion
in a solid very different from that in an isolated atom.

Inside the crystal each electron has a unique position and no two
electrons see exactly the same pattern of surrounding charges. Because
of this, each electron will have a different energy level. These different
energy levels with continuous energy variation form what are called
energy bands.  The energy band which includes the energy levels of the
valence electrons is called the valence band. The energy band above the
valence band is called the conduction band. With no external energy, all
the valence electrons will reside in the valence band. If the lowest level in
the conduction band happens to be lower than the highest level of the
valence band, the electrons from the valence band can easily move into
the conduction band. Normally the conduction band is empty. But when
it overlaps on the valence band electrons can move freely into it. This is
the case with metallic conductors.

If there is some gap between the conduction band and the valence
band, electrons in the valence band all remain bound and no free electrons
are available in the conduction band. This makes the material an
insulator. But some of the electrons from the valence band may gain
external energy to cross the gap between the conduction band and the
valence band. Then these electrons will move into the conduction band.
At the same time they will create vacant energy levels in the valence band
where other valence electrons can move. Thus the process creates the
possibility of conduction due to electrons in conduction band as well as
due to vacancies in the valence band.

Let us consider what happens in the case of Si or Ge crystal containing
N atoms. For Si, the outermost orbit is the third orbit (n = 3), while for Ge
it is the fourth orbit (n = 4). The number of electrons in the outermost
orbit is 4 (2s and 2p electrons). Hence, the total number of outer electrons
in the crystal is 4N. The maximum possible number of electrons in the
outer orbit is 8 (2s + 6p electrons). So, for the 4N valence electrons there
are 8N available energy states. These 8N discrete energy levels can either
form a continuous band or they may be grouped in different bands
depending upon the distance between the atoms in the crystal (see box
on Band Theory of Solids).

At the distance between the atoms in the crystal lattices of Si and Ge,
the energy band of these 8N states is split apart into two which are
separated by an energy gap E  (Fig. 14.1). The lower band which is

g
completely occupied by the 4N valence electrons at temperature of absolute 325
zero is the valence band.  The other band consisting of 4N energy states,
called the conduction band, is completely eRmepprintty 2 a02t5 a-2b6solute zero.



Physics
The lowest energy level in the

conduction band is shown as E  and
C

highest energy level in the valence band
is shown as E . Above E  and below E

V C V
there are a large number of closely spaced
energy levels, as shown in Fig. 14.1.

The gap between the top of the  valence
band and bottom of the conduction band
is called the energy band gap (Energy gap
E ). It may be large, small, or zero,

g
depending upon the material. These
different situations, are depicted in Fig.
14.2 and discussed below:
Case I: This refers to a situation, as
shown in Fig. 14.2(a). One can have a
metal either when the conduction band

FIGURE 14.1 The energy band positions in a is partially filled and the balanced band
semiconductor at 0 K. The upper band, called the is partially empty or when the conduction

conduction band, consists of infinitely large number and valance bands overlap. When there
of closely spaced energy states. The lower band, is overlap electrons from valence band can

called the valence band, consists of closely spaced easily move into the conduction band.
completely filled energy states.

This situation makes a  large number of
electrons available for electrical conduction. When the valence band is
partially empty, electrons from its lower level can move to higher level
making conduction possible. Therefore, the resistance of such materials
is low or the conductivity is high.

FIGURE 14.2 Difference between energy bands of (a) metals,
326 (b) insulators and (c) semiconductors.

Reprint 2025-26



Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and

Simple Circuits

Case II: In this case, as shown in Fig. 14.2(b), a large band gap E  exists
g

(E  > 3 eV). There are no electrons in the conduction band, and therefore
g

no electrical conduction is possible. Note that the energy gap is so large
that electrons cannot be excited from the valence band  to the conduction
band by thermal excitation. This is the case of insulators.
Case III: This situation is shown in Fig. 14.2(c). Here a finite but small
band gap (E  < 3 eV) exists. Because of the small band gap, at room

g
temperature some electrons from valence band can acquire enough
energy to cross the energy gap and enter the  conduction band. These
electrons (though small in numbers) can move in the conduction band.
Hence, the resistance of semiconductors is not as high as that of the
insulators.

In this section we have made a broad classification of metals,
conductors and semiconductors. In the section which follows you will
learn the conduction process in semiconductors.

14.3  INTRINSIC SEMICONDUCTOR

We shall take the most common case of Ge and Si whose
lattice structure is shown in Fig. 14.3. These structures
are called the  diamond-like structures. Each atom is
surrounded by four nearest neighbours. We know that
Si and Ge have four valence electrons. In its crystalline
structure, every Si or Ge atom tends to share one of its
four valence electrons with each of its four nearest
neighbour atoms, and also to take share of one electron
from each such neighbour. These shared electron pairs
are referred to as forming a  covalent bond or simply a
valence bond. The two shared electrons can be assumed
to shuttle back-and-forth between the associated atoms
holding them together strongly. Figure 14.4 schematically
shows the 2-dimensional representation of Si or Ge FIGURE 14.3 Three-dimensional dia-
structure shown in Fig. 14.3 which overemphasises the mond-like crystal structure for Carbon,
covalent bond. It shows an idealised picture in which no Silicon or Germanium with
bonds are broken (all bonds are intact). Such a situation respective lattice spacing a equal
arises at low temperatures. As the temperature increases, to 3.56, 5.43 and 5.66 Å.
more thermal energy becomes available to these electrons and some of
these electrons may break–away (becoming free electrons contributing to
conduction). The thermal energy effectively ionises only a few atoms in the
crystalline lattice and creates a vacancy in the bond as shown in Fig. 14.5(a).
The neighbourhood, from which the free electron (with charge –q) has come
out leaves a vacancy with an effective charge (+q). This vacancy with the
effective positive electronic charge is called a hole. The hole behaves as an
apparent free particle with effective positive charge.

In intrinsic semiconductors, the number of free electrons, n is equal to
e 

the number of holes, n .  That is
h

n  = n  = n (14.1)
e h i

where n  is called intrinsic carrier concentration.
i

Semiconductors posses the unique property in which, apart from
electrons, the holes also move. Suppose there is a hole at site 1 as shown 327

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
in Fig. 14.5(a). The movement of holes can be
visualised as shown in Fig. 14.5(b). An electron
from the covalent bond at site 2 may jump to
the vacant site 1 (hole). Thus, after such a jump,
the hole is at site 2 and the site 1 has now an
electron. Therefore, apparently, the hole has
moved from site 1 to site 2. Note that the electron
originally set free [Fig. 14.5(a)] is not involved
in this process of hole motion. The free electron
moves completely independently as conduction
electron and gives rise to an electron current, I

e
under an applied electric field. Remember that
the motion of hole is only a convenient way of

FIGURE 14.4 Schematic two-dimensional describing the actual motion of bound electrons,
representation of Si or Ge structure showing whenever there is an empty bond anywhere in

covalent bonds at low temperature
(all bonds intact). +4 symbol the crystal. Under the action of an electric field,

indicates inner cores of Si or Ge. these holes move towards negative potential
giving the hole current, I . The total current, I is

h
thus the sum of the electron current I  and the

e
hole current I :

h

I = I  + I (14.2)
e h

It may be noted that apart from the process of generation of conduction
electrons and holes, a simultaneous process of recombination occurs in
which the electrons recombine with the holes. At equilibrium, the rate of
generation is equal to the rate of recombination of charge carriers. The
recombination occurs due to an electron colliding with a hole.

(a) (b)
FIGURE 14.5 (a) Schematic model of generation of hole at site 1 and conduction electron

due to thermal energy at moderate temperatures. (b) Simplified representation of
possible thermal motion of a hole. The electron from the lower left hand covalent bond

(site 2) goes to the earlier hole site1, leaving a hole at its site indicating an
328 apparent movement of the hole from site 1 to site 2.

Reprint 2025-26



Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and

Simple Circuits

An intrinsic semiconductor
will behave like an insulator at
T = 0 K as shown in Fig. 14.6(a).
It is the thermal energy at
higher temperatures (T > 0K),
which excites some electrons
from the valence band to the
conduction band. These
thermally excited electrons at
T > 0 K, partially occupy the
conduction band. Therefore,
the energy-band diagram of an
intrinsic semiconductor will be
as shown in Fig. 14.6(b). Here, FIGURE 14.6 (a)  An intrinsic semiconductor at T = 0 K
some electrons are shown in behaves like insulator. (b)  At T > 0 K, four thermally generated
the conduction band. These electron-hole pairs. The filled circles ( ) represent electrons
have come from the valence and empty circles ( ) represent holes.
band leaving equal number of
holes there.

Example 14.1 C, Si and Ge have same lattice structure. Why is C
insulator while Si and Ge intrinsic semiconductors?

Solution  The 4 bonding electrons of C, Si or Ge lie, respectively, in
the second, third and fourth orbit.  Hence, energy required to take
out an electron from these atoms (i.e., ionisation energy E ) will be

g
least for Ge, followed by Si and highest for C. Hence, number of free
electrons for conduction in Ge and Si are significant but negligibly
small for C.

14.4  EXTRINSIC SEMICONDUCTOR

The conductivity of an intrinsic semiconductor depends on its
temperature, but at room temperature its conductivity is very low. As
such, no important electronic devices can be developed using these
semiconductors. Hence there is a necessity of improving their
conductivity. This can be done by making use of impurities.

When a small amount, say, a few parts per million (ppm), of a suitable
impurity is added to the pure semiconductor, the conductivity of the
semiconductor is increased manifold. Such materials are known as
extrinsic semiconductors or impurity semiconductors. The deliberate
addition of a desirable impurity is called doping and the impurity atoms
are called dopants. Such a material is also called a doped semiconductor.
The dopant has to be such that it does not distort the original pure
semiconductor lattice. It occupies only a very few of the original
semiconductor atom sites in the crystal. A necessary condition to attain
this is that the sizes of the dopant and the semiconductor atoms should
be nearly the same.

There are two types of dopants used in doping the tetravalent Si
or Ge:
(i) Pentavalent (valency 5); like Arsenic (As), Antimony (Sb), Phosphorous

(P), etc. 329

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 14.1



Physics
(ii) Trivalent (valency 3); like Indium (In),

Boron (B), Aluminium (Al), etc.
We shall now discuss how the doping

changes the number of charge carriers (and
hence the conductivity) of semiconductors.
Si or Ge belongs to the fourth group in the
Periodic table and, therefore, we choose the
dopant element from nearby fifth or third
group, expecting and taking care that the
size of the dopant atom is nearly the same as
that of Si or Ge. Interestingly, the pentavalent
and trivalent dopants in Si or Ge give two
entirely different types of semiconductors as
discussed below.

(i)  n-type semiconductor

Suppose we dope Si or Ge with a pentavalent
element as shown in Fig. 14.7. When an atom
of  +5 valency element  occupies the position
of an atom in the crystal lattice of Si, four of
its electrons bond with the four silicon
neighbours while the fifth remains very
weakly bound to its parent atom. This is
because the four electrons participating in

FIGURE 14.7 (a) Pentavalent donor atom (As, Sb, bonding are seen as part of the effective core
P, etc.) doped for tetravalent Si or Ge giving n- of the atom by the fifth electron. As a result
type semiconductor, and (b) Commonly used the ionisation energy required to set this
schematic representation of n-type material electron free is very small and even at room

which shows only the fixed cores of the
substituent donors with one additional effective temperature it will be free to move in the

positive charge and its associated extra electron. lattice of the semiconductor. For example, the
energy required is ~ 0.01 eV for germanium,
and 0.05 eV for silicon, to separate this

electron from its atom. This is in contrast to the energy required to jump
the forbidden band (about 0.72 eV for germanium and about 1.1 eV for
silicon) at room temperature in the intrinsic semiconductor.  Thus, the
pentavalent dopant is donating one extra electron for conduction and
hence is known as donor impurity. The number of electrons made
available for conduction by dopant atoms depends strongly upon the
doping level and is independent of any increase in ambient temperature.
On the other hand, the number of free electrons (with an equal number
of holes) generated by Si atoms, increases weakly with temperature.

In a doped semiconductor the total number of conduction electrons
n  is due to the electrons contributed by donors and those generated

e
intrinsically, while the total number of holes n  is only due to the holes

h
from the intrinsic source. But the rate of recombination of holes would
increase due to the increase in the number of electrons. As a result, the
number of holes would get reduced further.

Thus, with proper level of doping the number of conduction electrons
330 can be made much larger than the number of holes. Hence in an extrinsic

Reprint 2025-26



Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and

Simple Circuits

semiconductor doped with pentavalent impurity, electrons
become the majority carriers and holes the minority carriers.
These semiconductors are, therefore, known as n-type
semiconductors. For n-type semiconductors, we have,

n  >> n (14.3)
e h

(ii)  p-type semiconductor

This is obtained when Si or Ge is doped with a trivalent impurity
like Al, B, In, etc. The dopant has one valence electron less than
Si or Ge and, therefore, this atom can form covalent bonds with
neighbouring three Si atoms but does not have any electron to
offer to the fourth Si atom. So the bond between the fourth
neighbour and the trivalent atom has a vacancy or hole as
shown in Fig. 14.8. Since the neighbouring Si atom in the lattice
wants an electron in place of a hole, an electron  in the outer
orbit of an atom in the neighbourhood may jump to fill this
vacancy, leaving a vacancy or hole at its own site. Thus the hole
is available for conduction. Note that the trivalent foreign atom
becomes effectively negatively charged when it shares fourth
electron with neighbouring Si atom. Therefore, the dopant atom
of p-type material can be treated as core of one negative charge
along with its associated hole as shown in Fig. 14.8(b). It is
obvious that one acceptor atom gives one hole. These holes are
in addition to the intrinsically generated holes while the source
of conduction electrons is only intrinsic generation. Thus, for
such a material, the holes are the majority carriers and electrons
are minority carriers. Therefore, extrinsic semiconductors doped FIGURE 14.8 (a) Trivalent
with trivalent impurity are called p-type semiconductors. For acceptor atom (In, Al, B etc.)
p-type semiconductors, the recombination process will reduce doped in tetravalent Si or Ge

the number (n )of intrinsically generated electrons to n . lattice giving p-type semicon-
i e ductor. (b) Commonly used

We have, for p-type semiconductors schematic representation of
n  >> n (14.4)

h e p-type material which shows
Note that the crystal maintains an overall charge neutrality only the fixed core of the

substituent acceptor with
as the charge of additional charge carriers is just equal and

one effective additional
opposite to that of the ionised cores in the lattice. negative charge and its

In extrinsic semiconductors, because of the abundance of associated hole.
majority current carriers, the minority carriers produced
thermally have more chance of meeting majority carriers and
thus getting destroyed. Hence, the dopant, by adding a large number of
current carriers of one type, which become the majority carriers, indirectly
helps to reduce the intrinsic concentration of minority carriers.

The semiconductor’s energy band structure is affected by doping. In
the case of extrinsic semiconductors, additional energy states due to donor
impurities (E ) and acceptor impurities (E ) also exist. In the energy band

D A
diagram of n-type Si semiconductor, the donor energy level E  is slightly

D
below the bottom EC of the conduction band and electrons from this level
move into the conduction band with very small supply of energy. At room
temperature, most of the donor atoms get ionised but very few (~1012)
atoms of Si get ionised.  So the conduction band will have most electrons
coming from the donor impurities, as shown in Fig. 14.9(a). Similarly, 331

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
for p-type semiconductor, the acceptor energy level E  is slightly above

A
the top E  of the valence band as shown in Fig. 14.9(b). With very small

V
supply of energy an electron from the valence band can jump to the level
E  and ionise the acceptor negatively. (Alternately, we can also say that

A
with very small supply of energy the hole from level E  sinks down into

A
the valence band. Electrons rise up and holes fall down when they gain
external energy.) At room temperature, most of the acceptor atoms get
ionised leaving holes in the valence band. Thus at room temperature the
density of holes in the valence band is predominantly due to impurity in
the extrinsic semiconductor. The electron and hole concentration in a
semiconductor in thermal equilibrium is given by

n n  = n 2 (14.5)
e h i

Though the above description is grossly approximate and
hypothetical, it helps in understanding the difference between metals,
insulators and semiconductors (extrinsic and intrinsic) in a simple
manner. The difference in the resistivity of C, Si and Ge depends upon
the energy gap between their conduction and valence bands. For C
(diamond), Si and Ge, the energy gaps are 5.4 eV, 1.1 eV and 0.7 eV,
respectively. Sn also is a group IV element but it is a metal because the
energy gap in its case  is 0 eV.

FIGURE 14.9 Energy bands of (a) n-type semiconductor at T > 0K, (b) p-type
semiconductor at T > 0K.

Example 14.2 Suppose a pure Si crystal has 5 × 1028 atoms m–3. It is
doped by 1 ppm concentration of pentavalent As. Calculate the
number of electrons and holes. Given that n  =1.5 × 1016 m–3.

i

Solution Note that thermally generated electrons (n  ~1016 m–3) are
i

negligibly small as compared to those produced by doping.
Therefore, n  » N .

e D

Since n n  = n 2, The number of holes
e h i

n  = (2.25 × 1032)/(5 ×1022)
h

332           ~ 4.5 × 109 m–3

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 14.2



Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and

Simple Circuits

14.5  p-n JUNCTION

A p-n junction is the basic building block of many semiconductor devices
like diodes, transistor, etc. A clear understanding of the junction behaviour
is important to analyse the working of other semiconductor devices.
We will now try to understand how a junction is formed and how the
junction behaves under the influence of external applied voltage (also
called bias).

14.5.1  p-n junction formation

Consider a thin p-type silicon (p-Si) semiconductor wafer. By adding
precisely a small quantity of pentavelent impurity, part of the p-Si wafer
can be converted into n-Si. There are several processes by which a
semiconductor can be formed. The wafer now contains p-region and
n-region and a metallurgical junction between p-, and n- region.

Two important processes occur during the formation of a p-n junction:
diffusion and drift. We know that in an n-type semiconductor, the
concentration of electrons (number of electrons per unit volume) is more
compared to the concentration of holes. Similarly, in a p-type
semiconductor, the concentration of holes is more than the concentration
of electrons. During the formation of p-n junction, and due to the
concentration gradient across p-, and n- sides, holes diffuse from p-side
to n-side (p ® n) and electrons diffuse from n-side to p-side (n ® p). This
motion of charge carries gives rise to diffusion current across the junction.

When an electron diffuses from n ® p, it leaves behind an ionised
donor on n-side. This ionised donor (positive charge) is immobile as it is
bonded to the surrounding atoms. As the electrons continue to diffuse
from n ® p, a layer of positive charge (or positive space-charge region) on
n-side of the junction is developed.

Similarly, when a hole diffuses from p ® n due to the concentration
gradient, it leaves behind an ionised acceptor (negative charge) which is
immobile. As the holes continue to diffuse, a layer of negative charge (or
negative space-charge region) on the p-side of the junction is developed.
This space-charge region on either side of the junction together is known
as depletion region as the electrons and holes  taking
part in the initial movement across the junction depleted
the region of its free charges (Fig. 14.10). The thickness
of depletion region is of the order of one-tenth of a
micrometre. Due to the positive space-charge region on
n-side of the junction and negative space charge region
on p-side of the junction, an electric field directed from
positive charge towards negative charge develops. Due
to this field, an electron on p-side of the junction moves
to n-side and a hole on n-side of the junction moves to p- FIGURE 14.10 p-n junction
side. The motion of charge carriers due to the electric field formation process.
is called drift.  Thus a drift current, which is opposite in
direction to the diffusion current (Fig. 14.10) starts. 333

Reprint 2025-26

Formation and working of p-n junction diode
http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/solids/pnjun.html



Physics
Initially, diffusion current is large and drift current is small.

As the diffusion process continues, the space-charge regions
on either side of the junction extend, thus increasing the electric
field strength  and hence drift current. This process continues
until the diffusion current equals the drift current. Thus a p-n
junction is formed. In a p-n junction under equilibrium there
is no net current.

The loss of electrons from the n-region and the gain of
electron by the p-region causes a  difference of potential across
the junction of the two regions. The polarity of this potential is
such as to oppose further flow of carriers so that a condition of
equilibrium exists. Figure 14.11 shows the p-n junction at
equilibrium and the potential across the junction. The
n-material has lost electrons, and p material has acquired
electrons. The n material is thus positive relative to the p

FIGURE 14.11 (a) Diode under material. Since this potential tends to prevent the movement of
equilibrium (V = 0), (b) Barrier electron from the n region into the p region, it is often called a

potential under no bias. barrier potential.

Example 14.3  Can we take one slab of p-type semiconductor and
physically join it to another n-type semiconductor to get p-n junction?

Solution  No! Any slab, howsoever flat, will have roughness much
larger than the inter-atomic crystal spacing (~2 to 3 Å) and hence
continuous contact at the atomic level will not be possible. The junction
will behave as a discontinuity for the flowing charge carriers.

14.6  SEMICONDUCTOR DIODE

A semiconductor diode [Fig. 14.12(a)] is basically a p-n
junction with metallic contacts provided at the ends for
the application of an external voltage. It is a two terminal
device. A p-n junction diode is symbolically represented
as shown in Fig. 14.12(b).

The direction of arrow indicates the conventional
direction of current (when the diode is under forward

p n bias). The equilibrium barrier potential can be altered
by applying an external voltage V across the diode. The

FIGURE 14.12 (a) Semiconductor diode, situation of p-n junction diode under equilibrium
(b) Symbol for p-n junction diode. (without bias) is shown in Fig. 14.11(a) and (b).

14.6.1  p-n junction diode under forward bias
When an external voltage V is applied across a semiconductor diode such
that p-side is connected to the positive terminal of the battery and n-side
to the negative terminal [Fig. 14.13(a)], it is said to be forward biased.

The applied voltage mostly drops across the depletion region and the
voltage drop across the p-side and n-side of the junction is negligible.
(This is because the resistance of the depletion region – a region where
there are no charges – is very high compared to the resistance of  n-side

334 and p-side.) The direction of the applied voltage (V ) is opposite to the

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 14.3



Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and

Simple Circuits

built-in potential V0. As a result, the depletion layer width
decreases and the barrier height is reduced [Fig. 14.13(b)]. The
effective barrier height under forward bias is (V0 – V ).

If the applied voltage is small, the barrier potential will be
reduced only slightly below the equilibrium value, and only a
small number of carriers in the material—those that happen to
be in the uppermost energy levels—will possess enough energy
to cross the junction. So the current will be small. If we increase
the applied voltage significantly, the barrier height will be reduced
and more number of carriers will have the required energy. Thus
the current increases.

Due to the applied voltage, electrons from n-side cross the
depletion region and reach p-side (where they are minority
carries). Similarly, holes from p-side cross the junction and reach
the n-side (where they are minority carries). This process under
forward bias is known as minority carrier injection. At the
junction boundary, on each side, the minority carrier FIGURE 14.13 (a) p-n
concentration increases significantly compared to the locations junction diode under forward

far from the junction. bias, (b) Barrier potential

Due to this concentration gradient, the injected electrons on (1) without battery, (2) Low
battery voltage, and (3) High

p-side diffuse from the junction edge of p-side to the other end voltage battery.
of p-side. Likewise, the injected holes on n-side diffuse from the
junction edge of n-side to the other end of n-side
(Fig. 14.14). This motion of charged carriers on either side
gives rise to current. The total diode forward current is sum
of hole diffusion current and conventional current due to
electron diffusion. The magnitude of this current is usually
in mA.

14.6.2  p-n junction diode under reverse bias
When an external voltage (V ) is applied across the diode such FIGURE 14.14 Forward bias
that n-side is positive and p-side is negative, it is said to be minority carrier injection.
reverse biased [Fig.14.15(a)]. The applied voltage mostly
drops across the depletion region. The direction of applied voltage is same
as the direction of barrier potential. As a result, the barrier height increases
and the depletion region widens due to the change in the electric field.
The effective barrier height under reverse bias is (V0 + V ), [Fig. 14.15(b)].
This suppresses the flow of electrons from n ® p and holes from p ® n.
Thus, diffusion current, decreases enormously compared to the diode
under forward bias.

The electric field direction of the junction is such that if electrons on
p-side or holes on n-side in their random motion come close to the
junction, they will be swept to its majority zone. This drift of carriers
gives rise to current. The drift current is of the order of a few mA. This is
quite low because it is due to the motion of carriers from their minority
side to their majority side across the junction. The drift current is also
there under forward bias but it is negligible (mA) when compared with
current due to injected carriers which is usually in mA.

The diode reverse current is not very much dependent on the applied
voltage. Even a small voltage is sufficient to sweep the minority carriers
from one side of the junction to the other side of the junction. The current 335

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
is not limited by the magnitude of the applied voltage but is
limited due to the concentration of the minority carrier on either
side of the junction.

The current under reverse bias is essentially voltage
independent upto a critical reverse bias voltage, known as
breakdown voltage (V ). When V = V , the diode reverse current

br br
increases sharply. Even a slight increase in the bias voltage causes
large change in the current. If the reverse current is not limited by
an external circuit below the rated value (specified by the
manufacturer) the p-n junction will get destroyed. Once it exceeds
the rated value, the diode gets destroyed due to overheating. This
can happen even for the diode under forward bias, if the forward
current exceeds the rated value.

The circuit arrangement for studying the V-I characteristics
of a diode, (i.e., the variation of current as a function of applied

FIGURE 14.15 (a) Diode voltage) are shown in Fig. 14.16(a) and (b). The battery is connected
under reverse bias,

(b) Barrier potential under to the diode through a potentiometer (or reheostat) so that the
reverse bias. applied voltage to the diode can be changed. For different values

of voltages, the value of the current is noted. A graph between V
and I is obtained as in Fig. 14.16(c). Note that in forward bias

measurement, we use a milliammeter since the expected current is large
(as explained in the earlier section) while a micrometer is used in reverse
bias to measure the current. You can see in Fig. 14.16(c) that in forward

FIGURE 14.16 Experimental circuit arrangement for studying V-I characteristics of
a p-n junction diode (a) in forward bias, (b) in reverse bias. (c) Typical V-I

336 characteristics of a silicon diode.

Reprint 2025-26



Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and

Simple Circuits

bias, the current first increases very slowly, almost negligibly, till the
voltage across the diode crosses a certain value. After the characteristic
voltage, the diode current increases significantly (exponentially), even for
a very small increase in the diode bias voltage. This voltage is called the
threshold voltage or cut-in voltage (~0.2V for germanium diode and
~0.7 V for silicon diode).

For the diode in reverse bias, the current is very small (~mA) and almost
remains constant with change in bias. It is called reverse saturation
current. However, for special cases, at very high reverse bias (break down
voltage), the current suddenly increases. This special action of the diode
is discussed later in Section 14.8. The general purpose diode are not
used beyond the reverse saturation current region.

The above discussion shows that the p-n junction diode primerly
allows the flow of current only in one direction (forward bias). The forward
bias resistance is low as compared to the reverse bias resistance. This
property is used for rectification of ac voltages as discussed in the next
section. For diodes, we define a quantity called dynamic resistance as
the ratio of small change in voltage DV to a small change in current DI:

∆V
rd =

∆ (14.6)
I

Example 14.4 The V-I characteristic of a silicon diode is shown in
the Fig. 14.17. Calculate the resistance of the diode at (a) I  = 15 mA

D

and (b) V   = –10 V.
D

FIGURE 14.17

Solution Considering the diode characteristics as a straight line
between I = 10 mA to I = 20 mA passing through the origin, we can
calculate the resistance using Ohm’s law.
(a) From the curve, at I = 20 mA, V = 0.8 V; I = 10 mA, V = 0.7 V

r  = DV/DI = 0.1V/10 mA = 10 W
fb

(b) From the curve at V = –10 V, I = –1 mA,
Therefore,
r  = 10 V/1mA= 1.0 × 107 W

rb 337

Reprint 2025-26

 EXAMPLE 14.4



Physics

14.7  APPLICATION OF JUNCTION DIODE AS A RECTIFIER

From the V-I characteristic of a junction diode we see that it allows current
to pass only when it is forward biased. So if an alternating voltage is
applied across a diode the current flows only in that part of the cycle

when the diode is forward biased. This property
is used to rectify alternating voltages and the
circuit used for this purpose is called a rectifier.

If an alternating voltage is applied across a
diode in series with a load, a pulsating voltage will
appear across the load only during the half cycles
of the ac input during which the diode is forward
biased. Such rectifier circuit, as shown in
Fig. 14.18, is called a half-wave rectifier. The
secondary of a transformer supplies the desired
ac voltage across terminals A and B. When the
voltage at A is positive, the diode is forward biased
and it conducts. When A is negative, the diode is
reverse-biased and it does not conduct. The reverse
saturation current of a diode is negligible and can
be considered equal to zero for practical purposes.
(The reverse breakdown voltage of the diode must
be sufficiently higher than the peak ac voltage at
the secondary of the transformer to protect the
diode from reverse breakdown.)

Therefore, in the positive half-cycle of ac there
FIGURE 14.18 (a) Half-wave rectifier is a current through the load resistor R  and we

circuit, (b) Input ac voltage and output L
get an output voltage, as shown in Fig. 14.18(b),

voltage waveforms from the rectifier circuit.
whereas there is no current in the negative half-
cycle. In the next positive half-cycle, again we get

the output voltage. Thus, the output voltage, though still varying, is
restricted to only one direction and is said to be rectified. Since the
rectified output of this circuit is only for half of the input ac wave it is
called as half-wave rectifier.

The circuit using two diodes, shown in Fig. 14.19(a), gives output
rectified voltage corresponding to both the positive as well as negative
half of the ac cycle. Hence, it is known as full-wave rectifier. Here the
p-side of the two diodes are connected to the ends of the secondary of the
transformer. The n-side of the diodes are connected together and the
output is taken between this common point of diodes and the midpoint
of the secondary of the transformer. So for a full-wave rectifier the
secondary of the transformer is provided with a centre tapping and so it
is called centre-tap transformer. As can be seen from Fig.14.19(c) the
voltage rectified by each diode is only half the total secondary voltage.
Each diode rectifies only for half the cycle, but the two do so for alternate
cycles. Thus, the output between their common terminals and the centre-
tap of the transformer becomes a full-wave rectifier output. (Note that
there is another circuit of full wave rectifier which does not need a centre-

338 tap transformer but needs four diodes.) Suppose the input voltage to A

Reprint 2025-26



Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and

Simple Circuits

with respect to the centre tap at any instant
is positive. It is clear that, at that instant,
voltage at B being out of phase will be
negative as shown in Fig.14.19(b). So, diode
D  gets forward biased and conducts (while

1
D  being reverse biased is not conducting).

2
Hence, during this positive half cycle we get
an output current (and a output voltage
across the load resistor R ) as shown in

L
Fig.14.19(c). In the course of the ac cycle
when the voltage at A becomes negative with
respect to centre tap, the voltage at B would
be positive. In this part of the cycle diode
D  would not conduct but diode D  would,

1 2
giving an output current and output
voltage (across R ) during the negative half

L
cycle of the input ac. Thus, we get output
voltage during both the positive as well as
the negative half of the cycle. Obviously,
this is a more efficient circuit for getting
rectified voltage or current than the half-
wave rectifier.

The rectified voltage is in the form of
pulses of the shape of half sinusoids.
Though it is unidirectional it does not have
a steady value. To get steady dc output
from the pulsating voltage normally a
capacitor is connected across the output
terminals (parallel to the load R ). One can

L
also use an inductor in series with R  for

L
the same purpose. Since these additional FIGURE 14.19 (a) A Full-wave rectifier

circuits appear to filter out the ac ripple circuit; (b) Input wave forms given to the
diode D  at A and to the diode D  at B;

and give a pure dc voltage, so they are 1 2
(c) Output waveform across the

called filters. load R  connected in the full-wave
L

Now we shall discuss the role of rectifier circuit.
capacitor in filtering. When the voltage
across the capacitor is rising, it gets
charged. If there is no external load, it remains charged to the peak voltage
of the rectified output. When there is a load, it gets discharged through
the load and the voltage across it begins to fall. In the next half-cycle of
rectified output it again gets charged to the peak value (Fig. 14.20). The
rate of fall of the voltage across the capacitor depends inversely upon the
product of capacitance C and the effective resistance R  used in the circuit

L

and is called the time constant.  To make the time constant large value of
C should be large. So capacitor input filters use large capacitors. The
output voltage obtained by using capacitor input filter is nearer to the
peak voltage of the rectified voltage. This type of filter is most widely
used in power supplies. 339

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

FIGURE 14.20 (a) A full-wave rectifier with capacitor filter, (b) Input and output
voltage of rectifier in (a).

SUMMARY

1. Semiconductors are the basic materials used in the present solid state
electronic devices like diode, transistor, ICs, etc.

2. Lattice structure and the atomic structure of constituent elements
decide whether a particular material will be insulator, metal or
semiconductor.

3. Metals have low resistivity (10–2 to 10–8 Wm), insulators have very high
resistivity (>108 

W m–1), while semiconductors have intermediate values
of resistivity.

4. Semiconductors are elemental (Si, Ge) as well as compound (GaAs,
CdS, etc.).

5. Pure semiconductors are called ‘intrinsic semiconductors’. The presence
of charge carriers (electrons and holes) is an ‘intrinsic’ property of the
material and these are obtained as a result of thermal excitation. The
number of electrons (n ) is equal to the number of holes (n

h ) in intrinsic
e

conductors. Holes are essentially electron vacancies with an effective
positive charge.

6. The number of charge carriers can be changed by  ‘doping’ of a suitable
impurity in pure semiconductors. Such semiconductors are known as
extrinsic semiconductors. These are of two types (n-type and p-type).

7. In n-type semiconductors, n  >> n  while in p-type semiconductors n
h >> n .

e h e

8. n-type semiconducting Si or Ge is obtained by doping with pentavalent
atoms (donors) like As, Sb, P, etc., while p-type Si or Ge can be obtained
by doping with trivalent atom (acceptors) like B, Al, In etc.

9. n n  = n 2 in all cases. Further, the material possesses an overall charge
e h i

neutrality.
10. There are two distinct band of energies (called valence band and

conduction band) in which the electrons in a material lie. Valence
band energies are low as compared to conduction band energies. All
energy levels in the valence band are filled while energy levels in the
conduction band may be fully empty or partially filled. The electrons in
the conduction band are free to move in a solid and are responsible for
the conductivity. The extent of conductivity depends upon the energy
gap (E ) between the top of valence band (E ) and the bottom of the

g V
conduction band E . The electrons from valence band can be excited by

C

340

Reprint 2025-26



Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and

Simple Circuits

heat, light or electrical energy to the conduction band and thus, produce
a change in the current flowing in a semiconductor.

11. For insulators Eg > 3 eV, for semiconductors E  is 0.2 eV to 3 eV, while
g

for metals E  » 0.
g

12. p-n junction is the ‘key’ to all semiconductor devices. When such a
junction is made, a ‘depletion layer’ is formed consisting of immobile
ion-cores devoid of their electrons or holes. This is responsible for a
junction potential barrier.

13. By changing the external applied voltage, junction barriers can be
changed. In forward bias (n-side is connected to negative terminal of the
battery and p-side is connected to the positive), the barrier is decreased
while the barrier increases in reverse bias. Hence, forward bias current
is more (mA) while it is very small (mA) in a p-n junction diode.

14. Diodes can be used for rectifying an ac voltage (restricting the ac voltage
to one direction). With the help of a capacitor or a suitable filter, a dc
voltage can be obtained.

POINTS TO PONDER

1. The energy bands (E  or E ) in the semiconductors are space delocalised
C V

which means that these are not located in any specific place inside the
solid. The energies are the overall averages. When you see a picture in
which E  or E  are drawn as straight lines, then they should be

C V
respectively taken simply as the bottom of conduction band energy levels
and top of valence band energy levels.

2. In elemental semiconductors (Si or Ge), the n-type or p-type
semiconductors are obtained by introducing ‘dopants’ as defects. In
compound semiconductors, the change in relative stoichiometric ratio
can also change the type of semiconductor. For example, in ideal GaAs
the ratio of Ga:As is 1:1 but in Ga-rich or As-rich GaAs it could
respectively be Ga1.1 As0.9 or Ga0.9 As1.1. In general, the presence of
defects control the properties of semiconductors in many ways.

EXERCISES

14.1 In an n-type silicon, which of the following statement is true:
(a) Electrons are majority carriers and trivalent atoms are the

dopants.
(b) Electrons are minority carriers and pentavalent atoms are the

dopants.
(c) Holes are minority carriers and pentavalent atoms are the

dopants.
(d) Holes are majority carriers and trivalent atoms are the dopants.

14.2 Which of the statements given in Exercise 14.1 is true for p-type
semiconductos.

14.3 Carbon, silicon and germanium have four valence electrons each.
These are characterised by valence and conduction bands separated 341

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
by energy band gap respectively equal to (Eg)C, (Eg)Si and (Eg)Ge. Which
of the following statements is true?
(a) (E )

g Si < (E )   < (E )
g Ge  

g C
(b) (E )

g C < (E ) E )
g Ge > (

g Si
(c) (E )

g C > (E )  E )
g Si > (

g Ge
(d) (E ) = 

g C (E )   E )
g Si = (

g Ge
14.4 In an unbiased p-n junction, holes diffuse from the p-region to

n-region because
(a) free electrons in the n-region attract them.
(b) they move across the junction by the potential difference.
(c) hole concentration in p-region is more as compared to n-region.
(d) All the above.

14.5 When a forward bias is applied to a p-n junction, it
(a) raises the potential barrier.
(b) reduces the majority carrier current to zero.
(c) lowers the potential barrier.
(d) None of the above.

14.6 In half-wave rectification, what is the output frequency if the input
frequency is 50 Hz. What is the output frequency of a full-wave rectifier
for the same input frequency.

342

Reprint 2025-26



Notes

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

 APPENDICES

APPENDIX  A 1

THE GREEK ALPHABET

APPENDIX  A 2

COMMON SI PREFIXES AND SYMBOLS FOR MULTIPLES AND SUB-MULTIPLES

344

Reprint 2025-26



ApApneswndeicrses

APPENDIX  A 3

SOME IMPORTANT CONSTANTS

OTHER USEFUL CONSTANTS

345

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

ANSWERS

CHAPTER 9

9.1 v = –54 cm. The image is real, inverted and magnified. The size of the
image is 5.0 cm. As u ® f, v ® ¥; for u < f, image is virtual.

9.2 v = 6.7 cm. Magnification = 5/9, i.e., the size of the image is 2.5 cm. As
u ® ¥; v ® f (but never beyond) while m ® 0.

9.3 1.33; 1.7 cm

9.4 n = 1.51; n  = 1.32; n  = 1.144; which gives sin r = 0.6181 i.e.,
ga wa gw

r ~ 38°.

9.5 r = 0.8 × tan i  and sin ic = 1/1.33 ≅ 0.75 , where r is the radius (in m)
c

of the largest circle from which light comes out and i  is the critical
c

angle for water-air interface, Area = 2.6 m2

9.6 n ≅  1.53 and D  for prism in water ≅  10°
m

9.7 R = 22 cm
9.8 Here the object is virtual and the image is real. u = +12 cm (object on

right; virtual)
(a) f = +20 cm. Image is real and at 7.5 cm from the lens on its right

side.
(b) f = –16 cm. Image is real and at 48 cm from the lens on its right side.

9.9 v = 8.4 cm, image is erect and virtual. It is diminished to a size
1.8 cm. As u ® ¥, v ® f (but never beyond f while m ® 0).
Note that when the object is placed at the focus of the concave lens
(21 cm), the image is located at 10.5 cm (not at infinity as one might
wrongly think).

9.10 A  diverging lens of focal length 60 cm
9.11 (a) v  = –25 cm and  f  = 6.25 cm give u

e = –5 cm; vO = (15 – 5) cm =
e e

10 cm,
fO = uO = – 2.5 cm; Magnifying power = 20

(b) uO = – 2.59 cm.
Magnifying power = 13.5.

9.12 Angular magnification of the eye-piece for image at 25 cm
25 25

 1  11; | ue |= cm = 2.27cm ; vO = 7.2 cm
2.5 11

Separation = 9.47 cm; Magnifying power = 88
9.13 24; 150 cm
9.14 (a) Angular magnification = 1500

346 (b) Diameter of the image  = 13.7 cm.

Reprint 2025-26



Answers

9.15 Apply mirror equation and the condition:
(a) f < 0 (concave mirror); u < 0 (object on left)
(b) f > 0; u < 0
(c) f > 0 (convex mirror) and u < 0
(d) f < 0 (concave mirror); f < u < 0
to deduce the desired result.

9.16 The pin appears raised by 5.0 cm. It can be seen with an explicit ray
diagram that the answer is independent of the location of the slab
(for small angles of incidence).

9.17 (a) sin i ¢
c = 1.44/1.68 which gives  i ¢  = 59°. Total internal reflection

c
takes place  when i > 59° or when r < rmax = 31°. Now,
(sini /sinr ) = 1.68

max max , which gives imax  ~  60°. Thus, all
incident rays of angles in the range 0 < i < 60° will suffer total
internal reflections in the pipe. (If the length of the pipe is
finite, which it is in practice, there will be a lower limit on i
determined by the ratio of the diameter to the length of the
pipe.)

(b) If there is no outer coating, i ¢ = sin–1(1/1.68) = 36.5°. Now,
c

i = 90° will have r = 36.5°  and  i ¢ = 53.5° which is greater than
i ¢. Thus, all incident rays (in the range 53.5° < i < 90°) will
c
suffer total internal reflections.

9.18 For fixed distance s between object and screen, the lens equation
does not give a real solution for u or v if f is greater than s/4.
Therefore,  fmax = 0.75 m.

9.19 21.4 cm
9.20 (a) (i) Let a parallel beam be the incident from the left on the convex

lens first.
f1 = 30 cm and u1 = –  , give  v1 = + 30 cm. This image becomes
a virtual object for the second lens.
f2 = –20 cm, u2 = + (30 – 8) cm = +  22 cm which gives,
v2 = – 220 cm. The parallel incident beam appears to diverge
from a point 216 cm from the centre of the two-lens system.

(ii) Let the parallel beam be incident from the left on the concave
lens  first: f1 = – 20 cm, u1 = – ¥, give v1 = – 20 cm. This image
becomes a real object for the second lens: f2 = + 30 cm, u2 =
– (20 + 8) cm = – 28 cm which gives, v2 = – 420 cm. The parallel
incident beam appears to diverge from a point 416 cm on the
left of the centre of the two-lens system.

Clearly, the answer depends on which side of the lens system
the parallel beam is incident. Further we do not have a simple lens
equation true for all u (and v) in terms of a definite constant of the
system  (the constant being determined by f  and f , and the separation

1 2
between the lenses). The notion of effective focal length, therefore,
does not seem to be meaningful for this system.
(b) u1 = – 40 cm, f1 = 30 cm, gives v1= 120 cm.

Magnitude of magnification due to the first (convex) lens is 3.
u 2 = + (120 – 8) cm = +112 cm (object virtual);

f2 = – 20 cm which gives v2 = − 112 × 20 cm
92

Magnitude of magnification due to the second (concave) 347

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
lens = 20/92.
Net magnitude of magnification = 0.652
Size of the image = 0.98 cm

9.21 If the refracted ray in the prism is incident on the second face at the
critical angle ic, the angle of refraction r at the first face is (60°–ic).
Now, ic = sin–1 (1/1.524) ~ 41°
Therefore, r = 19°
sin i =  0.4962; i  ~ 30°

1 1 1
9.22 (a) + =

v 9 10
i.e., v = – 90 cm,
Magnitude of magnification = 90/9 = 10.
Each square in the virtual image  has an area 10 × 10 × 1 mm2

= 100 mm2 = 1 cm2

(b) Magnifying power = 25/9 = 2.8
(c) No, magnification of an image by a lens and angular magnification

(or magnifying power) of an optical instrument are two separate
things. The latter is the ratio of the angular size of the object
(which is equal to the angular size of the image even if the image
is magnified) to the angular size of the object if placed at the near
point (25 cm). Thus, magnification magnitude is |(v/u )| and
magnifying power is (25/ |u|). Only when the image is located at
the near point |v| = 25 cm, are the two quantities equal.

9.23 (a) Maximum magnifying power is obtained when the image is at
the near point (25 cm)
u =  – 7.14 cm.

(b) Magnitude of magnification = (25/ |u|) = 3.5.
(c) Magnifying power  = 3.5

Yes, the magnifying power (when the image is produced at 25 cm)
is equal to the magnitude of magnification.

9.24 Magnification  = (6.25 /1)  = 2.5
            v = +2.5u

1 1 1
       

2.5u u 10
i.e.,u = – 6 cm
|v| = 15 cm
The virtual image is closer than the normal  near point (25 cm) and
cannot be seen by the eye distinctly.

9.25 (a) Even though the absolute image size is bigger than the object
size, the angular size of the image is equal to the angular size of
the object. The magnifier helps in the following way: without it
object would be placed no closer than 25 cm;  with it the object
can be placed much closer. The closer object has larger angular
size than the same object at 25 cm. It is in this sense that angular
magnification is achieved.

(b) Yes, it decreases a little because the angle subtended at the eye
is then slightly less than the angle subtended at the lens. The

348

Reprint 2025-26



Answers

effect is negligible if the image is at a very large distance away.
[Note: When the eye is separated from the lens, the angles
subtended at the eye by the first object and its image are not
equal.]

(c) First, grinding lens of very small focal length is not easy. More
important, if you decrease focal length, aberrations (both spherical
and chromatic ) become more pronounced. So, in practice, you
cannot  get a magnifying power of more than 3 or so with a simple
convex lens. However, using an aberration corrected lens system,
one can increase this limit by a factor of 10 or so.

(d) Angular magnification of eye-piece is [(25/fe ) + 1] ( fe in cm) which
increases if fe is smaller. Further, magnification of the objective

vO 1
is given by   =

|uO | (|uO |/ fO ) −1

which is large when  |uO| is slightly greater than fO. The micro-
scope is used for viewing very close object. So |uO| is small, and
so is fO.

(e) The image of the objective in the eye-piece is known as ‘eye-ring’.
All the rays from the object refracted by objective go through the
eye-ring. Therefore, it is an ideal position for our eyes for viewing.
If we place our eyes too close to the eye-piece, we shall not collect
much of the light and also reduce our field of view. If we position
our eyes on the eye-ring and the area of the pupil of our eye is
greater or equal to the area of the eye-ring, our eyes will collect
all the light refracted by the objective. The precise location of
the eye-ring naturally depends on the separation between the
objective and the eye-piece. When you view through a microscope
by placing your eyes on one end,the ideal distance between the
eyes and eye-piece is usually built-in the design of the
instrument.

9.26 Assume microscope in normal use i.e., image at 25 cm. Angular
magnification of the eye-piece

25
=  1  6

5
Magnification of the objective

30
=   5

6
1 1 1

− =
5uO uO 1.25

which gives  uO= –1.5 cm;  v0= 7.5 cm. |u |  (25/6) cm = 4.17 cm. The
e

separation between the objective and the eye-piece should be (7.5 +
4.17) cm = 11.67 cm. Further the object should be placed 1.5 cm from
the objective to obtain the desired magnification.

9.27 (a) m = ( fO/fe ) = 28

(b) m = fO  f
1+ O   = 

e  25
33.6

f 349

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
9.28 (a) fO + fe = 145 cm

(b) Angle subtended by the tower = (100/3000) = (1/30) rad.

Angle subtended by the image produced by the objective

h
=  = h

fO 140

Equating  the two, h = 4.7 cm.
            (c) Magnification (magnitude) of the eye-piece = 6. Height of the

final image (magnitude) = 28 cm.
9.29 The image formed by the larger (concave) mirror acts as virtual object

for the smaller (convex) mirror. Parallel rays coming from the object
at infinity will focus at a distance of 110 mm from the larger mirror.
The distance of virtual object for the smaller mirror = (110 –20) =
90 mm. The focal length of smaller mirror is 70 mm. Using the mirror
formula, image is formed at 315 mm from the smaller mirror.

9.30 The reflected rays get deflected by twice the angle of rotation of the
mirror. Therefore, d/1.5 = tan 7°. Hence d = 18.4 cm.

9.31 n = 1.33

CHAPTER 10

10.1 (a) Reflected light: (wavelength, frequency, speed same as incident
light)

l  = 589 nm, n = 5.09 ´ 1014 Hz, c = 3.00 ´ 108 m s–1

(b) Refracted light: (frequency same as the incident frequency)
n = 5.09 ́  1014Hz
v = (c/n) = 2.26 × 108 m s–1, l = (v/n ) = 444 nm

10.2 (a) Spherical
(b) Plane
(c) Plane (a small area on the surface of a large sphere is nearly

planar).

10.3 (a) 2.0  × 108 m s–1

(b) No. The refractive index, and hence the speed of light in a
medium, depends on wavelength. [When no particular
wavelength or colour of light is specified, we may take the given
refractive index to refer to yellow colour.] Now we know violet
colour deviates more than red in a glass prism, i.e. n  >  n .

v r

Therefore, the violet component of white light travels slower than
the red component.

1.210– 2
0.28 – 3

10
10.4    m = 600 nm

41.4

10.5 K/4

10.6 (a) 1.17 mm (b) 1.56 mm

10.7 0.15°
350 10.8 tan–1(1.5) ~ 56.3o

Reprint 2025-26



Answers

10.9 5000 Å, 6 × 1014 Hz; 45°

10.10 40 m

CHAPTER 11

11.1 (a) 7.24 × 1018 Hz        (b) 0.041 nm
11.2 (a) 0.34 eV = 0.54 × 10–19J        (b) 0.34 V        (c) 344 km/s
11.3 1.5 eV = 2.4 × 10–19 J
11.4 (a) 3.14 × 10–19J, 1.05 × 10–27 kg m/s        (b) 3 × 1016 photons/s

(c)  0.63 m/s
11.5 6.59 × 10–34 J s
11.6 2.0 V
11.7 No, because n < no

11.8 4.73 × 1014 Hz
11.9 2.16 eV = 3.46 × 10–19J
11.10 (a) 1.7 × 10–35 m        (b) 1.1 × 10–32 m        (c) 3.0 × 10–23 m
11.11 l = h/p = h/(hn/c) = c/n

CHAPTER 12

12.1 (a) No different from
(b) Thomson’s model; Rutherford’s model
(c) Rutherford’s model
(d) Thomson’s model; Rutherford’s model
(e) Both the models

12.2 The nucleus of a hydrogen atom is a proton. The mass of it is
1.67 × 10–27 kg, whereas the mass of an incident a-particle is
6.64 × 10–27 kg. Because the scattering particle is more massive than
the target nuclei (proton), the a-particle won’t bounce back in even
in a head-on collision. It is similar to a football colliding with a tenis
ball at rest. Thus, there would be no large-angle scattering.

12.3 5.6 ´ 1014 Hz
12.4 13.6 eV; –27.2 eV
12.5 9.7 × 10 – 8 m; 3.1 × 1015 Hz.
12.6 (a) 2.18 × 106 m/s; 1.09 × 106 m/s; 7.27 × 105 m/s

(b) 1.52 × 10–16 s; 1.22 × 10–15 s; 4.11 × 10–15 s.
12.7 2.12´10–10 m; 4.77 ´ 10–10 m
12.8 Lyman series: 103 nm and 122 nm; Balmer series: 656 nm.
12.9 2.6 × 1074

CHAPTER 13

13.1 104.7 MeV
13.2 8.79 MeV, 7.84 MeV
13.3 1.584 × 1025 MeV or 2.535×1012J
13.4 1.23 351

Reprint 2025-26



Physics
13.5 (i)  Q = –4.03 MeV; endothermic

(ii) Q = 4.62 MeV; exothermic

13.6 Q =  m (56 ) (28
26 Fe – 2m 13 Al) = 26.90 MeV; not possible.

13.7 4.536 × 1026 MeV
13.8 About 4.9 × 104 y
13.9 360 KeV

CHAPTER 14

14.1 (c)
14.2 (d)
14.3 (c)
14.4 (c)
14.5 (c)
14.6 50 Hz for half-wave, 100 Hz for full-wave

352

Reprint 2025-26



Bibligraphy

BIBLIOGRAPHY

TEXTBOOKS

For additional reading on the topics covered in this book, you may like to consult one or more of the following
books. Some of these books however are more advanced and contain many more topics than this book.

1 Ordinary Level Physics, A.F. Abbott, Arnold-Heinemann (1984).
2 Advanced Level Physics, M. Nelkon and P. Parker, 6th Edition, Arnold-Heinemann (1987).
3 Advanced Physics, Tom Duncan, John Murray (2000).
4 Fundamentals of Physics, David Halliday, Robert Resnick and Jearl Walker, 7th Edition

John Wily (2004).
5 University Physics (Sears and Zemansky’s), H.D. Young  and R.A. Freedman, 11th Edition,

Addison—Wesley (2004).
6 Problems in Elementary Physics, B. Bukhovtsa, V. Krivchenkov, G. Myakishev and

V. Shalnov, MIR Publishers, (1971).
7 Lectures on Physics (3 volumes), R.P. Feynman, Addision – Wesley (1965).
8 Berkeley Physics Course (5 volumes) McGraw Hill (1965).

a. Vol. 1 – Mechanics: (Kittel, Knight and Ruderman)
b. Vol. 2 – Electricity and Magnetism (E.M. Purcell)
c. Vol. 3 – Waves and Oscillations (Frank S. Crawford)
d. Vol. 4 – Quantum Physics (Wichmann)
e. Vol. 5 – Statistical Physics (F. Reif )

9 Fundamental University Physics, M. Alonso and E. J. Finn, Addison – Wesley (1967).
10 College Physics, R.L. Weber, K.V. Manning, M.W. White and G.A. Weygand, Tata McGraw

Hill (1977).
11 Physics: Foundations and Frontiers, G. Gamow and J.M. Cleveland, Tata McGraw Hill

(1978).
12 Physics for the Inquiring Mind, E.M. Rogers, Princeton University Press (1960).
13 PSSC Physics Course, DC Heath and Co. (1965) Indian Edition, NCERT (1967).
14 Physics Advanced Level, Jim Breithampt, Stanley Thornes Publishers (2000).
15 Physics, Patrick Fullick, Heinemann (2000).
16 Conceptual Physics, Paul G. Hewitt, Addision—Wesley (1998).
17 College Physics, Raymond A. Serway and Jerry S. Faughn, Harcourt Brace and Co. (1999).
18 University Physics, Harris Benson, John Wiley (1996).
19 University Physics, William P. Crummet and Arthur B. Western, Wm.C. Brown (1994).
20 General Physics, Morton M. Sternheim and Joseph W. Kane, John Wiley (1988).
21 Physics, Hans C. Ohanian, W.W. Norton (1989).

Reprint 2025-26



Physics

22 Advanced Physics, Keith Gibbs, Cambridge University Press (1996).
23 Understanding Basic Mechanics, F. Reif, John Wiley (1995).
24 College Physics, Jerry D. Wilson and Anthony J. Buffa, Prentice Hall (1997).
25 Senior Physics, Part – I, I.K. Kikoin and A.K. Kikoin, MIR Publishers (1987).
26 Senior Physics, Part – II, B. Bekhovtsev, MIR Publishers (1988).
27 Understanding Physics, K. Cummings, Patrick J. Cooney, Priscilla W. Laws and Edward F.

Redish, John Wiley (2005).
28 Essentials of Physics, John D. Cutnell and Kenneth W. Johnson, John Wiley (2005).

GENERAL BOOKS

For instructive and entertaining general reading on science, you may like to read some of the following books.
Remember however, that many of these books are written at a level far beyond the level of the present book.

1 Mr. Tompkins in paperback, G. Gamow, Cambridge University Press (1967).
2 The Universe and Dr. Einstein, C. Barnett, Time Inc. New York (1962).
3 Thirty years that Shook Physics, G. Gamow, Double Day, New York (1966).
4 Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman, R.P. Feynman, Bantam books (1986).
5 One, Two, Three…  Infinity, G. Gamow, Viking Inc. (1961).
6 The Meaning of Relativity, A. Einstein, (Indian Edition) Oxford and IBH Pub. Co. (1965).
7 Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature, Niels Bohr, Cambridge (1934).
8 The Physical Principles of Quantum Theory, W. Heisenberg, University of Chicago Press

(1930).
9 The Physics—Astronomy Frontier, F. Hoyle and J.V. Narlikar, W.H. Freeman (1980).
10 The Flying Circus of Physics with Answer, J. Walker, John Wiley and Sons (1977).
11 Physics for Everyone (series), L.D. Landau and A.I. Kitaigorodski, MIR Publisher (1978).

Book 1: Physical Bodies
Book 2: Molecules
Book 3: Electrons
Book 4: Photons and Nuclei.

12 Physics can be Fun, Y. Perelman, MIR Publishers (1986).
13 Power of Ten, Philip Morrison and Eames, W.H. Freeman (1985).
14 Physics in your Kitchen Lab., I.K. Kikoin, MIR Publishers (1985).
15 How Things Work: The Physics of Everyday Life, Louis A. Bloomfield, John Wiley (2005).
16 Physics Matters: An Introduction to Conceptual Physics, James Trefil and Robert M.

Hazen, John Wiley (2004).

354

Reprint 2025-26