Psychology
TEXTBOOK FOR CLASS XII

Reprint 2025-26



12123 – PSYCHOLOGY
ISBN  81-7450-660-8

Textbook for Class XII

First Edition
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

January 2007  Magha 1928
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system

Reprinted or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the

October 2007, January 2009,
publisher.

December 2009, December 2010,
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,

January 2012, November 2013, be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s
December 2015, February 2017, consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is

December 2017, December 2018, published.

August 2019, January 2021 and q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any
revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other

November 2021 means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.

Revised Edition
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION

January 2023, Pausha 1944
DIVISION, NCERT

Reprinted NCERT Campus
March 2024 Chaitra 1946 Sri Aurobindo Marg

January 2025, Pausha 1946 New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension

PD 10T HK Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740

© National Council of Educational Navjivan Trust Building

Research and Training, 2007, 2023 P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446

CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454

CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869

` 125.00
Publication Team

Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan
Division

Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar

Chief Production : Jahan Lal
Officer (In charge)

Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT Manager
watermark

Assistant Production : Deepak Kumar
Published at the Publication Division Officer
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training, Cover and Illustrations
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110016
and printed at Goyal Offset Works Pvt. Nidhi Wadhwa

Ltd., Plot No. 370–371, 374–375,
Phase-V, Sector-56, Kundli, Sonipat
(Haryana)

Reprint 2025-26



FOREWORD

The National Curriculum Framework, 2005, recommends that children’s life at
school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system
and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and
textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this
basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of
sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will
take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education
outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).

The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to
pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that given space,
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the
information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the
sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites
of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive
and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of
knowledge.

These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching days
are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation
will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at
school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus
designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring
and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for child
psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring
hands-on experience.

NCERT appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group
of Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan (Department of History, Calcutta
University, Kolkata) and the Chief Advisor for this textbook, Professor R.C. Tripathi
(Director, G.B. Pant Social Science Institute, Allahabad) for guiding the work of
this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook;
we are grateful to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the
institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon
their resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members
of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the

Reprint 2025-26



iv

Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their
valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed to the systemic
reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes
comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revision
and refinement.

          Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 November 2006 Research and Training

Reprint 2025-26



RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE

TEXTBOOKS

In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on
students. The National Education Policy, 2020 also emphasises reducing the content
load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. In
this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to rationalise the
textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT
across classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise.

Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:

• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same
class

• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject

• Difficulty level

• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions
from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-
learning

• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context

This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes
given above.

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26



PREFACE

Psychology is one of the youngest sciences but one of the fastest growing. There
are many who believe that the 21st century is going to be the century of biological
sciences along with psychological sciences. Development in the fields of
neurosciences, as well as physical sciences have opened new doors to solve the
mysteries of mind and human behaviour. There is no human endeavour which is
going to remain unaffected by this new knowledge which is getting created. One
only hopes that it will enable people to live their lives more meaningfully and to
organise human systems better. In fact, as a consequence, a large number of new
job opportunities have surfaced. Psychology already has made inroads into many
new domains.

The writing of this textbook has been truly a collective effort. It has benefitted
from the inputs received from various subject experts in various forms, from college
and school teachers, and also students. In writing this textbook, we have tried to
address some of the concerns raised by the evaluators of the previous edition of
this textbook, while also making use of some portions of it. The textbook follows
the National Curriculum Framework-2005. In keeping with the general guidelines,
we have tried to reduce the load and attempted to make it more comprehensible for
the students. In doing so, we have tried to relate psychological concepts with everyday
human behaviour and also with various life experiences. How far one has succeeded
in this, is left for the teachers and students to judge. One major challenge which
teachers of psychology face is to make their students analyse human behaviour in
a scientific manner and to use explanations which are not commonsensical. More
than any other scientific discipline, psychology runs the risk of trivialisation. It is
our hope that students who go through this course will develop a proper scientific
attitude for analysing others and their own behaviour and use it for personal growth.

We take great pleasure in placing this textbook in the hands of students and
teachers and also express our gratitude to all who have provided their unstinted
support in its writing and production.

Reprint 2025-26



THE LITTLE FISH

“Excuse me,” said an ocean fish,
“You are older than I so can

you tell me where to find this
thing they call the Ocean?”

“The Ocean,” said the older fish,
“is the thing you are in now.”

“Oh, this? But this is water.
What I’m seeking is the Ocean,”

said the disappointed fish

as he swam away to search elsewhere.

Source : “The Song of the Bird” Anthony de Mello, S.J.
   (Anand: Gujarat Sahitya Prakash) 1987

Reprint 2025-26



TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE

CHIEF ADVISOR

R.C. Tripathi, Professor and Director, G.B. Pant Social Science Institute, Jhusi, Allahabad

TEAM MEMBERS

Anand Prakash, Professor, Department of Psychology, University of Delhi, Delhi

Anuradha Bhandari, Professor, Department of Psychology, Panjab University, Chandigarh

Damodar Suar, Professor, Department of Humanities & Social Sciences, IIT, Kharagpur

Komila Thapa, Professor, Department of Psychology, University of Allahabad, Allahabad

Lilavati  Krishnan, Professor, Department of Humanities & Social Sciences, IIT, Kanpur

Neelam Srivastava, former PGT, Vasant Valley School, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi

Poornima Singh, Professor, Department of Humanities & Social Sciences, IIT, New Delhi

R.C. Mishra, Professor, Department of Psychology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi

Shobini L. Rao, Professor, National Brain Research Centre, Gurgaon

Sunita Arora, Senior Counsellor, Govt. Girls Sr. Sec. School No.1, Roop Nagar, Delhi

Sushma Gulati, Professor, DEPFE, NCERT, New Delhi

U.N. Dash, Professor, Department of Psychology, Utkal University, Bhubaneswar

MEMBER-COORDINATORS

Anjum Sibia, Reader, DEPFE, NCERT, New Delhi

Prabhat K. Mishra, Lecturer, DEPFE, NCERT, New Delhi

Reprint 2025-26



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

National Council of Educational Research and Training, New Delhi thanks
Professor Sushma Gulati, Head, Department of Educational Psychology and
Foundations of Education for her support during the various stages of textbook
development. Acknowledgements are due to Dr. Shakuntla S. Jaiman, Principal,
CSKM School, Satbari, Chattarpur, New Delhi; Rimjhim Jairath, Vasant Valley
School, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi; Alka Kumar, Ryan International School, Vasant
Kunj, New Delhi; Anuradha Narayan, DAV Public School, Pitampura, Delhi;
Cimran Kher, Modern School, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi; Lovika Jain, DPS,
Mathura Road, New Delhi; and Usha Anand, St. Thomas Girls Sr. Sec. School,
Mandir Marg, New Delhi for their contributions during workshops at different stages
of textbook development. The suggestions given by Dr. Prachi Ghildyal, Lecturer,
NERIE, Shillong in finalising two chapters of this textbook are also acknowledged.

Acknowledgements are also due to Professor C.B. Dwivedi (Retired), Department
of Psychology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi for content editing the chapters
and to Professor Sagar Sharma (Retired), H.P. University, Shimla for his valuable
feedback and suggestions in finalising the textbook.

Special thanks are due to Vandana Singh, Consultant Editor, for going through
the manuscript and suggesting relevant changes.

The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Pavnesh Verma
and Neelam Walecha, DTP Operators; Rakesh Kumar, Proof Reader; Sumant Thapliyal,
Incharge, Computer Station; and Purnendu Kumar Barik, Copy Editor, in shaping
this textbook.

Last but not the least, the efforts of the Publication Department, NCERT are
also duly acknowledged.

Reprint 2025-26



NOTE FOR THE TEACHERS

As a teacher, one is always concerned about students’ learning and enhancing
their understanding over and above what is in the textbook. The existing classroom
practices largely focus on imparting knowledge and information. It is, however,
important for us to reflect on what it means to teach, how we teach, and the
carryover value of our teaching. Research shows that pedagogical practices are
influenced by the nature and contents of the subject or discipline. The subject of
psychology, which deals with human mind, behaviour and human relationship,
can most appropriately lend itself to teaching with humanistic perspective. Such a
perspective aims at enriching students’ knowledge as well as inspiring and
awakening their curiosity, positive feelings, desire to learn, openness, exploration
of self and others, etc. Such an approach is also conducive to their personal
development and inculcation of positive attitude and love for the subject.

This textbook has been so designed as to provide ample scope to build on the
previous knowledge and experiences of the students. Meaningful contexts have
been provided to relate the subject matter with day-to-day life. We suggest you to
use interactive approach to engage the students, and to sustain their interest and
enthusiasm in order to make the teaching-learning process joyful. Strategies like
stories, discussions, examples, questioning, analogies, problem-solving situations,
role play, etc. are in-built part of the text. It will be good if students bring in their
own stories and examples. Special effort has been made to reduce the density of
information to provide time and space to help students to relate knowledge gained
in the classroom to their individual experiences as well as to their physical, social,
political and economic environments. The transaction of the subject matter,
therefore, should facilitate reflection among students to explore the applicability of
knowledge to their own contexts. We suggest that you may encourage your students
to maintain a record of interesting events/episodes in which they may have been
involved personally or which they may have observed. They may try to make sense
of these episodes using their learning from this textbook. This may be called a
LEARNING DIARY.

It would be important to dwell on the potential of the subject for Class XII
students, its value in daily life and various career possibilities. Students, it is
expected, will be made aware of the empirical nature of the discipline and the
importance of adopting scientific approach in studying human behaviour.

This textbook consists of seven chapters on topics considered essential for an
introductory course in psychology. Each chapter begins with learning objectives.
An outline of the major contents to be covered give an overall view of the chapter.
The introduction at the beginning of each chapter provides an informative and
challenging start to build on the students’ previous knowledge. The main content
in each chapter is interspersed with examples, illustrations, tables, activities and
boxes to facilitate better understanding of the concepts. These are integral part of
the textbook and should be used. The summary at the end of each chapter helps to
reinforce and consolidate what has been read or taught. Before you begin a particular
chapter you should encourage the students to read the summary of the chapter.

Reprint 2025-26



xii

The chapter-end review questions cater to the areas of understanding, application
and skill, intended to promote higher order thinking. The project ideas given at the
end of each chapter are aimed at engaging students in fieldwork and gaining
hands-on experience. This also brings them to understand abstract concepts more
meaningfully by relating these to their everyday life happenings. We hope that
these will be appropriately used by you to create new learning opportunities.

Although the contents of the textbook have been organised under different
headings, like variations in psychological attributes, personality, attitude,
psychological disorders, group processes etc., efforts have been made to provide
linkages across and within the chapters to maintain continuity and holistic
perspective. The activities given in the textbook have been carefully chosen to
maximise students’ participation in the class. Most activities suggested are easy to
carry out and require no special material. These can be conducted in the classroom
situation or given as part of home assignments. While some of the activities are
group-oriented, some of these are individual in nature. Group activities are important
for team building, to experience the joy of sharing and to develop respect for each
others’ viewpoint. While conducting activity sessions, particular care should be
taken in building a classroom climate that is conducive to mutual respect, confidence
and cooperation. Since every class is different and every teacher is different, these
activities can be adapted according to the varied requirements and the contexts.
The two new features of this textbook are the pedagogical hints and weblinks.
Pedagogical hints are given at the end of each chapter with the aim to help teachers
transact the contents in a manner to evoke students’ interest and curiosity, and
provide scope for better interaction in the class. Weblinks related to each chapter
would facilitate further exploration on the topics to know about the latest
developments made in the area of psychology.

It is critical that in teaching this course, we must strive to maintain balance
between scientific and experiential approaches.

Reprint 2025-26



NOTE FOR THE STUDENTS

This textbook has been prepared to introduce you to the fundamentals of
psychology. Besides providing basic disciplinary knowledge, it focuses on enhancing
your curiosity and understanding of people’s behaviour and that of your own. The
interactive nature of the textbook will help you understand psychology as a
discipline as well as the practical applications of psychology in day-to-day life. For
this it is required that you participate in the classroom activities fully and also
reflect on them.

To begin with, you must get familiar with the subject contents which will give
you an idea of the topics to be covered and the sequence of chapters. Each chapter
has objectives and the content outline. The objectives inform you what all you
should be able to know after you have gone through the chapter. The chapters
begin with an introduction which will give you a brief overview of what lies ahead.
The contents also include boxes and activities. These boxes contain information
relating to the latest theories and experiments that have been conducted and its
applications to everyday situations. They are integral to the book and you are
required to read them to widen your horizon and to develop a quest for knowledge.
Examples given in the textbook relate to real-life events and experiences. To
consolidate all that has been taught and understood, you will find a summary
after each chapter. This is then followed by review questions. These questions are
likely to generate critical thinking and develop in you the power to question and
reason. We encourage you to attempt these questions. Your responses to these
questions will indicate both the degree of your mastery of the concepts taught and
the depth of your knowledge.

It is important that you learn the key terms given at the end of each chapter
and their definitions. The glossary at the end of the textbook will prove to be an
excellent aid to clarify and brush-up the fundamentals of the subject.

Now let us focus on the activities and project ideas mentioned in each chapter.
These are intended to promote experiential learning. Your experience while taking
up these activities will help you to know more about yourself and others. These
will also help you to relate taught concepts in the class to real-life situations. Try
to involve in as many activities as you can as this will facilitate your understanding
of psychological concepts better. The project ideas also emphasise learning by
doing. You may have to move out of your classroom to interview people or to
gather information. It may not be possible for you to carry out all the projects but
choose the ones you find interesting. Weblinks provided at the end of each chapter
would help you to find out additional information on the related concepts covered
in this textbook.

You are going to embark on a journey towards exploring different realms of the
subject. As you go along, the text will help you to explore your ‘self ’ and the world
of which you are a part. The doorway to psychology is open, make the best of it.

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26



CONTENTS

Foreword iii

Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks v

Preface vii

Chapter 1

Variations in Psychological Attributes 1

Chapter 2

Self and Personality 23

Chapter 3

Meeting Life Challenges 50

Chapter 4

Psychological Disorders 69

Chapter 5

Therapeutic Approaches 89

Chapter 6

Attitude and Social Cognition 104

Chapter 7

Social Influence and Group Processes 120

Guidelines for Practicals in Psychology 132

Glossary 135

Suggested Readings 142

Reprint 2025-26



CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)

(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)

guarantees these

Fundamental Rights

Right to Equality

• before law and equal protection of laws;

• irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;

• of opportunity in public employment;

• by abolition of untouchability and titles.

Right to Freedom

• of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;

• of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;

• of protection of life and personal liberty;

• of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;

• of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.

Right against Exploitation

• for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;

• for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.

Right to Freedom of Religion

• freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;

• freedom to manage religious affairs;

• freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;

• freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational
institutions wholly maintained by the State.

Cultural and Educational Rights

• for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;

• for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.

Right to Constitutional Remedies

• by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.

Reprint 2025-26



GUIDELINES FOR PRACTICALS IN PSYCHOLOGY

Psychological tools and techniques help to studied in Class XI, a psychological test is
uncover the latent aspects of an individual’s essentially an objective and standardised
behaviour. Thus they aid in understanding, measure of a sample of behaviour. In Class
predicting, and controlling the human XII, you will be learning about the concepts of
behaviour, which is the fundamental aim of intelligence and aptitude (Chapter 1),
psychology. Practicals in psychology are personality and self-concept (Chapter 2),
intended to provide students with requisite adjustment and anxiety (Chapter 3), and
knowledge and skills in psychological tools attitude (Chapter 6). You are also required to
and techniques to gain an understanding of undertake practical training in order to
human behaviour. They attempt to provide develop the ability to conduct, score and
hands-on experience to the students with both interpret data generated by the administration
quantitative tools of measurement, such as of the psychological tests in these areas. In
standardised psychological tests and other words, practical training would help you
qualitative tools, such as interview and in assessing various dimensions of human
observation. Practicals are based on the behaviour, such as intellectual ability, overall
principle of learning by doing and thus they personality profile, specific aptitudes, potential
provide an opportunity to the students to put for adjustment, attitudinal profile, self-
into practice whatever psychological principles concept, and level of anxiety.
and theories they have learnt in the classroom.

Before undertaking practical work, it is Test Administration
important to ensure that the students have The accuracy of psychological testing comes
knowledge about various methods of research from standardisation of testing conditions,
in psychology and their merits and demerits, materials, procedures, and norms which form
the behavioural characteristics being an integral part of test development, its
assessed, the nature and uses of psychological administration and interpretation. In this
tests, and the ethical guidelines so as to avoid process, it is expected that students will
their misuse. Keeping in view the syllabus of develop skills to establish rapport with the test
psychology for Class XII, the students would takers to make them comfortable in a relatively
undertake practicals in psychological testing new and different context. Establishing
which would involve using standardised Rapport involves the test administrator’s
psychological tests in different domains, i.e. efforts to arouse the test takers’ interest in
intelligence, personality, aptitude, adjustment, the test, elicit their cooperation, and encourage
attitude, self-concept, and anxiety. They would them to respond in a manner appropriate to
also prepare one case profile which will include the objectives of the test. The main objective
developmental history of the individual (case), of establishing rapport is to motivate the
using both qualitative and quantitative respondents to follow the instructions as fully
approaches. and meticulously as they can. It may be noted

that the nature of the test (e.g., individual or
group, verbal or non-verbal, etc.), and the age

PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTING and other characteristics of the test takers
determine the use of specific techniques for

Practical work in use of psychological tests the establishment of rapport. For example,
must be carried out under the guidance and while testing children from educationally
supervision of the teacher. As you have already disadvantaged backgrounds, the test

132
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



administrator cannot assume that they will be administrator is not adequately qualified,
motivated to do well on academic tasks, incorrect or inaccurate scoring may render
therefore, in such conditions, the test the test scores worthless.
administrator makes special efforts to

Any standardised test is accompanied by
establish rapport to motivate them.

a manual which includes the psychometric
When establishing rapport, the test

properties of the test, norms, and references.
administrator also informs the test takers

This gives a clear indication regarding the
about the confidentiality of test data. The test

procedures of the test administration, the
taker is informed about the purpose of the

scoring methods, and time limits, if any, of
test, and how the test results will be used.

the test. The manual also includes instructions
The test taker is assured that such results

to be given to the test takers.
would be kept strictly confidential and be made

A thorough understanding of the test, the
available to a third person (the other two being

test taker, and the testing conditions is
test administrator and test taker) only after

essential for the proper interpretation of test
knowledge and consent of the test taker.

scores. Some information about the test given
The test administration, therefore, is the

in the manual like its reliability, validity,
task of a professionally trained and skilful

norms, etc. are relevant in interpreting any
person under controlled conditions. The

test score. Similarly, some background data
following points may be kept in mind while

about the individual being tested (test taker)
using a test :

are also essential. For example, the same score
• Uniform testing conditions : Basically, the

may be obtained by different individuals for
function of psychological tests is to

different reasons. Therefore, the conclusions
measure differences between individuals

to be drawn from such scores may not be
or between the responses of the same

similar. Finally, some consideration must also
individual on different occasions. If the

be given to special factors that may have
scores obtained by different individuals are

influenced a particular score, such as unusual
to be compared, testing conditions must

testing conditions, temporary emotional
obviously be the same for all. Attention

or physical state of the subject, the extent of
should be given to the selection of a

the test taker’s previous experience with
suitable testing room, which should be free

tests, etc.
from undue noise and distraction. This

The test administrator also provides test
room should provide adequate lighting,

takers with appropriate and understandable
ventilation, seating facilities, etc. for test

explanations of test results and of any
takers.

recommendations stemming from them. It
• Standardised instructions : In order to

may be noted here that even when a test has
secure uniformity of testing conditions, the

been accurately administered, scored, and
test constructor provides detailed

interpreted, providing merely specific
directions for administering the test.

numerical scores (e.g., IQ score, aptitude
Standardised instructions include the

score, etc.) without the opportunity to discuss
exact materials used, time limit (if any),

it further may be harmful to the test taker.
oral instructions to subjects, preliminary
demonstrations, ways of handling queries

Procedure for Test Administration
from subjects, and other possible details
of the testing situation. A psychological test can be administered only

• Training of test administrator : The test by a professionally qualified person. A student
administrator is the person who of psychology at +2 level would not have
administers and scores the test. The reached the stage of a professionally qualified
importance of a trained test administrator person. Therefore, s/he is not fully equipped
is evident. For instance, if the test to interpret the scores of a psychological test

133
Guidelines for Practicals in Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



for any conclusive purpose, e.g. selection, 6. The teacher may use the scores of the
prediction, diagnosis, etc. For this purpose, hypothetical data and demonstrate how to
the test administration may be broken into use the manual to interpret the raw scores
small components/activities. The emphasis with the help of norms.
should be on learning skills for understanding 7. The students are also told how to draw
the concepts on which the test is based, conclusions based on the analysis of data.
developing rapport with the participant, 8. Based on the above guidelines, the
administration of the test including giving students will be required to prepare a
instructions, maintaining optimum testing report of the testing undertaken.
conditions, taking precautions, and doing
scoring of the test. Suggested Format for Writing a

The following steps and guidelines are Psychological Testing Report
suggested to carry out practical work in 1. Problem/Title of the Study (e.g., to study
psychological testing : the level of adjustment/personality/
1. The teacher would introduce the test to aptitude of Class X students).

the students along with the manual and 2. Introduction
the scoring key. The teacher would • Basic Concepts
demonstrate the test to her/his class • Variables
laying stress upon rapport building, 3. Method
imparting instructions, and the • Subject
precautions that need to be taken care of. • Name
The test may then be taken by the entire • Age
class. • Gender

2. The students may be instructed not to • Class
write their names or to use fictitious names
on the response/scoring sheets. The (Note : As the data is to be kept confidential,

response sheets of the students may be the details of the subject may be given

collected by the teacher. In order to under a fictitious number.)

maintain confidentiality, it is desirable that • Material
the response sheets are reshuffled and/or • Brief description of the test (name of
fictitious numbers are given to each the test, author, year, psychometric
response sheet. properties, etc.).

3. One response sheet each may then be • Other materials (e.g., stop watch,
given back by the teacher to students in screen, etc.).
the class for scoring. As per the • Procedure
instructions given in the manual, the • Process of test administration, such as
students would be guided to do the rapport formation, instructions,
scoring. precautions, actual conduct of test, etc.

4. The response/scoring sheets should be • Scoring of the test
kept with the teacher to be used later as • Preparation of graph, psychogram, etc.
hypothetical data for providing hands-on (if required).
experience in interpretation of test scores. 4. Results and Conclusions

5. The students will then be required to • Describing subject’s scores in terms of
conduct the same test on the selected norms and drawing conclusions.
participants with the teacher examining 5. References
their rapport building skills, instruction • List the books, manuals and materials
imparting skills, etc. consulted on the topic.

134
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



GLOSSARY

Adaptation: Structural or functional change that Archetypes: Jung’s term for the contents of the
enhances the organism’s survival value. collective unconscious; images or symbols

Aggression: An overt behaviour intended to hurt expressing the inherited patterns for the

someone, either physically or verbally. organisation of experience.

Alarm reaction: The first stage of the general Arousal: The tension experienced at the thought

adaptation syndrome characterised by an of others being present, and/or

emergency reaction involving the performance being evaluated.
mobilisation of energy through adrenal and Attitudes: States of the mind, thoughts or ideas
sympathetic activity.

regarding a topic, containing a cognitive,
Alienation: The feeling of not being part of society affective and behavioural component.

or a group.
Attitude object: The target of an attitude.

Anal stage: The second of Freud’s psychosexual
stages, which occurs during the child’s Autism spectrum disorder: Neuro-

second year. Pleasure is focused on the anus developmental disorder beginning in

and on retention and expulsion of faeces. infancy and involving a wide range of
abnormalities, including deficits in

Anorexia nervosa: Disorder involving severe loss language, perceptual, and motor
of body weight, accompanied by an intense development, defective reality testing, and
fear of gaining weight or becoming “fat”. social withdrawal.

Antisocial personality: A behavioural disorder
Balance: The state of an attitude system in which

characterised by truancy, delinquency,
the attitudes between a person (P) and

promiscuity, theft, vandalism, fighting,
another individual (O), the person (P) and

violation of common social rules, poor work
the attitude object (X), and between the

record, impulsiveness, irrationality,
other individual (O) and the attitude object

aggressiveness, reckless behaviour, and
inability to plan ahead. The particular (X) are in the same direction, or logically

pattern of behaviour varies from individual consistent with each other.

to individual. Behaviour therapy: Therapy based on the

Anxiety: A state of psychic distress characterised principles of behaviouristic learning theories

by fear, apprehension, and physiological in order to change the maladaptive behaviour.

arousal. Beliefs: The cognitive component of the thoughts
Anxiety disorders: Disorders in which anxiety or ideas regarding a topic.

is a central symptom. The disorder is
Bipolar and related disorders: These include

characterised by feelings of vulnerability,
periods of mania and depression both

apprehension, or fear.
alternately present sometimes interrupted

Applied psychology : The practical application by normal mood.
of what is known about the mind, brain,
and behaviour as a result of theoretical and Cardinal trait: According to Allport, a single trait

experimental psychology. that dominates an individual’s entire
personality.

Aptitude: A combination of characteristics
indicative of individual’s potential to acquire Case study: An intensive study of an individual
some specific skills with training. or a situation to develop general principles

about behaviour.
Aptitude tests: Tests meant to measure

individual’s potential to predict future Central traits: The major trait considered in
prformance. forming an impression of others.

135
Glossary

Reprint 2025-26



Centrality of attitude: The extent to which a Culture-fair test: A test that does not
specific attitude affects the entire attitude discriminate examinees on the basis of their
system. cultural experiences.

Client-centred (Rogerian) therapy: The Defence mechanisms: According to Freud, ways
therapeutic approach developed by Carl in which the ego unconsciously tries to cope
Rogers in which therapist helps clients to with unacceptable id impulses, as in
clarify their true feelings and come to value repression, projection, reaction formation,
who they are. sublimation, rationalisation, etc.

Cognition: The process of knowing. The mental Deinstitutionalisation: The transfer of former
activities associated with thought, decision- mental patients from institutions into the
making, language, and other higher mental community.
processes.

Delusions: Irrational beliefs that are held despite
Cognitive assessment system: A battery of overwhelming evidence to the contrary.

tests designed to measure the four basic
Depersonalisation/derealisation disorder:

PASS (Planning-Attention-Simultaneous-
Dissociative disorder in which there is a

Successive) processes.
loss of the sense of self.

Cognitive consistency: A state in which
Depressive disorders: These disorders include

thoughts or ideas are logically in line with
a period of depressed mood and/or loss of

each other.
interest or pleasure in most activities with

Cognitive dissonance: The state of an attitude other changes in appetite, sleep and fatigue.
system in which two cognitive elements are

Diathesis-stress model: A view that the
logically contradictory, or inconsistent.

interaction of factors such as biological
Cognitive therapies: Forms of therapy focused predisposition combined with life stress may

on changing distorted and maladaptive cause a specific disorder.
patterns of thought.

Diffusion of responsibility: The thought that
Cohesiveness: All forces (factors) that cause when others are present, one person alone

group members to remain in the group. will not be held responsible for doing, or not
doing, something; other members are also

Collective unconscious: Inherited portion of the
responsible and will therefore do the task.

unconscious, as postulated by Carl Jung. The
unconscious shared by all human beings. Discrimination: Behaviour that shows a

distinction being made between two or
Componential intelligence: In Sternberg’s

more persons, often on the basis of the
triarchic theory, it refers to ability to think

person’s (or persons’) membership of a
critically and analytically.

particular group.
Conflict: A state of disturbance or tension

Displacement: Redirecting an impulse towards
resulting from opposing motives, drives,

a less threatening or safer target; a key
needs or goals.

concept in psychoanalytic theory; a defence
Congruent attitude change: Attitude change in the mechanism.

same direction as that of the existing attitude.
Dissociation: A split in consciousness whereby

Contextual intelligence: In Sternberg’s triarchic certain thoughts, feelings, and behaviour
theory, it is the practical intelligence used operate independently from others.
in solving everyday problems.

Ego: The part of the personality that provides a
Coping: The process of trying to manage buffer between the id and the outside world.

demands that are appraised as taxing or
Emotional intelligence: A cluster of traits or

exceeding one’s resources.
abilities relating to the emotional side of

Creativity: The ability to produce ideas, objects, life — abilities such as recognising and
and problem solutions that are novel and managing one’s own emotions, being able
appropriate. to motivate oneself and restrain one’s

136
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



impulses, recognising and managing Gestalt therapy: An approach to therapy that
others’ emotions, and handling attempts to integrate a client’s thoughts,
interpersonal relationships in an effective feelings, and behaviour into a unified whole.
manner. It is expressed in the form of an
emotional quotient (EQ) score. g-factor: General intelligence factor referring to

a basic intellectual capacity underlying all
Empathy: Reacting to another’s feelings with an manifestations of intelligence.

emotional response that is similar to the
other’s feelings. Group: Two or more persons who interact with

one another, have shared goals, are
Environment: Totality, or any aspect of physical

interdependent, and consider themselves
and social set-up that surround and affect

as members of group.
an individual organism.

Group test: A test designed to be administered
Exhaustion: State in which energy resources

have been used up and responsiveness is to more than one individual at the same

reduced to a minimum. time, in contrast to individual test.

Exorcism:  Religiously inspired treatment Groupthink: A mode of thinking in which the

procedure designed to drive out evil spirits desire to reach unanimous agreement over-

or forces from a “possessed” person. rides the wish to adopt proper, rational,
decision-making procedures; an example of

Experiential intelligence: In Sternberg’s triarchic group polarisation.
theory, it is the ability to use past experiences
creatively to solve novel problems. Hallucination: A false perception which has a

compulsive sense of the reality of objects
Extraversion: One of the dimensions of

although relevant and adequate stimuli for
personality in which interests are directed
outwards to nature and other people rather such perception is lacking. It is an abnormal

than inwards to the thoughts and feelings phenomenon.

of self (introvert). Halo effect: The tendency to link positive

Extremeness of attitude: Refers to how far an qualities with other positive qualities about

attitude is from the neutral point. which information is not available.

Factor analysis : Mathematical procedure, Hardiness: It is a set of beliefs about oneself,
involving correlations, for sorting trait terms the world, and how they interact. It has three
or test responses into clusters or factors; characteristics, i.e. commitment, control,
used in the development of tests designed to and challenge.
discover basic personality traits. It identifies
items that are homogeneous or internally Homeostasis: A state of physiological balance

consistent and independent of others. within the body.

Fluid intelligence: Ability to perceive complex Humanistic approach: The theory that people

relationships, reason abstractly, and solve are basically good and tend to grow to higher

problems. levels of functioning.

General adaptation syndrome (GAS): It Humanistic therapy: A therapy in which the
consists of three phases : an alarm phase underlying assumption is that people have
which promotes sympathetic nervous control over their behaviour, can make
system activity, a resistance phase during choices about their lives, and are essentially
which the organism makes efforts to cope responsible for solving their own problems.
with the threat, and an exhaustion phase

Id: According to Freud, the impulsive and
which occurs if the organism fails to

unconscious part of the psyche that operates
overcome the threat and depletes its

through the pleasure principle toward the
physiological resources.

gratification of instinctual drives. The id is
Genetics: The study of how the qualities of living conceived as the true unconscious, or the

things are passed on in their genes. deepest part of the psyche.

137
Glossary

Reprint 2025-26



Ideal self: The kind of person we would like to be. Intelligence tests: Tests designed to measure
Also called ego-ideal/idealised self-image. person’s level of intelligence.

Identification: The process of feeling one with Interest: An individual’s preference for one or
another person, usually resulting from liking more specific activities.
or extreme regard for the other person. Interview: Verbal interaction between a

Identity: The distinguishing character of the respondent and a researcher to gather
individual: who each of us is, what our roles information about the respondent.
are, and what we are capable of. Introversion: One of the dimensions of

Incongruent attitude change: Attitude change personality in which interests are directed
in a direction opposite to that of the existing inwards rather than outwards (extravert).
attitude. Kernel of truth: The small element of truth that

Individual differences: Distinctiveness and may be perceived in overgeneralised
unique variations among people’s clusters of beliefs about groups
characteristics and behaviour patterns. (stereotypes).

Individual test: A test that must be given to a Latency period:  In Freud’s theory of
single individual at a time, typically by a psychosexual stages, the period between
specially trained person. The Binet and the phallic stage and the mature genital
Wechsler intelligence tests are examples of stage (period from age 4 or 5 to about
individual tests. 12) during which interest in sex is

sublimated.
Industrial/organisational psychology: A sub-

field of psychology that focuses on Libido: Freud introduced this term. In Freud’s
relationship between people and work. In treatment, libido was quite simply a direct
the contemporary context, the emphasis or indirect sexual expression.
has shifted from industrial psychology to Life skills: Abilities for adaptive and positive
organisational psychology, which includes behaviour that enable individuals to deal
industrial and all other organisations. effectively with the environment.

Inferiority complex: According to Adler, a Lifestyle: In the context of health psychology,
complex developed by adults who have not the overall pattern of decisions and
been able to overcome the feelings of behaviours that determine health and
inferiority they developed as children, when quality of life.
they were small and limited in their
knowledge about the world. Meditation: A technique of turning one’s

concentration inward and achieving an
Ingroup: The social group to which an individual altered state of consciousness.

perceives herself or himself as belonging
(“us”). The group with which one identifies. Mental age (MA): A measure of intellectual
The other groups are outgroups. functioning expressed in terms of age.

Intellectual disability: Sub-average intellectual Metaneeds: In the hierarchy of needs, those at
functioning combined with varying degrees the top, such as self-actualisation, self-
of deficits in adaptive behaviour. esteem, aesthetic needs, and the like, which

can only be satisfied when lower order needs
Intellectual giftedness: Exceptional general are satisfied.

intellectual efficiency shown in superior
performance in a wide range of tasks. Modelling: A process of learning in which an

individual acquires responses by observing
Intelligence: The capacity to understand the world, and imitating others.

to think rationally, and to use resources
effectively when faced with challenges. Neurodevelopmental disorders: These

disorders are characterized by symptoms
Intelligence quotient (IQ): An index derived appearing in the early stage of development.

from standardised intelligence tests They affect the personal, social, academic
indicating a ratio of mental age to and occupational functioning of the
chronological age. individual.

138
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Neurotransmitter: Chemicals that carry Positive health: It includes a healthy body, good
messages across the synapse to the interpersonal relationships, a sense of
dendrite (and sometimes the cell body) of a purpose in life, and resilience to stress,
receiver neuron. trauma and change.

Normal probability curve: A symmetrical, bell- Post-traumatic stress disorder: Patterns of
shaped frequency distribution. Most scores symptoms involving anxiety reactions,
are found near the middle, and fewer and tensions, nightmares, and depression
fewer occur towards the extremes. Many following a disaster such as an earthquake
psychological characteristics are or a flood.
distributed in this manner.

Prejudice: A prejudgment, usually a negative
Norms: Standards of test performance that attitude that is unverified, and is often

permit the comparison of one person’s score towards a group.
on the test to the scores of others who have

Primary group: Group in which each member
taken the same test.

is personally known to each of the other
Observational method: A method in which member, and in which the members, at

researcher observes a phenomenon that least on occasion, meet face-to-face.
occurs naturally without being able to Problem solving behaviour: The activity and
manipulate any of the factors. mental processes involved in overcoming

Obsessive-compulsive disorder: A disorder the obstacles, physical or conceptual, which
characterised by obsessions or compulsions. lie between an animal and its goal.

Oedipus complex: The Freudian concept in Projection: A defence mechanism; the process
which the young child develops an intense of unwittingly attributing one’s own traits,
desire to replace the parent of the same sex attitudes, or subjective processes to others.
and enjoy that affection of the opposite sex Projective techniques: The utilisation of vague,
parent. ambiguous, unstructured stimulus objects

Optimism: The tendency to seek out, remember, or situations in order to elicit the individual’s

and expect pleasurable experiences. characteristic modes of perceiving her/his
world or of behaving in it.

Outgroup: Any group of which an individual is
not a member. Proximity: The principle of Gestalt psychology

that stimuli close together tend to be
Performance test: A test in which the role of perceived as a group.

language is minimised, the task requiring
overt motor responses other than verbal. Psychodynamic approach: Approach that

strives for explanation of behaviour in terms
Personal identity: Awareness of oneself as a of motives, or drives.

separate, distinct being.
Psychodynamic therapy: First suggested by

Persuasibility: The degree to which people can Freud; therapy based on the premise that
be made to change their attitudes. the primary sources of abnormal behaviour

are unresolved past conflicts and the
Phallic stage: Third of Freud’s psychosexual

possibility that unacceptable unconscious
stages (at about age five) when pleasure is

impulses will enter consciousness.
focused on the genitals and both males and
females experience the “Oedipus complex”. Psychological test: An objective and

standardised instrument for measuring an
Phobia: A strong, persistent, and irrational fear

individual’s mental and behavioural traits;
of some specific object or situation that

used by psychologists to help people make
presents little or no actual danger to a decisions about their lives and understand
person. more about themselves.

Planning: In Das’s PASS model of intelligence, Psychoneuroimmunology: Interactions among
it involves goal setting, strategy selection, behavioural, neuroendocrine, and immuno-
and monitoring of goal-orientation. logical processes of adaptation.

139
Glossary

Reprint 2025-26



Psychotherapy: The use of any psychological Self-actualisation: A state of self-fulfilment in
technique in the treatment of mental/ which people realise their highest potential
psychological disorder or maladjustment. in their own unique way.

Rational emotive therapy (RET): A therapeutic Self-awareness: Insight into one’s own motives,
system developed by Albert Ellis. It seeks to potential and limitations.
replace irrational, problem-provoking

Self-efficacy: Bandura’s term for the
outlooks with more realistic ones.

individual’s beliefs about her or his own
Rationalisation: A defence mechanism that effectiveness; the expectation that one can

occurs when one attempts to explain failure master a situation and produce positive
or short-comings by attributing them to outcomes.
more acceptable causes.

Self-esteem: The individual’s personal judgment
Reaction formation: A defence mechanism in which of her or his own worth; one’s attitude

a person denies a disapproved motive through toward oneself along a positive-negative
giving strong expression to its opposite. dimension.

Regression: A defence mechanism that involves Self-fulfilling prophecy: Behaving in a way that
a return to behaviours characteristic of an confirms the prediction others make.
earlier stage in life. The term is also used

Self-regulation: Refers to our ability to organise
in statistics, in which with the help of

and monitor our own behaviour.
correlation prediction is made.

Sensitivity: Tendency to respond to very low
Rehabilitation: Restoring an individual to

levels of physical stimulation.
normal, or as satisfactory a state as
possible, following an illness, criminal Simplicity or complexity (multiplexity) of
episode, etc. attitude: Whether the whole attitude

consists of a single or very few sub-attitudes
Relaxation training: A procedure in which

(simple), or contains many sub-attitudes
clients are taught to release all the tension

(multiplex).
in their bodies.

Simultaneous processing: Cognitive processing
Repression: A defence mechanism by which

in the PASS model that involves integrating
people push unacceptable, anxiety-provoking

elements of the stimulus situation into
thoughts and impulses into the unconscious

composite and meaningful patterns.
to avoid confronting them directly.

Situationism: A principle which states that
Resilience: The maintenance of positive

situations and circumstances outside
adjustment under challenging life

oneself have the power to influence
conditions.

behaviour.
Resistance: In psychoanalysis, attempts by the

Social facilitation: The tendency for people’s
patient to block treatment.

performance to improve in the presence of
Roles: An important concept in social psychology others, or an audience.

which refers to the behaviour expected of
Social identity: A person’s definition of who she

an individual in accordance  with the
or he is; includes personal attributes (self-

position s/he holds in a particular society.
concept) along with membership in various

Scapegoating: Placing the blame on a group for groups.
something that has gone wrong, because

Social influence: The process by which the
the blamed group cannot defend itself.

actions of an individual or group affect the
Schizophrenia: A group of psychotic reactions behaviour of others.

characterised by the breakdown of
Social loafing: In a group, each additional

integrated personality functioning,
individual puts in less effort, thinking that

withdrawal from reality, emotional blunting
and distortion, and disturbances in thought others will be putting in their effort.

and behaviour.

140
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Social support: Information from other people Therapeutic alliance: The special relationship
that one is loved and cared for, esteemed between the client and the therapist;
and valued, and part of a network of contractual nature of the relationship and
communication and mutual obligation. limited duration of the therapy are its two

major components.
Somatoform disorders: Conditions involving

physical complaints or disabilities Token economy: Forms of behaviour therapy
occurring in the absence of any identifiable based on operant conditioning in which
organic cause. hospitalised patients earn tokens they can

exchange for valued rewards, when they
Status: Social rank within a group.

behave in ways the hospital staff consider
Stereotype: An overgeneralised and unverified to be desirable.

prototype about a particular group.
Trait: A relatively persistent and consistent

Stress: Our response to events that disrupt or behaviour pattern manifested in a wide
threaten to disrupt our physical and range of circumstances.
psychological functioning.

Trait approach: An approach to personality that
Stressors: Events or situations in our seeks to identify the basic traits necessary

environment that cause stress. to describe personality.

Structure: The enduring form and composition of Typology: Ways of categorising individuals into
a complex system or phenomenon. Contrast discrete categories or types, e.g. Type-A
with function, which is a process of a relatively personality.
brief duration, arising out of structure.

Unconditional positive regard: An attitude of
Substance abuse: The use of any drug or acceptance and respect on the part of an

chemical to modify mood or behaviour that observer, no matter what the other person
results in impairment. says or does.

Successive processing: Cognitive processing in Unconscious: In psychoanalytic theory,
the PASS model where elements of the characterising any activity or
stimulus situation are responded to mental structure which a person is not
sequentially. aware of.

Superego: According to Freud, the final Valence of attitude: Whether an attitude is
personality structure to develop; it positive or negative.
represents society’s standards of right and

Values: Enduring beliefs about ideal modes of
wrong as handed down by person’s parents,

behaviour or end-state of existence;
teachers, and other important figures.

attitudes that have a strong evaluative and
Surface traits: R.B. Cattell’s term for clusters ‘ought’ aspect.

of observable trait elements (responses) that
Verbal test: Test in which a subject’s ability to

seem to go together. Factor analysis of the
understand and use words and concepts

correlations reveals source traits.
is important in making the required

Syndrome: Group or pattern of symptoms that responses.
occur together in a disorder and represent
the typical picture of the disorder.

Systematic desensitisation: A form of
behavioural therapy in which phobic client
learns to induce a relaxed state and then
exposed to stimuli that elicit fear or phobia.

141
Glossary

Reprint 2025-26



SUGGESTED READINGS

For developing further understanding on the topics, you may like
to read the following books

• Baron, R.A. 2001/Indian reprint 2002. Psychology (5th ed.). Allyn &
Bacon.

• Bellack, A.S., & Hersen, M. 1998. Comprehensive Clinical Psychology.

Elsevier. London.

• Carson, R.C., Butcher, J.N., & Mineka, S. 2004. Abnormal Psychology

and Modern Life. Pearson Education. Delhi.

• Davis, S.F., & Palladino, J.H. 1997.  Psychology.  Prentice-Hall, Inc.

• Davison, G.C. 1998. Abnormal Psychology. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

• Gerow, J.R. 1997. Psychology : An Introduction. Addison Wesley
Longman, Inc.

• Gleitman, H. 1996. Basic Psychology. W.W. Norton & Company.

• Sadock, B.J., & Sadock, V.A. (Eds.) 2004. Kaplan & Sadock’s

Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry (8th ed., Vol. II). Lippincott

Williams & Wilkins.

• Lahey, B.B. 1998. Psychology : An Introduction. Tata McGraw-Hill.

• Malim, T., & Birch, A. 1998. Introductory Psychology. Macmillan
Press Ltd.

• McMahon, J.W., McMahon, F.B., & Romano, T. 1995. Psychology
and You. West Publishing Company.

• Weiten, W. 2001. Psychology : Themes and Variations. Thomson
Learning, Inc. Wadsworth.

• Zimbardo, P.G., & Weber, A.L. 1997. Psychology. Longman. New York.

Reprint 2025-26



NOTES

143
Glossary

Reprint 2025-26



NOTES

Reprint 2025-26



VARIATIONS IN PSYCHOLOGICAL

ATTRIBUTES

After reading this chapter, you would be able to:
understand psychological attributes on which people differ from each other,
learn about different methods that are used to assess psychological attributes,
explain what constitutes intelligent behaviour,
learn how psychologists assess intelligence to identify mentally challenged
and gifted individuals,
understand how intelligence has different meaning in different cultures, and
understand the difference between intelligence and aptitude.

Introduction
Individual Differences in Human Functioning
Assessment of Psychological Attributes
Intelligence
Theories of Intelligence

Theory of Multiple Intelligences
Triarchic Theory of Intelligence
Planning, Attention-arousal, and Simultaneous-
      successive Model of Intelligence

Individual Differences in Intelligence
CONTENTS Variations of Intelligence

Some Misuses of Intelligence Tests (Box 1.1)
Culture and Intelligence
Emotional Intelligence

Key Terms
Characteristics of Emotionally Intelligent

Summary
Persons (Box 1.2)

Special Abilities Review Questions

Aptitude : Nature and Measurement Project Ideas

Creativity Weblinks
Pedagogical Hints
##1##
1
Chapter 1 • Variations in Psychological Attributes

Reprint 2025-26



If you observe your friends, classmates or relatives, you will find how they
differ from each other in the manner they perceive, learn, and think, as
also in their performance on various tasks. Such individual differences can
be noticed in every walk of life. That people differ from one another is obvious.

Introduction In Class XI, you have learnt about psychological principles that are applied
to understand human behaviour. We also need to know how people differ,
what brings about these differences, and how such differences can be
assessed. You will recall how one of the main concerns of modern psychology
has been the study of individual differences from the time of Galton. This
chapter will introduce you to some of the fundamentals of individual
differences.

One of the most popular psychological attributes which has been of
interest to psychologists is Intelligence. People differ from each other in
their ability to understand complex ideas, adapt to environment, learn from
experience, engage in various forms of reasoning, and to overcome obstacles.
In this chapter, you will study the nature of intelligence, changing definitions
of intelligence, cultural differences in intelligence, range and variations in
the intellectual competencies of people, and the nature of special abilities
or aptitudes.

INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN H exemplifies a typical combination of
UMAN

various traits. The question which you may
FUNCTIONING

like to pose is how and why people differ.
Individual variations are common within This, in fact, is the subject matter of the
and across all species. Variations add study of individual differences. For
colour and beauty to nature. For a psychologists, individual differences refer to

moment, think of a world around you distinctiveness and variations among

where each and every object is of the same people’s characteristics and behaviour
colour, say red or blue or green. How would patterns.
the world appear to you? Certainly not a While many psychologists believe that
beautiful one! Would you prefer to live in our behaviours are influenced by our
such a world? In all likelihood, your personal traits, some others hold the view
answer will be ‘no’. Like objects, people too that our behaviours are influenced more by
possess different combinations of traits. situational factors. This latter view is

Variability is a fact of nature, and known as situationism, which states that
individuals are no exception to this. They situations and circumstances in which one
vary in terms of physical characteristics, is placed influence one’s behaviour. A
such as height, weight, strength, hair person, who is generally aggressive, may
colour, and so on. They also vary along behave in a submissive manner in the
psychological dimensions. They may be presence of her/his top boss. Sometimes,
intelligent or dull, dominant or submissive, the situational influences are so powerful
creative or not so creative, outgoing or that individuals with differing personality
withdrawn, etc. The list of variations can traits respond to them in almost the same
be endless. Different traits can exist in ways. The situationist perspective views
varying degrees in an individual. In this human behaviour relatively more as a result
sense, each one of us is unique as s/he of influence of external factors.

2
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



A er/his family and neighbourhood, we
SSESSMENT OF P h

SYCHOLOGICAL
may consider assessing her/his

ATTRIBUTES
personality characteristics. For a poorly

Psychological attributes are involved in motivated person, we may assess her/his

very simple phenomena like in time taken interests and preferences. Psychological

to react to a stimulus, i.e. reaction time, assessment uses systematic testing

and also in highly global concepts like procedures to evaluate abilities, behaviours,

happiness. It is difficult to count and and personal qualities of individuals.

specify the number of psychological
attributes that can be assessed. Some Domains of Psychological

Assessment  is the first step in Attributes

understanding a psychological attribute. Psychological attributes are not linear or
Assessment refers to the measurement of unidimensional. They are complex and
psychological attributes of individuals and expressed in terms of dimensions. A line
their evaluation, often using multiple is a mere aggregate of many points. A point
methods in terms of certain standards of occupies no space. But think of a box. It
comparison. Any attribute will be said to occupies space. It can be described only in
exist in a person only if it can be measured terms of its three dimensions, i.e. length,
by using scientific procedures. For width, and height. Similar is the case with
example, when we say, “Harish is psychological attributes. They are usually
dominant”, we are referring to the degree multi-dimensional. If you want to have a
of ‘dominance’ in Harish. This statement is complete assessment of a person, you will
based on our own assessment of need to assess how s/he functions in
‘dominance’ in him. Our assessment may various domains or areas, such as
be informal or formal. Formal assessment cognitive, emotional, social, etc.
is objective, standardised, and organised. We will discuss in this chapter some
On the other hand, informal assessment important attributes that are of interest to
varies from case to case and from one psychologists. These attributes are
assessor to another and, therefore, is open categorised on the basis of varieties of tests
to subjective interpretations. Psychologists used in psychological literature.
are trained in making formal assessment 1. Intelligence is the global capacity to
of psychological attributes. understand the world, think rationally,

Once assessment is done, we can use and use available resources effectively
this information to predict how Harish will when faced with challenges. Intelligence
probably behave in future. We may predict tests provide a global measure of a
that Harish, if given a chance to lead a person’s general cognitive competence
team, will most likely be an authoritarian including the ability to profit from
leader. If the predicted consequence is not schooling. Generally, students having
what we want, we may want to intervene low intelligence are not likely to do so
to effect a change in Harish’s behaviour. well in school-related examinations, but
The attribute chosen for assessment their success in life is not associated
depends upon our purpose. In order to only with their intelligence test scores.
help a weak student perform well in 2. Aptitude refers to an individual’s
examinations, we may assess her/his underlying potential for acquiring skills.
intellectual strengths and weaknesses. If Aptitude tests are used to predict what
a person fails to adjust with members of an individual will be able to do if given

3
Chapter 1 • Variations in Psychological Attributes

Reprint 2025-26



proper environment and training. A used for the purposes of clinical
person with high mechanical aptitude diagnosis, guidance, personnel
can profit from appropriate training and selection, placement, and training.
can do well as an engineer. Similarly, Besides objective tests, psychologists
a person having high language aptitude have also developed certain projective
can be trained to be a good writer. tests, especially for the assessment of

3. Interest is an individual’s preference for personality. You will learn about them
engaging in one or more specific in Chapter 2.
activities relative to others. Assessment • Interview involves seeking information
of interests of students may help to from a person on a one-to-one basis. You
decide what subjects or courses they may see it being used when a
can pursue comfortably and with counsellor interacts with a client, a
pleasure. Knowledge of interests helps salesperson makes a door-to-door
us in making choices that promote life survey regarding the usefulness of a
satisfaction and performance on jobs. particular product, an employer selects

4. Personality refers to relatively enduring employees for her/his organisation, or a
characteristics of a person that make journalist interviews important people
her or him distinct from others. on issues of national and international
Personality tests try to assess an importance.
individual’s unique characteristics, e.g. • Case Study is an in-depth study of the
whether one is dominant or submissive, individual in terms of her/his
outgoing or withdrawn, moody or psychological attributes, psychological
emotionally stable, etc. Personality history in the context of her/his
assessment helps us to explain an psychosocial and physical environment.
individual’s behaviour and predict how Case studies are widely used by
she/he will behave in future. clinical psychologists. Case analyses of

5. Values are enduring beliefs about an the lives of great people can also be
ideal mode of behaviour. A person highly illuminating for those willing to
having a value sets a standard for learn from their life experiences.
guiding her/his actions in life and also Case studies are based on data
for judging others. In value assessment, generated by different methods, e.g.
we try to determine the dominant interview, observation, questionnaire,
values of a person (e.g., political, psychological tests, etc.
religious, social or economic). • Observation involves employing

systematic, organised, and objective
Assessment Methods procedures to record behavioural
Several methods are used for psychological phenomena occurring naturally in real
assessment. You have learnt about some time. Certain phenomena such as
of these methods in Class XI. Let us recall mother-child interactions can be easily
their key features. studied through observation. The major
• Psychological Test is an objective problems with observational methods

and standardised measure of an are that the observer has little control
individual’s mental and/or behavioural over the situation and the reports may
characteristics. Objective tests have suffer from subjective interpretations of
been developed to measure all the the observer.
dimensions of psychological attributes • Self-Report is a method in which a
(e.g., intelligence, aptitude, etc.) person provides factual information
described above. These tests are widely about herself/himself and/or opinions,

4
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



beliefs, etc. that s/he holds. Such we discuss some important theories of
information may be obtained by intelligence.
using an interview schedule or a
questionnaire, a psychological test, or

Discovering the Attributes of Activity
a personal diary.

Intelligent Persons 1.1
1. Who is the most intelligent of your

INTELLIGENCE classmates? Think of her/him in
your mind’s eye, and write down

Intelligence is a key construct employed to a few words/phrases describing

know how individuals differ from one that person.
2. Think of 3 other persons in your

another. It also provides an understanding immediate environment, whom
of how people adapt their behaviour you consider intelligent, and write
according to the environment they live in. down a few words/phrases

In this section, you will read about describing the attributes of each.

intelligence in its various forms. 3. Judge the newer additions with
reference to what you wrote in item

Psychological notion of intelligence is
no. 1.

quite different from the common sensical 4. Make a list of all the attributes you
notion of intelligence. If you watch an consider as manifestations of
intelligent person, you are likely to see in intelligent behaviours. Using these

her/him attributes like mental alertness, attributes, try to frame a definition.

ready wit, quickness in learning, and 5. Discuss your report with your
classmates and the teacher.

ability to understand relationships. The 6. Compare it with what the
Oxford Dictionary explains intelligence as researchers have to say about
the power of perceiving, learning , ‘intelligence’.

understanding, and knowing. Early
intelligence theorists also used these
attributes in defining intelligence. Alfred
Binet was one of the first psychologists THEORIES OF INTELLIGENCE

who worked on intelligence. He defined
Psychologists have proposed several

intelligence as the ability to judge well, theories of intelligence. Theories can be
understand well, and reason well. broadly classified as either representing a
Wechsler, whose intelligence tests are most psychometric/structural approach or an
widely used, understood intelligence in information-processing approach.
terms of its functionality, i.e. its value for The psychometric approach considers
adaptation to environment. He defined it as intelligence as an aggregate of abilities. It
the global and aggregate capacity of an expresses the individual’s performance in
individual to think rationally, act terms of a single index of cognitive abilities.
purposefully, and to deal effectively with On the other hand, the information-
her/his environment. Other psychologists, processing approach describes the
such as Gardner and Sternberg have processes people use in intellectual
suggested that an intelligent individual not reasoning and problem solving. The major
only adapts to the environment, but also focus of this approach is on how an
actively modifies or shapes it. You will be intelligent person acts. Rather than
able to understand the concept of focusing on structure of intelligence or its
intelligence and how it has evolved, when underlying dimensions, information-

5
Chapter 1 • Variations in Psychological Attributes

Reprint 2025-26



processing approaches emphasise independent of the others. These primary
studying cognitive functions underlying abilities are: (i) Verbal Comprehension
intelligent behaviour. We will discuss (grasping meaning of words, concepts, and
some representative theories of these ideas), (ii) Numerical Abilities (speed and
approaches. accuracy in numerical and computational

We mentioned above that Alfred Binet skills), (iii) Spatial Relations (visualising
was the first psychologist who tried to patterns and forms), (iv) Perceptual Speed
formalise the concept of intelligence in (speed in perceiving details), (v) Word
terms of mental operations. Prior to him, Fluency (using words fluently and flexibly),
we find the notion of intelligence described (vi) Memory (accuracy in recalling
in general ways in various philosophical information), and (vii) Inductive Reasoning
treatises available in different cultural (deriving general rules from presented
traditions. Binet’s theory of intelligence facts).
was rather simple as it arose from his Arthur Jensen proposed a hierarchical
interest in differentiating more intelligent model of intelligence consisting of abilities
from less intelligent individuals. He, operating at two levels, called Level I and
therefore, conceptualised intelligence as Level II. Level I is the associative learning
consisting  of one similar set of abilities in which output is more or less similar to
which can be used for solving any or every the input (e.g., rote learning and memory).
problem in an individual’s environment. Level II, called cognitive competence,
His theory of intelligence is called Uni or involves higher-order skills as they
one factor theory of intelligence. This transform the input to produce an effective
theory came to be disputed when output.
psychologists started analysing data J.P. Guilford proposed the structure-
of individuals, which was collected using of-intellect model which classifies
Binet’s test. intellectual traits among three dimensions:

In 1927, Charles Spearman proposed a operations, contents, and products.
two-factor theory of intelligence Operations are what the respondent does.
employing a statistical method called factor These include cognition, memory
analysis. He showed that intelligence recording, memory retention, divergent
consisted of a general factor (g-factor) and production, convergent production, and
some specific factors (s-factors). The evaluation. Contents refer to the nature of
g-factor includes mental operations which materials or information on which
are primary and common to all intellectual operations are performed.
performances. In addition to the g-factor, These include visual, auditory, symbolic
he said that there are also many specific (e.g., letters, numbers), semantic (e.g.,
abilities. These are contained in what he words) and behavioural (e.g., information
called the s-factor. Excellent singers, about people’s behaviour, attitudes, needs,
architects, scientists, and athletes may be etc.). Products refer to the form in which
high on g-factor, but in addition to this, information is processed by the respondent.
they have specific abilities which allow Products are classified into units, classes,
them to excel in their respective domains. relations, systems, transformations, and
Spearman’s theory was followed by Louis implications. Since this classification
Thurstone’s theory. He proposed the (Guilford, 1988) includes 6´5´6 categories,
theory of primary mental abilities. It therefore, the model has 180 cells. Each cell
states that intelligence consists of seven is expected to have at least one factor or
primary abilities, each of which is relatively ability; some cells may have more than

6
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



one factor. Each factor is described in Pilots, sailors, sculptors, painters,
terms of all three dimensions. architects, interior decorators, and

The above mentioned theories are surgeons are likely to have highly
representations of psychometric approach developed spatial intelligence.
to understand intelligent behaviour. Musical (an ability to produce and

manipulate musical rhythms and
Theory of Multiple Intelligences patterns) : It is the capacity to produce,
Howard Gardner proposed the theory of create and manipulate musical patterns.
multiple intelligences. According to him, Persons high on this intelligence are very
intelligence is not a single entity; rather sensitive to sounds and vibrations, and
distinct types of intelligences exist. Each in creating new patterns of sounds.
of these intelligences are independent of Bodily-Kinaesthetic (an ability to use
each other. This means that, if a person whole or portions of the body flexibly and
exhibits one type of intelligence, it does creatively) : This consists of the use of the
not necessarily indicate being high or low whole body or portions of it for display
on other types of intelligences. Gardner or construction of products and problem
also put forth that different types of solving. Athletes, dancers, actors,
intelligences interact and work together sportspersons, gymnasts, and surgeons
to find a solution to a problem. Gardner are likely to have such kind of intelligence.
studied extremely talented persons, who Interpersonal (an ability to
had shown exceptional abilities in their understand to subtle aspects of others’
respective areas, and described eight behaviours) : This is the ability to
types of intelligence. These are as follows: understand the motives, feelings and

Linguistic (an ability to produce and behaviours of other people so as to bond
use language) : It is the capacity to use into a comfortable relationship with
language fluently and flexibly to express others. Psychologists, counsellors,
one’s thinking and understand others. politicians, social workers, and religious
Persons high on this intelligence are leaders are likely to possess high
‘word-smart’, i.e. they are sensitive to interpersonal intelligence.
different shades of word meanings, are Intrapersonal (an ability to
articulate, and can create linguistic understand of one’s own feelings,
images in their mind. Poets and writers motives, and desires): This refers to the
are very strong in this component of knowledge of one’s internal strengths and
intelligence. limitations and using that knowledge to

Logical-Mathematical (an ability to effectively relate to others. Persons high
think logically and critically, and solve on this ability have finer sensibilities
problems) : Persons high on this type of regarding their identity, human
intelligence can think logically and existence, and meaning of life.
critically. They engage in abstract Philosophers and spiritual leaders present
reasoning, and can manipulate symbols examples of this type of intelligence.
to solve mathematical problems. Scientists Naturalistic (an ability to identify the
and Nobel Prize winners are likely to be features of the natural world) : This
strong in this component. involves complete awareness of our

Spatial (an ability to form visual relationship with the natural world. It is
images and patterns) : It refers to the useful in recognising the beauty of
abilities involved in forming, using, and different species of flora and fauna, and
transforming mental images. The person making subtle discriminations in the
high on this intelligence can easily natural world. Hunters, farmers, tourists,
represent the spatial world in the mind.

7
Chapter 1 • Variations in Psychological Attributes

Reprint 2025-26



botanists, zoologists, and bird watchers Experiential Intelligence: Experiential
possess more of naturalistic intelligence. or creative intelligence is involved in

using past experiences creatively to solve
Triarchic Theory of Intelligence novel problems. It is reflected in creative

Robert Sternberg (1985) proposed the performance. Persons high on this aspect

triarchic theory of intelligence. Sternberg integrate different experiences in an

views intelligence as “the ability to adapt, original way to make new discoveries and

to shape and select environment to inventions. They quickly find out which

accomplish one’s goals and those of one’s information is crucial in a given situation.

society and culture”. According to this
theory, there are three basic types of

On the ‘Practical’ Track Activity
intelligence: Componential, Experiential, 1.2
and Contextual. The elements of the You have just been admitted into a
triarchic theory of intelligence are shown school/college. You will take three
in Figure 1.1. examinations during the entire year.

Componential Intelligence : Compo- You sincerely want to receive high
marks in the course. How likely are you

nential or analytical intelligence is the
to engage in each of the following

analysis of information to solve problems. actions? Rank the following courses of
Persons high on this ability think action. Match your answer with that
analytically and critically and succeed in of your classmates.
schools. This intelligence has three • Attend classes regularly.

components, each serving a different • Create study groups with your

function. First is the knowledge acquisition friends for weekly discussions.
• Take detailed notes in the class.

component, which is responsible for
• Join a tutorial/coaching centre.

learning and acquisition of the ways of • Prepare written notes for each
doing things. The second is the meta or a chapter.
higher order component, which involves • Read the textbook chapters

planning concerning what to do and how thoroughly.

to do. The third is the performance • Solve the questions of the last three
years.

component, which involves actually doing
Talk to your teacher after the class.

things.

Fig.1.1 : Elements of Triarchic Theory of Intelligence

8
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Contextual Intelligence : Contextual you perceive the relations among various
or practical intelligence involves the ability concepts and integrate them into a
to deal with environmental demands meaningful pattern for comprehension. For
encountered on a daily basis. It may be example, in Raven’s Progressive Matrices
called ‘street smartness’ or ‘business sense’. (RPM) Test, a design is presented from
Persons high on this aspect easily adapt to which a part has been removed. You are
their present environment or select a more required to choose one of the six options
favourable environment than the existing that best completes the design.
one, or modify the environment to fit their Simultaneous processing helps you in
needs. Therefore, they turn out to be grasping the meaning and relationship
successful in life. between the given abstract figures.

Sternberg’s triarchic theory of Successive processing takes place when
intelligence represents the information- you remember all the information serially
processing approach to understand so that the recall of one leads to the recall
intelligence. of another. Learning of digits, alphabets,

multiplication tables, etc. are examples of
Planning, Attention-arousal, and successive processing.
Simultaneous-successive (PASS) Model Planning : This is an essential feature
of Intelligence of intelligence. After the information is

attended to and processed, planning is
This model has been developed by J.P. activated. It allows us to think of the
Das, Jack Naglieri, and Kirby (1994). possible courses of action, implement them
According to this model, intellectual to reach a target, and evaluate their
activity involves the interdependent effectiveness. If a plan does not work, it is
functioning of three neurological systems, modified to suit the requirements of the
called the functional units of brain. These task or situation. For example, to take the
units are responsible for arousal/attention, test scheduled by your teacher, you would
coding or processing, and planning have to set goals, plan a time schedule of
respectively. study, get clarifications in case of problems

Arousal/Attention : State of arousal is and if you are not able to tackle the
basic to any behaviour as it helps us in chapters assigned for the test, you may
attending to stimuli. Arousal and attention have to think of other ways (e.g., give more
enable a person to process information. An time, study with a friend, etc.) to meet your
optimal level of arousal focuses our goals.
attention to the relevant aspects of a These PASS processes operate on a
problem. Too much or too little arousal knowledge base developed either formally
would interfere with attention. For (by reading, writing, and experimenting) or
instance, when you are told by your informally from the environment. These
teacher about a test which s/he plans to processes are interactive and dynamic in
hold, it would arouse you to attend to the nature; yet each has its own distinctive
specific chapters. Arousal forces you to functions. Das and Naglieri have also
focus your attention on reading, learning developed a battery of tests, known as the
and revising the contents of the chapters. Cognitive Assessment System (CAS). It

Simultaneous and Successive consists of verbal as well as non-verbal
Processing : You can integrate the tasks that measure basic cognitive
information into your knowledge system functions presumed to be independent of
either simultaneously or successively. schooling. The battery of tests is meant for
Simultaneous processing takes place when individuals between 5 and 18 years of age.

9
Chapter 1 • Variations in Psychological Attributes

Reprint 2025-26



The results of assessment can be used intelligence while rich nutrition, good
to remedy cognitive deficits of children family background, and quality schooling
with learning problems. increases intelligence. There is a general

This model represents the information- consensus among psychologists that
processing approach to intelligence. intelligence is a product of complex

interaction of heredity (nature) and

I environment (nurture). Heredity can best be
NDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN INTELLIGENCE

viewed as something that sets a range
Why are some people more intelligent than within which an individual’s development is
others? Is it due to their heredity, or is it actually shaped by the support and
due to the influence of environmental opportunities of the environment.
factors? You have already read about the
influence of these factors in the Assessment of Intelligence
development of an individual in Class XI. In 1905, Alfred Binet and Theodore Simon,

made the first successful attempt to
Intelligence: Interplay of Nature and

formally measure intelligence. In 1908,
Nurture

when the scale was revised, they gave the
The evidence for hereditary influences on concept of Mental Age (MA), which is a
intelligence comes mainly from studies on measure of a person’s intellectual
twins and adopted children. The development relative to people of her/his
intelligence of identical twins reared age group. A mental age of 5 means that
together correlate almost 0.90. Twins a child’s performance on an intelligence
separated early in childhood also test equals the average performance level
show considerable similarity in their of a group of 5-year olds. Chronological
intellectual, personality and behavioural Age (CA) is the biological age from birth.
characteristics. The intelligence of identical A bright child’s MA is more than her/his
twins reared in different environments CA; for a dull child, MA is below the CA.
correlate 0.72, those of fraternal twins Retardation was defined by Binet and
reared together correlate almost 0.60, and Simon as being two mental age years below
those of brothers and sisters reared the chronological age.
together correlate about 0.50, while In 1912, William Stern, a German
siblings reared apart correlate about 0.25. psychologist, devised the concept of
Another line of evidence comes from the Intelligence Quotient (IQ). IQ refers to
studies of adopted children, which mental age divided by chronological age,
show that children’s intelligence is more and multiplied by 100.
similar to their biological rather than

MA
adoptive parents. IQ =        ´ 100

CA
With respect to the role of environment,

studies have reported that as children grow The number 100 is used as a multiplier
in age, their intelligence level tends to move to avoid the decimal point. When the MA
closer to that of their adoptive parents. equals the CA, the IQ equals 100. If MA is
Children from disadvantaged homes more than the CA, IQ is more than 100. IQ
adopted into families with higher socio- becomes less than 100 when the MA is less
economic status exhibit a large increase in than the CA. For example, a
their intelligence scores. There is evidence 10-year-old child with a mental age of 12
that environmental deprivation lowers would have an IQ of 120 (12/10 ´ 100),

10
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



‘intellectual disability’, while persons
Activity ‘Intelligent’ Numbers with IQ above 130 are considered to have

1.3 (Computing IQ) exceptional talents. The IQ score of a
• Find out the IQ of a 14-year-old

child with a mental age of 16. person can be interpreted by referring to
• Find out the mental age of a 12- Table 1.1.

year-old child with an IQ of 90.
Table 1.1 : Classification of People on the

Basis of IQ
whereas the same child with an MA of 7

IQ Range Descriptive Label Per cent in the
would have an IQ of 70 (7/10 ´ 100). The

Population
average IQ in the population is 100,
irrespective of age. Above 130 Very superior 2.2

IQ scores are distributed in the 120 – 130 Superior 6.7
population in such a way that the scores

110 – 119 High average 16.1
of most people tend to fall in the middle
range of the distribution. Only a few 90 – 109 Average 50.0

people have either very high or very low 80 – 89 Low average 16.1

scores. The frequency distribution for the 70 – 79 Borderline 6.7
IQ scores tends to approximate a bell- Below 70 Intellectually disabled 2.2
shaped curve, called the normal curve.
This type of distribution is symmetrical
around the central value, called the mean. All persons do not have the same
The distribution of IQ scores in the form intellectual capacity; some are
of a normal distribution is shown in exceptionally bright and some are below
Figure 1.2. average. One practical use of intelligence

The mean IQ score in a population is test is to identify persons at the extremes
100. People with IQ scores in the range of of intellectual functioning. If you refer to
90–110 have normal intelligence. Those Table 1.1, you will notice that about 2 per
with IQ below 70 are suspected to have cent of the population have IQ above 130,

Fig.1.2 : Normal Curve Pattern Showing Distribution of IQ Scores in the Population

11
Chapter 1 • Variations in Psychological Attributes

Reprint 2025-26



and a similar percentage have IQ below to those who cannot be trained and
70. The persons in the first group are require institutional care throughout their
called intellectually gifted; those in the lives. You have learnt earlier that the
second group are termed intellectually mean IQ score in the population is 100.
disabled. These two groups deviate These figures are used to understand the
considerably from the normal population categories of intellectually disabled. The
in respect of their cognitive, emotional, different levels of intellectual disability are:
and motivational characteristics. mild  (IQs 55 to approximately 70),

Variations of Intelligence moderate (IQs 35–40 to approximately 50–
55), severe  (IQs 20–25 to approximately

Intellectual Deficiency 35–40), and profound (IQs below 20–25).

On the one hand are the gifted and Although the development of people with

creative persons we discussed briefly mild disability is typically slower than that

earlier. On the other hand, there are of their peers, they can function quite

children who face enormous difficulty in independently, hold jobs and families. As

learning even very simple skills. Those the level of disability increases, the

children who show intellectual deficiency difficulties are strongly marked. The

are termed as ‘intellectually disabled’. As people with moderate disability lag behind
a group, there is wide variation among the their peers in language and motor skills.
intellectually disabled. The American They can be trained in self-care skills, and
Association on Mental Deficiency (AAMD) simple social and communication skills.
views intellectual disability as They need to have moderate degree of
“significantly sub-average general supervision in everyday tasks. Individuals
intellectual functioning existing with profound and severe disability are
concurrently with deficits in adaptive incapable of managing life and need
behaviour and manifested during the constant care for their entire lives. You
developmental period”. This definition will read more about the characteristics
points to three basic features. First, in of the intellectually disabled in Chapter 4.
order to be judged as intellectually
disabled, a person must show significantly Intellectual Giftedness
sub-average intellectual functioning.
Persons having IQs below 70 are judged Intellectually gifted individuals show
to have sub-average intelligence. The higher performance because of their
second relates to deficits in adaptive outstanding potentialities. The study of
behaviour. Adaptive behaviour refers to a gifted individuals began in 1925, when
person’s capacity to be independent and Lewis Terman followed the lives of about
deal effectively with one’s environment. 1500 children with IQs of 130 and above
The third feature is that the deficits must to examine how intelligence was related
be observed during the developmental to occupational success and life
period, that is between 0 and 18 years adjustment. Although the terms ‘talent’
of age. and ‘giftedness’ are often used inter -

Individuals who are categorised as changeably, they mean different things.
having intellectual disability show Giftedness is exceptional general ability
significant variation in their abilities, shown in superior performance in a wide
ranging from those who can be taught to variety of areas. Talent is a narrower term
work and function with special attention, and refers to remarkable ability in a

12
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



specific field (e.g., spiritual, social, These may include life enrichment
aesthetic, etc.). The highly talented are programmes that can sharpen children’s
sometimes called ‘prodigies’. skills in productive thinking, planning,

It has been suggested by psychologists decision-making, and communication.
that giftedness from the teachers’ point of
view depends on a combination of high Types of Intelligence Tests
ability , high creativity, and high Intelligence tests are of several types. On
commitment. the basis of their administration procedure,

Gifted children show early signs of
they can be categorised as individual or

intellectual superiority. Even during
group tests. They can also be classified as

infancy and early childhood, they show
either verbal or performance tests on the

larger attention span, good recognition
basis of the nature of items used.

memory, preference for novelty, sensitivity
Depending upon the extent to which an

to environmental changes, and early
intelligence test favours one culture over

appearance of language skills. To equate
another, it can be judged as either culture-

giftedness with brilliant academic
fair or culture-biased. You can choose a

performance is not correct. Athletes who
test depending on the purpose of your use.

show superior psychomotor ability are
also gifted. Each gifted student

Individual or Group Tests
possesses different strengths, personalities
and characteristics. Some important An individual intelligence test is one which
characteristics of gifted children are : can be administered to one person at a
• Advanced logical thinking, questioning time. A group intelligence test can be

and problem solving behaviour. administered to several persons

• High speed in processing information. simultaneously. Individual tests require

• Superior generalisation and discri- the test administrator to establish a

mination ability. rapport with the subject and be sensitive

• Advanced level of original and creative to her/his feelings, moods and expressions

thinking. during the testing session. Group tests,
however, do not allow an opportunity to be

• High level of intrinsic motivation and
familiar with the subjects’ feelings.

self-esteem.
Individual tests allow people to answer

• Independent and non-conformist
orally or in a written form or manipulate

thinking.
objects as per the tester’s instructions.

• Preference for solitary academic
Group tests generally seek written answers

activities for long periods.
usually in a multiple-choice format.

Performance on intelligence tests is not
the only measure for identifying the gifted.

Verbal, Non-Verbal, or Performance Tests
Many other sources of information, such as
teachers’ judgment, school achievement An intelligence test may be fully verbal,
record, parents’ interviews, peer and self- fully non-verbal or fully performance-
ratings, etc. can be used in combination based, or it may consist of a mixture of
with intellectual assessment. To reach their items from each category. Verbal tests
full potential, gifted children require special require subjects to give verbal responses
attention and different educational either orally or in a written form.
programmes beyond those provided to Therefore, verbal tests can be administered
normal children in regular classrooms. only to literate people. The non-verbal tests use

13
Chapter 1 • Variations in Psychological Attributes

Reprint 2025-26



pictures or illustrations as test items. is asked to arrange the blocks within a
Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM) Test is time period to produce a given design. A
an example of a non-verbal test. In this major advantage of performance tests is
test, the subject examines an incomplete that they can be easily administered to
pattern and chooses a figure from the persons from different cultures.
alternatives that will complete the pattern.
A specimen item from RPM is given in Culture-Fair or Culture-Biased Tests
Figure 1.3.

Intelligence tests can be culture-fair or
culture-biased. Many intelligence tests
show a bias to the culture in which they
are developed. Tests developed in America
and Europe represent an urban and
middle class cultural ethos. Hence,
educated middle class white subjects
generally perform well on those tests. The
items do not respect the cultural
perspectives of Asia and Africa. The norms
for these tests are also drawn from western
cultural groups. You may be already
familiar with the concept of norms

Fig.1.3 : An Item from Raven’s Progressive discussed in Class XI.
Matrices Test It is nearly impossible to design a test

that can be applied equally meaningfully in
Performance tests require subjects to all cultures. Psychologists have tried to

manipulate objects and other materials to develop tests that are culture-fair or
perform a task. Written language is not culturally appropriate, i.e. one that does not
necessary for answering the items. For discriminate against individuals belonging
example, Kohs’ Block Design Test contains to different cultures. In such tests, items
a number of wooden blocks. The subject are constructed in a manner that they

Box Some Misuses of Intelligence Tests

1.1
You might have learnt by now that intelligence tests serve many useful purposes such as
selection, counselling, guidance, self-analysis, and diagnosis. Unless used by a trained
investigator, they may be misused either intentionally or unintentionally. Some of the ill-
effects of intelligence testing by naive testers are:
• Poor performance on a test may attach a stigma to children and thereby adversely

affect their performance and self-respect.
• The tests may invite discriminating practices from parents, teachers and elders in the

society.
• Administering a test biased in favour of the middle class and higher class populations

may underestimate the IQ of children coming from disadvantaged sections of the society.
• Intelligence tests do not capture creative potentialities and practical side of intelligence,

and they also do not relate much to success in life. Intelligence can be a potential factor
for achievement in various spheres of life.
It is suggested that one should guard against erroneous practices associated with

intelligence tests and take the help of trained psychologists to analyse an individual’s
strengths and weaknesses.

14
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



assess experiences common to all cultures (NCERT) has documented Indian tests.
or have questions in which language usage Critical reviews of Indian tests are
is not required. Non-verbal and published in the form of handbooks.
performance tests help reduce the cultural NLEPT has brought out the handbooks in
bias usually associated with verbal tests. the area of intelligence, aptitude,

personality, attitudes, and interests.
Intelligence Testing in India Table 1.2 lists some tests developed in
S.M. Mohsin made a pioneering attempt in India. Among these, Bhatia’s Battery of
constructing an intelligence test in Hindi Performance Tests is quite popular.

Table 1.2 : Some Tests Developed in India

Verbal Performance

• CIE Verbal Group Test of Intelligence by • CIE Non-verbal Group Test of Intelligence
Uday Shankar • Bhatia’s Battery of Performance Tests

• Group Test of General Mental Ability by • Draw-a-Man Test by Pramila Pathak
S. Jalota

• Adaptation of Wechsler Adult Performance
• Group Test of Intelligence by Prayag Mehta Intelligence Scale by R. Ramalingaswamy
• The Bihar Test of Intelligence by S.M. Mohsin

• Group Test of Intelligence by Bureau of
Psychology, Allahabad

• Indian Adaptation of Stanford-Binet Test
(Third Edition) by S.K. Kulshrestha

• Test of General Mental Ability (Hindi) by
M.C. Joshi.

in the 1930s. C.H. Rice attempted to CULTURE AND INTELLIGENCE
standardise Binet’s test in Urdu and
Punjabi. At about the same time, A major characteristic of intelligence is that
Mahalanobis attempted to standardise it helps individuals to adapt to their
Binet’s test in Bengali. Attempts were also environment. The cultural environment
made by Indian researchers to develop provides a context for intelligence to
Indian norms for some western tests develop. Vygotsky, a Russian psychologist,
including RPM, WAIS, Alexander’s has argued that culture provides a social
Passalong, Cube Construction, and Kohs’ context in which people live, grow, and
Block Design. Long and Mehta prepared a understand the world around them. For
Mental Measurement Handbook listing out example, in less technologically developed
103 tests of intelligence in India that were societies, social and emotional skills in
available in various languages. Since then, relating to people are valued, while in
a number of tests have either been technologically advanced societies,
developed or adapted from western personal achievement founded on abilities
cultures. The National Library of of reasoning and judgment is considered
Educational and Psychological Tests to represent intelligence.
(NLEPT) at the National Council of From your previous reading you know
Educational Research and Training that culture is a collective system

15
Chapter 1 • Variations in Psychological Attributes

Reprint 2025-26



of customs, beliefs, attitudes, and others in the society. Some non-western
achievements in art and literature. A societies value self-reflection and
person’s intelligence is likely to be tuned collectivistic orientation as opposed to
by these cultural parameters. Many personal achievement and individualistic
theorists have regarded intelligence as orientation.
attributes specific to the person without
regard to their cultural background. The Intelligence in the Indian Tradition
unique features of culture now find some Contrary to technological intelligence,
representation in theories of intelligence. intelligence in the Indian tradition can be
Sternberg’s notion of contextual or termed as integral intelligence, which
practical intelligence implies that gives emphasis on connectivity with the
intelligence is a product of culture. social and world environment. Indian
Vygotsky also believed that cultures, like thinkers view intelligence from a holistic
individuals, have a life of their own; they perspective where equal attention is paid
grow and change, and in the process to cognitive and non-cognitive processes as
specify what will be the end-product of well as their integration.
successful intellectual development. The Sanskrit word ‘buddhi’ which is
According to him, while elementary mental often used to represent intelligence is far
functions (e.g., crying, attending to more pervasive in scope than the western
mother’s voice, sensitivity to smells, concept of intelligence. Buddhi, according
walking, and running) are universal, the to J.P. Das, includes such skills as mental
manner in which higher mental functions effort, determined action, feelings, and
such as problem solving and thinking opinions along with cognitive competence
operate are largely culture-produced. such as knowledge, discrimination, and

Technologically advanced societies understanding. Among other things,
adopt child rearing practices that foster buddhi is the knowledge of one’s own self
skills of generalisation and abstraction, based on conscience, will and desire. Thus,
speed, minimal moves, and mental the notion of buddhi has affective and
manipulation among children. These motivational components besides a strong
societies promote a type of behaviour, cognitive component. Unlike the western
which can be called technological views, which primarily focus on cognitive
intelligence. In these societies, persons parameters, the following competencies are
are well-versed in skills of attention, identified as facets of intelligence in the
observation, analysis, performance, speed, Indian tradition :
and achievement orientation. Intelligence • Cognitive capacity (sensitivity to
tests developed in western cultures look context, understanding, discrimination,
precisely for these skills in an individual. problem solving, and effective

Technological intelligence is not so communication).
valued in many Asian and African • Social competence (respect for social
societies. The qualities and skills regarded order, commitment to elders, the
as intelligent actions in non-western young and the needy, concern
cultures are sharply different, though the about others, recognising others’
boundaries are gradually vanishing under perspectives).
the influence of western cultures. In • Emotional competence (self-
addition to cognitive competence that is regulation and self-monitoring of
very specific to the individual, the non- emotions, honesty, politeness, good
western cultures look for skills to relate to conduct, and self-evaluation).

16
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



• Entrepreneurial competence information accurately and efficiently. To
(commitment, persistence, patience, know the characteristics of persons who
hard work, vigilance, and goal-directed are high on emotional intelligence, read
behaviours). Box 1.2.

Emotional intelligence is receiving
increasing attention of educators for

EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE
dealing with students who are affected by

The notion of emotional intelligence stresses and challenges of the outside

broadens the concept of intelligence world. Programmes aimed at improving

beyond the intellectual sphere/domain and students’ emotional intelligence have

considers that intelligence includes beneficial ef fects on their academic

emotions. You may note that it builds on achievement. They encourage cooperative

the concept of intelligence in the Indian behaviour and reduce their antisocial

tradition. Emotional intelligence is a set activities. These programmes are very

of skills that underlie accurate appraisal, useful in preparing students to face the

expression, and regulation of emotions. It challenges of life outside the classroom.

is the feeling side of intelligence. A good IQ
and scholastic record is not enough to be SPECIAL ABILITIES
successful in life. You may find many
people who are academically talented, but Aptitude : Nature and Measurement
are unsuccessful in their own life. They
experience problems in family, workplace By now you have learnt enough about

and interpersonal relationships. What do intelligence. You may recall that

they lack? Some psychologists believe that intelligence tests assess a general mental

the source of their difficulty may be a lack ability. Aptitude refers to special abilities

of emotional intelligence. This concept was in a particular field of activity. It is a

first introduced by Salovey and Mayer who combination of characteristics that indicates

considered emotional intelligence as “the an individual’s capacity to acquire some

ability to monitor one’s own and other’s specific knowledge or skill after training. We
emotions, to discriminate among them, and assess aptitude with the help of selected
to use the information to guide one’s tests. The knowledge of aptitude can help
thinking and actions”. Emotional Quotient us to predict an individual’s future
(EQ) is used to express emotional performance.
intelligence in the same way as IQ is used While assessing intelligence,
to express intelligence. psychologists often found that people with

In simple terms, emotional intelligence similar intelligence differed widely in
refers to the ability to process emotional acquiring certain knowledge or skills. You

Characteristics of Emotionally Intelligent Persons Box
1.2

• Perceive and be sensitive to your feelings and emotions.
• Perceive and be sensitive to various types of emotions in others by noting their body

language, voice and tone, and facial expressions.
• Relate your emotions to your thoughts so that you take them into account while solving

problems and taking decisions.
• Understand the powerful influence of the nature and intensity of your emotions.
• Control and regulate your emotions and their expressions while dealing with self and

others to achieve harmony and peace.

17
Chapter 1 • Variations in Psychological Attributes

Reprint 2025-26



may observe in your class that there are (vi) Space Relations, (vii) Spelling, and
certain areas in which some intelligent (viii) Language Usage. J.M. Ojha has
students do not do well. When you have a developed an Indian adaptation of DAT.
problem in mathematics, you may turn to Several other aptitude tests have been
Aman for help, and with similar difficulties developed in India for measuring scientific,
in literature you may consult Avinash. You scholastic, literary, clerical, and teaching
may request Shabnam to sing for your aptitudes.
annual function, and may turn to John
when facing a problem with your bike. CREATIVITY
These specific skills and abilities are called
aptitudes. With proper training these In the foregoing sections, you have read
abilities can be considerably enhanced. that there are variations in psychological

In order to be successful in a particular attributes like intelligence, aptitude,
field, a person must have both aptitude personality and so on.  Here, you will learn
and interest. Interest is a preference for that there are differences in the potential
a particular activity; aptitude is the for creativity across individuals and the
potentiality to perform that activity. A manner in which creativity is expressed.
person may be interested in a particular Some are highly creative and others are not
job or activity, but may not have the so creative. Some may express creativity in
aptitude for it. Similarly, a person may writing, still others in dance, music, poetry,
have the potentiality for performing a job, science and so on. Manifestations of
but may not be interested in doing that. creativity can be observed in a novel
In both cases, the outcome will not be solution to a problem, an invention,
satisfactory. A student with high composition of a poem, painting, new
mechanical aptitude and strong interest in chemical process, an innovation in law, a
engineering is more likely to be a breakthrough in preventing a disease and
successful mechanical engineer. the like. Despite differences, one common

Aptitude tests are available in two element among these is the production of
forms: independent (specialised) aptitude something new and unique.
tests and multiple (generalised) aptitude We generally think of creativity in terms
tests. Clerical Aptitude, Mechanical of creative persons like Tagore, Einstein,
Aptitude, Numerical Aptitude, and Typing C.V. Raman, Ramanujan etc. who have
Aptitude are independent aptitude tests. made outstanding contributions in
Multiple Aptitude Tests exist in the form different spheres. In recent years, our
of test batteries, which measure aptitude understanding of creativity has broadened.
in several separate but homogeneous Creativity is not just limited to a selected
areas. Differential Aptitude Tests (DAT), few — the artist, the scientist, the poet or
the General Aptitude Tests Battery (GATB), the inventor. An ordinary individual who is
and the Armed Services Vocational engaged in simple occupations like pottery,
Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) are well-known carpentry, cooking, etc. can also be
aptitude test batteries. Among these, creative. However, it has been said that
DAT is most commonly used in they are not working at the same level of
educational settings. It consists of 8 creativity as an eminent scientist or a
independent subtests: (i) Verbal Reasoning, writer. Hence, we can say that individuals
(ii) Numerical Reasoning, (iii) Abstract vary in terms of the level and the areas in
Reasoning, (iv) Clerical Speed and which they exhibit creativity and that all
Accuracy, (v) Mechanical Reasoning, may not be operating at the same level.

18
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Einstein’s theory of relativity is an you have already read in Class XI about
example of the highest level of creativity strategies to enhance creativity.
which implies bringing out altogether
new ideas, facts, theory, or a product. Creativity and Intelligence
Another level of creativity is working on One important debate in understanding
what has already been established the variations in creativity has been the
earlier by way of modifications, by putting relationship of creativity with intelligence.
things in new perspectives or to new use. Let us take an example of two students

Research literature suggests that in a class. Sunita is regarded by her
children begin to develop their imagination teachers as an excellent student. She does
during the early years of childhood but her work on time, scores the highest
they express creativity mostly through grades in her class, listens to instructions
physical activities and in non-verbal ways. with care, grasps quickly, reproduces
When language and intellectual functions accurately but she rarely comes out with
are fully developed and store of knowledge ideas which are her own. Rita is another
is adequately available, creativity is student who is just average in her studies
expressed through verbal modes too. Those and has not achieved high grades
who are outstanding in their creativity may consistently. She prefers to learn on her
give an indication about the direction in own. She improvises new ways of helping
which their creativity lies through their her mother at home and comes up with
self-chosen activities. In some cases, new ways of doing her work and
however, opportunities need to be provided assignments. The former is considered to
before they can manifest their hidden be more intelligent and the latter as more
potential for creativity. creative. Thus, a person who has the

How do we explain variations in the ability to learn faster and reproduce
potential for creativity? As in the case of accurately may be considered intelligent
other mental and physical characteristics, more than creative unless s/he devises
such variations can be attributed to the new ways of learning and doing.
complex interaction of heredity and Terman, in the 1920s, found that
environment. There is no disagreement persons with high IQ were not necessarily
that creativity is determined by both creative. At the same time, creative ideas
heredity and environment. Limits of the could come from persons who did not have
creative potential are set by heredity, a very high IQ. Other researches have
environmental factors stimulate the shown that not even one of those identified
development of creativity. How much of the as gifted, followed up throughout their
creative potential can be realised, when adult life, had become well-known for
and in what specific form and direction is creativity in some field. Researchers have
largely determined by environmental also found that both high and low level of
factors such as motivation, commitment, creativity can be found in highly intelligent
family support, peer influences, training children and also children of average
opportunities, etc.  Although no amount of intelligence. The same person, thus, can be
training can transform an average person creative as well as intelligent but it is not
to the level of Tagore, Shakespeare, etc. necessary that intelligent ones, in the
but it is also true that every individual can conventional sense, must be creative.
raise her/his level of creative potential Intelligence, therefore, by itself does not
beyond its present level. In this context, ensure creativity.

19
Chapter 1 • Variations in Psychological Attributes

Reprint 2025-26



Researchers have found that the are off-the-beaten track, ability to see new
relationship between creativity and relationships between seemingly unrelated
intelligence is positive. All creative acts things, ability to guess causes and
require some minimum ability to acquire consequences, ability to put things in a
knowledge and capacity to comprehend, new context, etc. This is contrary to the
retain, and retrieve. Creative writers, for tests of intelligence which mostly involve
example, need facility in dealing with convergent thinking. In tests of
language. The artist must understand the intelligence, the person has to think of the
effect that will be produced by a particular right solution to the problem and the focus
technique of painting, a scientist must be is on assessing abilities such as memory,
able to reason and so on. Hence, a certain logical reasoning, accuracy, perceptual
level of intelligence is required for creativity ability, and clear thinking. There is little
but beyond that intelligence does not scope for the expression of spontaneity,
correlate well with creativity. It can be originality, and imagination.
concluded that creativity can take many Since expressions of creativity are
forms and blends. Some may have more of varied, tests have been developed using
intellectual attributes, others may have different stimuli like words, figures, action,
more of attributes associated with and sounds. These tests measure general
creativity. But, what are the attributes of

creative thinking abilities like ability to
a creative person? You may like to discuss

think of a variety of ideas on a given topic/
the attributes which are common to all

situation, alternative ways of looking at
kinds of creative persons.

things, problems or situations, to guess
Creativity tests came into existence to

causes and consequences, to think of
assess variations in terms of the potential

unusual ideas to improve and to use
for creativity in contrast to intelligence.

common objects, ask unusual questions
A general feature of most of the

and so on. A few investigators have also
creativity tests is that they are open-ended.
They permit the person to think of different developed tests of creativity in different

answers to the questions or problems in areas such as literary creativity, scientific

terms of her/his experiences, whatever creativity, mathematical creativity, etc.

these may have been. These help the Some of the famous psychologists who

individual to go in different directions. have developed creativity tests are

There are no specified answers to Guilford, Torrance, Khatena, Wallach and

questions or problems in creativity tests. Kogan, Paramesh, Baqer Mehdi, and Passi.
Therefore, there is freedom to use one’s Each test has a standardised procedure, a
imagination and express it in original ways. complete set of manual, and interpretation
Creativity tests involve divergent thinking guide. These can be used only after
and assess such abilities as ability to extensive training in administration and
produce a variety of ideas, i.e. ideas which interpretation of test scores.

Key Terms
Aptitude, Aptitude tests, Case study, Cognitive assessment system, Componential intelligence,
Contextual intelligence, Creativity, Emotional intelligence, Culture-fair test, Experiential intelligence,
g-factor, Individual differences, Intellectual giftedness, Intellectual disability, Intelligence, Intelligence
tests, Intelligence quotient (IQ), Interest, Interview, Mental age (MA), Observational method, Planning,
Psychological test, Simultaneous processing, Situationism, Successive processing, Values.

20
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



• Individuals vary in their physical and psychological characteristics. Individual
differences refer to distinctiveness and variations in people’s characteristics and
behaviour patterns.

• A wide variety of personal attributes such as intelligence, aptitude, interests,
personality, and values can be assessed. Psychologists assess these attributes
through psychological tests, interviews, case studies, observations, and self-reports.

• The term ‘intelligence’ refers to an individual’s capacity to understand the world,
think rationally, and use resources effectively to meet the demands of life. Intellectual
development is the product of a complex interplay of hereditary factors (nature), and
environmental conditions (nurture).

• The psychometric approaches to intelligence lay emphasis on studying intelligence
as a constellation of abilities, expressed in quantitative terms such as IQ. The more
recent theories representing information-processing approaches, e.g. Sternberg’s
triarchic theory and Das’s PASS model describe the processes underlying intelligent
behaviour. Howard Gardner suggests that there are eight different kinds of intelligence.

• Intelligence is assessed with the help of specially designed tests. Intelligence tests
may be of verbal or performance type; can be administered individually or in groups;
and may be culturally-biased or culturally-fair. At the two extremes of intelligence
are the intellectually deficient persons and the intellectually gifted.

• Culture provides a context for intellectual development. Western culture promotes
‘technological intelligence’ based on skills of analysis, performance, speed, and
achievement orientation. In contrast, non-western cultures value self-reflection, social
and emotional competence as signs of intelligent behaviour. Indian culture promotes
‘integral intelligence’ that emphasises connectivity with people and the larger social
world.

• Emotional intelligence involves the ability to perceive and manage one’s and other’s
feelings and emotions; to motivate oneself and restrain one’s impulses; and to handle
interpersonal relationships effectively.

• Aptitude refers to an individual’s potential for acquiring some specific skills. Aptitude
tests predict what an individual will be able to do given proper training and
environment.

• Creativity is the ability to produce ideas, objects, or problem solutions that are novel,
appropriate and useful. Certain level of intelligence is necessary to be creative, but a
high level of intelligence, however, does not ensure that a person would certainly be
creative.

Review Questions

1. How do psychologists characterise and define intelligence?
2. To what extent is our intelligence the result of heredity (nature) and environment

(nurture)? Discuss.
3. Explain briefly the multiple intelligences identified by Gardner.
4. How does the triarchic theory help us to understand intelligence?
5. “Any intellectual activity involves the independent functioning of three neurological

systems”. Explain with reference to PASS model.
6. Are there cultural differences in the conceptualisation of intelligence?
7. What is IQ? How do psychologists classify people on the basis of their IQ scores?
8. How can you differentiate between verbal and performance tests of intelligence?
9. All persons do not have the same intellectual capacity. How do individuals vary in

their intellectual ability? Explain.
10. Which of the two, IQ or EQ, do you think would be more related to success in life

and why?
11. How is ‘aptitude’ different from ‘interest’ and ‘intelligence’? How is aptitude measured?
12. How is creativity related to intelligence?

21
Chapter 1 • Variations in Psychological Attributes

Reprint 2025-26



Project 1. Observe and interview 5 persons in your neighbourhood in order to see how they differ
Ideas from each other in terms of certain psychological attributes. Cover all the five domains.

Prepare a psychological profile of each person and compare.
2. Select 5 vocations and gather information about the nature of work done by people in

these vocations. Also analyse these vocations in terms of the types of psychological
attributes required for successful performance. Write a report.

Weblinks
http://www.indiana.edu/~intell/anastasi.shtml
http://www.chiron.valdosta.edu/whuitt/col/cogsys/intell.html
http://www.humandimensions.org/emotion.htm
http://www.emotionaliq.com/Gdefault.htm
http://edweb.gsn.org/edref.mi.intro.html
http://www.talentsmart.com
http://www.kent.ac.uk/career/psychotests.com

Pedagogical Hints
1. To introduce the topic, teacher can

initiate discussion on psychological
constructs such as intelligence,
personality, aptitude, values, etc.
This would serve to point out the
difficulty in arriving at one single,
universal explanation of these
constructs.

2. Teacher should draw from the
experiences of the students to
introduce the different psycho-
logical attributes discussed in the
chapter.

3. Some sample items of various tests
(to be collected by the teacher) can
be given to students to generate
their interest.

4. Encourage students to complete the
activities and also to design
activities on their own either
individually or in groups. Initiate
discussion in the class on
observations made by students on
completion of the activities.

5. Students should be encouraged to
relate the concepts to their real-life
experiences.

22
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



SELF AND PERSONALITY

After reading this chapter, you would be able to:
describe the concept of self and learn some ways for self-regulation of behaviour,
explain the concept of personality,
differentiate between various approaches to the study of personality,
develop insight into the development of a healthy personality, and
describe some techniques for personality assessment.

Introduction
Self and Personality
Concept of Self
Cognitive and Behavioural Aspects of Self

Self-esteem, Self-efficacy and Self-regulation
Culture and Self
Concept of Personality

Personality-related Terms (Box 2.1)
Major Approaches to the Study of Personality

Type Approaches

CONTENTS Trait Approaches
Five-Factor Model of Personality (Box 2.2)
Psychodynamic Approach
Behavioural Approach Key Terms
Cultural Approach Summary
Humanistic Approach Review Questions
Who is a Healthy Person? (Box 2.3)

Project Ideas
Assessment of Personality

Weblinks
Self-report Measures

Pedagogical Hints
Projective Techniques
Behavioural Analysis

23
##2##
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



Quite often you must have found yourself engaged in knowing and
evaluating your own behaviour and that of others. You must have noticed
how you react and behave in certain situations in a manner different from
others? You may have also often asked questions about your relationships
with others. To find an answer to some of these questions, psychologists
use the notion of self. Similarly when we ask  questions such as why people
are different, how they make different meaning of events, and how they
feel and react differently in similar situations (i.e. questions relating to

Introduction variations in behaviour), the notion of personality comes into play. Both
these concepts, i.e. self and personality are intimately related. Self, in fact,
lies at the core of personality.

The study of self and personality helps us understand not only who we
are, but also our uniqueness as well as our similarities with others. By
understanding self and personality, we can understand our own as well
as others’ behaviour in diverse settings. Several thinkers have analysed
the structure and function of self and personality. As a result, we have
different theoretical perspectives on self and personality today. This chapter
will introduce you to some basic aspects of self and personality. You will
also learn some important theoretical approaches to self and personality,
and certain methods of personality assessment.

SELF AND PERSONALITY CONCEPT OF SELF

Self and personality refer to the From your childhood days, you may have
characteristic ways in which we define our spent considerable time thinking about
existence. They also refer to the ways in who you are, and how you are different
which our experiences are organised and from others. By now, you already may have
show up in our behaviour. From common developed some ideas about yourself,
observation we know that different people although you may not be aware of it. Let
hold different ideas about themselves. us try to have some preliminary notion of
These ideas represent the self of a person. our self (i.e. who are we?) by completing
We also know that different people behave Activity 2.1.
in different ways in a given situation, but How easy was it for you to complete
the behaviour of a particular person from these sentences? How much time did you
one situation to another generally remains take? Perhaps it was not as easy as you
fairly stable. Such a relatively stable may have thought at first. While working
pattern of behaviour represents the on it, you were describing your ‘self ’. You
“personality” of that person. Thus, different are aware of your ‘self’ in the same way as
persons seem to possess dif ferent you are aware of various objects in your
personalities. These personalities are surrounding environment, such as a chair
reflected in the diverse behaviour of or a table in your room. A newly born child
persons. has no idea of its self. As a child grows

24
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



older, the idea of self emerges and its disclosing her/his personal identity. Social
formation begins. Parents, friends, identity refers to those aspects of a person
teachers and other significant persons play that link her/him to a social or cultural
a vital role in shaping a child’s ideas about group or are derived from it. When
self. Our interaction with other people, our someone says that s/he is a Hindu or a
experiences, and the meaning we give to Muslim, a Brahmin or an adivasi or a
them, serve as the basis of our self. The North Indian or a South Indian, or
structure of self is modifiable in the light something like these, s/he is trying to
of our own experiences and the indicate her/his social identity. These
experiences we have of other people. This descriptions characterise the way people
you will notice if you exchange the list you mentally represent themselves as a person.
completed under Activity 2.1 with your Thus, self refers to the totality of an
other friends. individual’s conscious experiences, ideas,

thoughts and feelings with regard to herself

Activity Understanding the Self or himself. These experiences and ideas
2.1 define the existence of an individual both

Please complete the following sentences at the personal and at social levels.
starting with “I am”.

Time Now............. Self as Subject and Self as Object

I am........................................................ If you return to your friends’ descriptions
I am........................................................ in Activity 2.1, you will find that they have
I am........................................................ described themselves either as an entity
I am........................................................

that does something (e.g., I am a dancer)
I am........................................................
I am........................................................ or as an entity on which something is done
I am........................................................ (e.g., I am one who easily gets hurt). In the
I am........................................................ former case, the self is described as a
I am........................................................ ‘subject’ (who does something); in the latter
I am..................................................... case, the self is described as an ‘object’
Time when you finished..................... (which gets affected).

This means that self can be understood

Notice what they have done. You will as a subject as well as an object. When you

find that they have produced a fairly long say, “I know who I am”, the self is being

list of attributes about how they identify described as a ‘knower’ as well as

themselves. The attributes they have used something that can be ‘known’. As a

for identification tell us about their subject (actor) the self actively engages in

personal as well as social or cultural the process of knowing itself. As an object

identities. Personal identity refers to those (consequence) the self gets observed and

attributes of a person that make her/him comes to be known. This dual status of self

different from others. When a person should always be kept in mind.

describes herself/himself by telling her/his
Kinds of Self

name (e.g., I am Sanjana or Karim), or her/
his qualities or characteristics (e.g., I am There are several kinds of self. They get
honest or hardworking person), or her/his formed as a result of our interactions with
potentialities or capabilities (e.g., I am a our physical and socio-cultural
singer or dancer), or her/his beliefs (e.g., environments. The first elements of self
I am a believer in God or destiny), s/he is may be noticed when a newborn child cries

25
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



for milk when it is hungry. Although, this more specific level, a person may have a
cry is based on reflex, this later on leads very positive view of her/his athletic
to development of awareness that ‘I am bravery, but a negative view of her/his
hungry’. This biological self in the context academic talents. At an even more specific
of socio-cultural environment modifies level, one may have a positive self-concept
itself. While you may feel hungry for a about one’s reading ability but a negative
chocolate, an Eskimo may not. one about one’s mathematical skills.

A distinction is made between ‘personal’ Finding out an individual’s self-concept is
and ‘social’ self. The personal self leads to not easy. The most frequently used method
an orientation in which one feels primarily involves asking the person about herself/
concerned with oneself. We have talked himself.
above how our biological needs lead to the
development of a ‘biological self ’. But, soon Self-esteem
a child’s psychological and social needs in Self-esteem is an important aspect of our
the context of her/his environment lead self. As persons we always make some
other components of personal self to judgment about our own value or worth.
emerge. Emphasis comes to be laid on This value judgment of a person about
those aspects of life that relate only to the herself/himself is called self-esteem. Some
concerned person, such as personal people have high self-esteem, whereas
freedom, personal responsibility, personal others may have low self-esteem. In order
achievement, or personal comforts. The to assess self-esteem we present a variety
social self emerges in relation with others of statements to a person, and ask her/
and emphasises such aspects of life as him to indicate the extent to which those
cooperation, unity, affiliation, sacrifice, statements are true for her or him. For
support or sharing. This self values example, we may ask a child to indicate the
family and social relationships. Hence, it extent to which statements such as “I am
is also referred to as familial or relational good at homework”, or “I am the one
self. usually chosen for the games”, or “I am

highly liked by my peers”, are true of her/
COGNITIVE AND BEHAVIOURAL ASPECTS him. If a child reports these statements to
OF SELF be true for her/him, her/his self-esteem

will be high in comparison to someone who
Psychologists from all parts of the world says “no”.
have shown interest in the study of self. Studies indicate that by the age of 6 to
These studies have brought out many 7 years, children seem to have formed self-
aspects of our behaviour related to self. As esteem at least in four areas: academic
indicated earlier, all of us carry within us competence, social competence, physical/
a sense of who we are and what makes us athletic competence, and physical
different from everyone else. We cling to appearance, which become more refined
our personal and social identities and feel with age. Our capacity to view ourselves in
safe in the knowledge that it remains terms of stable dispositions permits us to
stable in our lifetime. combine separate self-evaluations into a

The way we perceive ourselves and the general psychological image of ourselves.
ideas we hold about our competencies and This is known as an overall sense of self-
attributes is also called self-concept. At a esteem.
very general level, this view of oneself is, Self-esteem shows a strong relationship
overall, either positive or negative. At a with our everyday behaviour. For example,

26
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



children with high academic self-esteem stop smoking the moment they decide to
perform better in schools than those with do so. Our society, our parents and our
low academic self-esteem, and children own positive experiences can help in the
with high social self-esteem are more liked development of a strong sense of self-
by their peers than those with low social efficacy by presenting positive models
self-esteem. On the other hand, children during the formative years of children.
with low self-esteem in all areas are often
found to display anxiety, depression, and Self-regulation
increasing antisocial behaviour. Studies Self-regulation refers to our ability to
have shown that warm and positive organise and monitor our own behaviour.
parenting helps in the development of high People, who are able to change their
self-esteem among children as it allows behaviour according to the demands of the
them to know that they are accepted as external environment, are high on self-
competent and worthwhile. Children, whose monitoring.
parents help or make decisions for them Many situations of life require
even when they do not need assistance, resistance to situational pressures and
often suffer from low self-esteem. control over ourselves. This becomes

possible through what is commonly
Self-efficacy

known as ‘will power’. As human beings
Self-efficacy is another important aspect we can control our behaviour the way we
of our self. People differ in the extent to want. We often decide to delay or defer the
which they believe they themselves control satisfaction of certain needs. Learning to
their life outcomes or the outcomes are delay or defer the gratification of needs is
controlled by luck or fate or other called self-control. Self-control plays a
situational factors, e.g. passing an key role in the fulfilment of long-term
examination. A person who believes that goals. Indian cultural tradition provides
s/he has the ability or behaviours required us with certain effective mechanisms (e.g.,
by a particular situation demonstrates fasting in vrata or roza and non-
high self-efficacy. attachment with worldly things) for

The notion of self-efficacy is based on developing self-control.
Bandura’s social learning theory. A number of psychological techniques
Bandura’s initial studies showed that of self-control have also been suggested.
children and adults learned behaviour by Observation of own behaviour is one of
observing and imitating others. People’s them. This provides us with necessary
expectations of mastery or achievement information that may be used to change,
and their convictions about their own modify, or strengthen certain aspects of
effectiveness also determine the types of self. Self-instruction is another important
behaviour in which they would engage, as technique. We often instruct ourselves to
also the amount of risk they would do something and behave the way we want
undertake. A strong sense of self-efficacy to. Such instructions are quite effective in
allows people to select, influence, and even self-regulation. Self-reinforcement is the
construct the circumstances of their own third technique. This involves rewarding
life. People with a strong sense of self- behaviours that have pleasant outcomes.
efficacy also feel less fearful. For example, you may go to see a movie

Self-efficacy can be developed. People with friends, if you have done well in an
with high self-efficacy have been found to examination. These techniques have been

27
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



tried out and found quite effective with members of the group maintain their
respect to self-regulation and self-control. individuality. In the Indian culture, the self

is generally not separated from one’s own

CULTURE AND S group; rather both remain in a state of
ELF

harmonious co-existence. In the Western
Several aspects of self seem to be linked culture, on the other hand, they often
to the characteristic features of the culture remain at a distance. That is why many
in which an individual lives. Analysis of Western cultures are characterised as
self carried out in the Indian cultural individualistic, whereas many Asian
context reveals a number of important cultures are characterised as collectivistic.
features that are distinct from those found
in the Western cultural context. CONCEPT OF PERSONALITY

The most important distinction between
the Indian and the Western views is the The term ‘personality’ often appears in our
way the boundary is drawn between the day-to-day discussion. The literal meaning
self and the other. In the Western view, this of personality is derived from the Latin
boundary appears to be relatively fixed. word persona, the mask used by actors in
The Indian view of self, on the other hand, the Roman theatre for changing their facial
is characterised by the shifting nature of make-up. After putting on the mask,
this boundary. Thus, our self at one audience expected the person to perform
moment of time expands to fuse with the a role in a particular manner. It did not,
cosmos or include the others. But at the however, mean that the person enacting
next moment, it seems to be completely the given role necessarily possessed those
withdrawn from it and focused fully on qualities.
individual self (e.g., our personal needs or For a layperson, personality generally
goals). The Western view seems to hold refers to the physical or external
clear dichotomies between self and other, appearance of an individual. For example,
man and nature, subjective and objective. when we find someone ‘good-looking’, we
The Indian view does not make such clear often assume that the person also has a
dichotomies. Figure 2.1 illustrates this charming personality. This notion of
relationship. personality is based on superficial

In the Western culture, the self and the impressions, which may not be correct.
group exist as two different entities with In psychological terms, personality
clearly defined boundaries. Individual refers to our characteristic ways of

Fig.2.1 : Self and Group Boundaries in Western and Indian Cultural Perspectives

28
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



responding to individuals and situations. or external situational demands. Thus,
People can easily describe the way in which personality is adaptive to situations.
they respond to various situations. Certain Once we are able to characterise
catchwords (e.g., shy, sensitive, quiet, someone’s personality, we can predict
concerned, warm, etc.) are often used to how that person will probably behave
describe personalities. These words refer to

in a variety of circumstances. An
different components of personality. In this

understanding of personality allows us to
sense, personality refers to unique and

deal with people in realistic and acceptable
relatively stable qualities that characterise

ways. For example, if you find a child who
an individual’s behaviour across different

does not like orders, the most effective way
situations over a period of time.

to deal with that child will be not to give
If you watch closely, you will find that

orders, but to present a set of acceptable
people do show variations in their

alternatives from which the child may
behaviour. One is not always cautious or
impulsive, shy or friendly. Personality choose. Similarly, a child who has feelings

characterises individuals as they appear in of inferiority needs to be treated differently

most circumstances. Consistency in from a child who is self-confident.

behaviour, thought and emotion of an Several other terms are used to refer to

individual across situations and across behavioural characteristics of individuals.

time periods characterises her/his Quite often they are used as synonyms of

personality. For example, an honest person personality. Some of these terms are given

is more likely to remain honest irrespective in Box 2.1 along with their defining

of time or situation. However, situational features. You may read them carefully to
variations in behaviour do occur as they appreciate how they are different from the
help individuals in adapting to their notion of personality.
environmental circumstances.

In brief, personality is characterised by MAJOR APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF
the following features: PERSONALITY
1. It has both physical and psychological

components. Psychologists interested in the study of
2. Its expression in terms of behaviour is personality, try to answer certain questions

fairly unique in a given individual. about the nature and origin of individual
3. Its main features do not easily change differences in personality. You may have

with time. observed that two children in the same
4. It is dynamic in the sense that some of family develop dramatically dif ferent

its features may change due to internal personalities. Not only they look physically

Personality-related Terms Box
2.1

Temperament: Biologically based characteristic way of reacting.

Trait: Stable, persistent and specific way of behaving.

Disposition: Tendency of a person to react to a given situation in a particular way.

Character: The overall pattern of regularly occurring behaviour.

Habit: Over learned modes of behaving.

Values: Goals and ideals that are considered important and worthwhile to achieve.

29
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



different, but they also behave differently of external rewards or threats available in
in different situations. These observations a particular situation. The cross-
often generate curiosity and force us to situational consistency of traits is found to
ask: “Why is it that some people react be quite low. The compelling influence of
differently in a given situation than others situations can be noted by observing
do? Why is it that some people enjoy people’s behaviour in places like a market,
adventurous activities, while others like a courtroom, or a place of worship.
reading, watching television or playing
cards? Are these differences stable all Type Approaches
through one’s life, or are they just short- As we explained above, personality types
lived and situation-specific?” are used to represent and communicate a

A number of approaches and theories set of expected behaviours based on
have been developed to understand and similarities. Efforts to categorise people
explain behavioural differences among into personality types have been made
individuals, and behavioural consistencies since ancient times. The Greek physician
within an individual. These theories are Hippocrates had proposed a typology of
based on different models of human personality based on fluid or humour. He
behaviour. Each throws light on some, but classified people into four types (i.e.,
not all, aspects of personality. sanguine, phlegmatic, melancholic and

Psychologists distinguish between type choleric); each characterised by specific
and trait approaches to personality. The behavioural features.
type approaches attempts to comprehend In India also, Charak Samhita, a
human personality by examining certain famous treatise on Ayurveda, classifies
broad patterns in the observed behavioural people into the categories of vata, pitta and
characteristics of individuals. Each kapha on the basis of three humoural
behavioural pattern refers to one type in elements called tridosha. Each refers to a
which individuals are placed in terms of type of temperament, called prakriti (basic
the similarity of their behavioural nature) of a person. Apart from this, there
characteristics with that pattern. In is also a typology of personality based on
contrast, the trait approach focuses on the trigunas, i.e. sattva, rajas, and tamas.
the  specific psychological attributes along Sattva guna includes attributes like
which individuals tend to differ in cleanliness, truthfulness, dutifulness,
consistent and stable ways. For example, detachment, discipline, etc. Rajas guna
one person may be less shy, whereas includes intensive activity, desire for sense
another may be more; or one person may gratification, dissatisfaction, envy for
be less friendly, whereas another may be others, and a materialistic mentality, etc.
more. Here “shyness” and “friendliness” Tamas guna characterises anger,
represent traits along which individuals arrogance, depression, laziness, feeling of
can be rated in terms of the degree of helplessness, etc. All the three gunas are
presence or absence of the concerned present in each and every person in
behavioural quality or a trait. The different degrees. The dominance of one or
interactional approach holds that the other guna may lead to a particular
situational characteristics play an type of behaviour.
important role in determining our Within psychology, the personality
behaviour. People may behave as types given by Sheldon are fairly well-
dependent or independent not because of known. Using body build and temperament
their internal personality trait, but because as the main basis, Sheldon proposed the

30
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Endomorphic, Mesomorphic, and the absence of Type-A traits. This typology
Ectomorphic typology. The endomorphs has been further extended. Morris has
are fat, soft and round. By temperament suggested a Type-C personality, which is
they are relaxed and sociable. The prone to cancer. Individuals characterised
mesomorphs have strong musculature, are by this personality are cooperative,
rectangular with a strong body build. They unassertive and patient. They suppress
are energetic and courageous. The their negative emotions (e.g., anger), and
ectomorphs are thin, long and fragile in show compliance to authority. More
body build. They are brainy, artistic and recently, a Type-D personality has been
introvert. suggested, which is characterised by

Let us remember that these body proneness to depression.
typologies are simple, and have limited use Personality typologies are usually very
in predicting behaviour of individuals. They appealing, but are too simplistic. Human
are more like stereotypes which people behaviour is highly complex and variable.
hold. Assigning people to a particular personality

Jung has proposed another important type is difficult. People do not fit into such
typology by grouping people into introverts simple categorisation schemes so neatly.
and extraverts. This is widely recognised.
According to this typology, introverts are Trait Approaches
people who prefer to be alone, tend to avoid
others, withdraw themselves in the face of These theories are mainly concerned with

emotional conflicts, and are shy. the description or characterisation of basic

Extraverts, on the other hand, are sociable, components of personality. They try to

outgoing, drawn to occupations that allow discover the ‘building blocks’ of

dealing directly with people, and  react to personality. Human beings display a wide

stress by trying to lose themselves among range of variations in psychological

people and social activity. attributes, yet it is possible to club them

In recent years, Friedman and into smaller number of personality traits.

Rosenman have classified individuals into Trait approach is very similar to our

Type-A and Type-B personalities. The two common experience in everyday life. For
researchers were trying to identify example, when we come to know that a
psychosocial risk factors when they person is sociable, we assume that s/he
discovered these types. People will not only be cooperative, friendly and
characterised by Type-A personality seem helping, but also engage in behaviours that
to possess high motivation, lack patience, involve other social components. Thus,
feel short of time, be in a great hurry, and trait approach attempts to identify primary
feel like being always burdened with work. characteristics of people. A trait is
Such people find it difficult to slow down considered as a relatively enduring
and relax. People with Type-A personality attribute or quality on which one
are more susceptible to problems like individual differs from another. They
hypertension and coronary heart disease include a range of possible behaviours
(CHD). The risk of developing CHD with that are activated according to the
Type-A personality is sometimes even demands of the situation.
greater than the risks caused by high blood To summarise, (a) traits are relatively
pressure, high cholesterol levels, or stable over time, (b) they are generally
smoking. Opposite to this is the Type-B consistent across situations, and (c) their
personality, which can be understood as strengths and combinations vary across

31
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



individuals leading to individual differences situations depends on her/his traits,
in personality. although people sharing the same traits

A number of psychologists have used might express them in different ways.
traits to formulate their theories of Allport considered traits more like
personality. We will discuss some intervening variables that occur between
important theories. the stimulus situation and response of the

person. This meant that any variation in
Allport’s Trait Theory traits would elicit a different response to

the same situation.
Gordon Allport is considered the pioneer of
trait approach. He proposed that

Cattell: Personality Factors
individuals possess a number of traits,
which are dynamic in nature. They Raymond Cattell believed that there is a
determine behaviour in such a manner common structure on which people differ
that an individual approaches different from each other. This structure could be
situations with similar plans. The traits determined empirically. He tried to identify
integrate stimuli and responses which the primary traits from a huge array of
otherwise look dissimilar. Allport argued descriptive adjectives found in language.
that the words people use to describe He applied a statistical technique, called
themselves and others provide a basis for factor analysis, to discover the common
understanding human personality. He structures. He found 16 primary or source
analysed the words of English language to traits. The source traits are stable, and are
look for traits which describe a person. considered as the building blocks of
Allport, based on this, categorised traits personality. Besides these, there are also
into cardinal, central, and secondary. a number of surface traits that result out
Cardinal traits are highly generalised of the interaction of source traits. Cattell
dispositions. They indicate the goal around described the source traits in terms of
which a person’s entire life seems to opposing tendencies. He developed a test,
revolve. Mahatma Gandhi’s non-violence called Sixteen Personality Factor
and Hitler’s Nazism are examples of Questionnaire (16PF), for the assessment
cardinal traits. Such traits often get of personality. This test is widely used by
associated with the name of the person so psychologists.
strongly that they derive such identities as
the ‘Gandhian’ or ‘Hitlerian’ trait. Less Eysenck’s Theory

pervasive in effect, but still quite H.J. Eysenck proposed that personality
generalised dispositions, are called central could be reduced into two broad
traits. These traits (e.g., warm, sincere, dimensions. These are biologically and
diligent, etc.) are often used in writing a genetically based. Each dimension
testimonial or job recommendation subsumes a number of specific traits.
for a person. The least generalised These dimensions are:
characteristics of a person are called (1) Neuroticism vs. emotional stability : It
secondary traits. Traits such as ‘likes refers to the degree to which people
mangoes’ or ‘prefers ethnic clothes’ are have control over their feelings. At one
examples of secondary traits. extreme of the dimension, we find

While Allport acknowledged the people who are neurotic. They are
influence of situations on behaviour, he anxious, moody, touchy, restless and
held that the way a person reacts to given quickly lose control. At the other

32
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Five-Factor Model of Personality Box
2.2

The controversy regarding the number of basic personality traits has taken an interesting
turn in recent years. Paul Costa and Robert McCrae have examined all possible personality
traits. The findings indicate a set of five factors. They are often called Big Five Factors.
These factors include:
1. Openness to experience : Those who score high on this factor are imaginative, curious,

open to new ideas, and interested in cultural pursuits. In contrast, those who score
low are rigid.

2. Extraversion : It characterises people who are socially active, assertive, outgoing,
talkative, and fun loving. On its opposite are people who are shy.

3. Agreeableness : This factor characterises people who are helpful, co-operative, friendly,
caring, and nurturing. On the opposite are people who are hostile and self-centered.

4. Neuroticism : People who score high on this factor are emotionally unstable, anxious,
worried, fearful, distressed, irritable and hypertensive. On the opposite side are people
who are well adjusted.

5. Conscientiousness : Those who score high on this factor are achievement-oriented,
dependable, responsible, prudent, hardworking and self-controlled. On the opposite
are people who are impulsive.

This five factor model represents an important theoretical development in the field of
personality. It has been found useful in understanding the personality profile of people
across cultures. While it is consistent with the analysis of personality traits found in
different languages, it is also supported by the studies of personality carried out through
different methods. Hence, it is now considered to be the most promising empirical approach
to the study of personality.

extreme lie people who are calm, even- with the other two dimensions mentioned
tempered, reliable and remain under above. A person who scores high on
control. psychoticism dimension tends to be

(2) Extraversion vs. introversion : It refers hostile, egocentric, and antisocial.
to the degree to which people are Eysenck Personality Questionnaire is the
socially outgoing or socially withdrawn. test which is used for studying these
At one extreme are those who are dimensions of personality.
active, gregarious, impulsive and thrill- The trait approach is very popular and
seeking. At the other extreme are many advances in this respect are taking
people who are passive, quiet, cautious place. These are beyond the scope of your
and reserved. present studies. A new formulation has

also been advanced that provides a novel
In a later work Eysenck proposed a

scheme of organising traits. This new
third dimension, called Psychoticism vs.

formulation is given in Box 2.2.
Sociability, which is considered to interact

Psychodynamic Approach

Activity If you were asked to change one aspect This is a highly popular approach to
2.2 of your personality, what would you studying personality. This view owes

like to change and why? If not, why? largely to the contributions of Sigmund
Which aspect of your personality would Freud. He was a physician, and developed
you never want to change? Write a this theory in the course of his clinical
paragraph. Discuss with a friend.

practice. Early in his career he used

33
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



hypnosis to treat people with physical and repressed unconscious materials to
emotional problems. He noted that many consciousness, thereby helping people to
of his patients needed to talk about their live in a more self-aware and integrated
problems, and having talked about them, manner.
they often felt better. Freud used free
association (a method in which a person is Structure of Personality
asked to openly share all the thoughts, According to Freud’s theory, the primary
feelings and ideas that come to her/his structural elements of personality are
mind), dream analysis, and analysis of three, i.e. id, ego, and superego. They
errors to understand the internal reside in the unconscious as forces, and
functioning of the mind. they can be inferred from the ways people

behave (see Fig. 2.2). Let us remember that
Levels of Consciousness

id, ego and superego are concepts, not real
Freud’s theory considers the sources and physical structures. We will discuss these
consequences of emotional conflicts and terms in some detail.
the way people deal with these. In doing
so, it visualises the human mind in terms
of three levels of consciousness. The first
level is conscious, which includes the
thoughts, feelings and actions of which
people are aware. The second level is
preconscious, which includes mental
activity of which people may become aware
only if they attend to it closely. The third
level is unconscious, which includes
mental activity that people are unaware of.

According to Freud, the unconscious is
a reservoir of instinctive or animal drives.
It also stores all ideas and wishes that are
concealed from conscious awareness,
perhaps, because they lead to

Fig.2.2 : Structure of Personality in Freudian
psychological conflicts. Most of these arise Theory
from sexual desires which cannot be
expressed openly and therefore are

Id : It is the source of a person’s
repressed. People constantly struggle to

instinctual energy. It deals with immediate
find either some socially acceptable ways

gratification of primitive needs, sexual
to express unconscious impulses, or to

desires and aggressive impulses. It works
keep those impulses away from being

on the pleasure principle, which assumes
expressed. Unsuccessful resolution of

that people seek pleasure and try to avoid
conflicts results in abnormal behaviour.

pain. Freud considered much of a person’s
Analysis of forgetting, mispronunciations,

instinctual energy to be sexual, and the
jokes and dreams provide us with a means

rest as aggressive. Id does not care for
to approach the unconscious. Freud

moral values, society, or other individuals.
developed a therapeutic procedure, called
psychoanalysis. The basic goal of Ego : It grows out of id, and seeks to
psychoanalytic therapy is to bring the satisfy an individual’s instinctual needs in

34
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



accordance with reality. It works by the Ego Defence Mechanisms
reality principle, and often directs the id

According to Freud, much of human
towards more appropriate ways of behaviour reflects an attempt to deal with
behaving. For example, the id of a boy, who or escape from anxiety. Thus, how the ego
wants an ice-cream cone, tells him to grab deals with anxiety largely determines how
the cone and eat it. His ego tells him that people behave. Freud believed that people
if he grabs the cone without asking, he avoid anxiety mainly by developing defence
may be punished. Working on the reality mechanisms that try to defend the ego
principle, the boy knows that the best way against the awareness of the instinctual
to achieve gratification is to ask for needs. Thus, defence mechanism is a way
permission to eat the cone. Thus, while the of reducing anxiety by distorting reality.
id is demanding, unrealistic and works Although some defence against anxiety is
according to pleasure principle, the ego is normal and adaptive, people who use these
patient, reasonable, and works by the mechanisms to such an extent that reality
reality principle. is truly distorted develop various forms of

Superego : The best way to characterise the maladjustment.

superego is to think of it as the moral Freud has described many different

branch of mental functioning. The kinds of defence mechanisms. The most
important is repression, in which anxiety-

superego tells the id and the ego whether
provoking behaviours or thoughts are

gratification in a particular instance is
totally dismissed by the unconscious.

ethical. It helps control the id by
When people repress a feeling or desire,

internalising the parental authority
they become totally unaware of that wish

through the process of socialisation. For
or desire. Thus, when a person says, “I do

example, if a boy sees and wants an ice-
not know why I did that”, some repressed

cream cone and asks his mother for it, his
feeling or desire is expressing itself.

superego will indicate that his behaviour
Other major defence mechanisms are

is morally correct. This approach towards projection, denial, reaction formation and
obtaining the ice-cream will not create rationalisation. In projection, people
guilt, fear or anxiety in the boy. attribute their own traits to others. Thus,

Thus, in terms of individual functioning a person who has strong aggressive
Freud thought of the unconscious as being tendencies may see other people as acting
composed of three competing forces. In in an excessively aggressive way towards
some people, the id is stronger than the her/him. In denial, a person totally refuses
superego; in others, it is the superego. The to accept reality. Thus, someone suffering
relative strength of the id, ego and from HIV/AIDS may altogether deny her/
superego determines each person’s his illness. In reaction formation, a
stability. Freud also assumed that id is person defends against anxiety by adopting
energised by two instinctual forces, called behaviours opposite to her/his true
life instinct and death instinct. He paid feelings. A person with strong sexual urges,
less attention to the death instinct and who channels her/his energy into religious
focused more on the life (or sexual) fervour, presents a classical example of
instinct. The instinctual life force that reaction formation. In rationalisation, a
energises the id is called libido. It works person tries to make unreasonable feelings
on the pleasure principle, and seeks or behaviour seem reasonable and
immediate gratification. acceptable. For example, when a student

35
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



buys a set of new pens after doing poorly children at this age experience pleasure in
in an examination, s/he may try to moving their bowels. The anal area of the
rationalise her/his behaviour by asserting, body becomes the focus of certain
“I will do much better with these pens”. pleasurable feelings. This stage establishes

People who use defence mechanisms the basis for conflict between the id and
are often unaware of doing so. Each the ego, and between the desire for babyish
defence mechanism is a way for the ego to pleasure and demand for adult, controlled
deal with the uncomfortable feelings behaviour.
produced by anxiety. However, Freud’s

Phallic Stage : This stage focuses on the
ideas about the role of defence

genitals. At around ages four and five
mechanisms have been questioned. For

children begin to realise the differences
example, his claim that projection reduces

between males and females. They become
anxiety and stress has not found support

aware of sexuality and the sexual
in several studies.

relationship between their parents. During
this stage, the male child experiences the

Stages of Personality Development
Oedipus Complex, which involves love for

Freud claims that the core aspects of the mother, hostility towards the father,
personality are established early, remain and the consequent fear of punishment or
stable throughout life, and can be changed castration by the father (Oedipus was a
only with great difficulty. He proposed a Greek king who unknowingly killed his
five-stage theory of personality (also father and then married his mother). A
called psychosexual) development. major developmental achievement of this
Problems encountered at any stage may stage is the resolution of the Oedipus
arrest development, and have long-term complex. This takes place by accepting his
effect on a person’s life. A brief description father’s relationship with his mother, and
of these stages is given here. modelling his own behaviour after his

Oral Stage : A newborn’s instincts are father.

focused on the mouth. This is the infant’s For girls, the Oedipus complex (called

primary pleasure seeking centre. It is the Electra Complex after Electra, a Greek

through the mouth that the baby obtains character, who induced her brother to kill

food that reduces hunger. The infant their mother) follows a slightly different

achieves oral gratification through feeding, course. By attaching her love to the father

thumb sucking, biting and babbling. It is a girl tries to symbolically marry him and

during these early months that people’s raise a family. When she realises that this

basic feelings about the world are is unlikely, she begins to identify with her
mother and copy her behaviour as a means

established. Thus, for Freud, an adult who
of getting (or, sharing in) her father’s

considers the world a bitter place probably
affection. The critical component in

had difficulty during the oral stage of
resolving the Oedipus complex is the

development.
development of identification with the same

Anal Stage : It is found that around ages sex parents.  In other words, boys give up
two and three the child learns to respond sexual feelings for their mothers and begin
to some of the demands of the society. One to see their fathers as role models rather
of the principal demands made by parents than as rivals; girls give up their sexual
is that the child learns to control the bodily desires for their father and identify with
functions of urination and defecation. Most their mother.

36
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Latency Stage : This stage lasts from about worked with him and then moved on to
seven years until puberty. During this develop their own versions of the
period, the child continues to grow psychoanalytic theory. These theorists
physically, but sexual urges are relatively have been called neo-analytic, or post-
inactive. Much of a child’s energy is Freudian in order to differentiate their
channelled into social or achievement- work from Freud’s. These theories are
related activities. characterised by less prominent roles to

sexual and aggressive tendencies of the id
Genital Stage : During this stage, the
person attains maturity in psychosexual and expansion of the concept of ego. The

development. The sexuality, fears and human qualities of creativity, competence,

repressed feelings of earlier stages are once and problem solving abilities are

again exhibited. People learn to deal with emphasised. Some of these theories are

members of the opposite sex in a socially briefly described here.

and sexually mature way. However, if the
Carl Jung : Aims and Aspirations

journey towards this stage is marked by
excessive stress or over-indulgence, it may Jung worked with Freud in his early stages
cause fixation to an earlier stage of of career, but later on he broke away from
development. Freud. Jung saw human beings guided as

Freud’s theory also postulates that as much by aims and aspirations as by sex
children proceed from one stage to another and aggression. He developed his own
stage of development, they seem to adjust theory of personality, called analytical
their view of the world. Failure of a child psychology. The basic assumption of his
to pass successfully through a stage leads theory is that personality consists of
to fixation to that stage. In this situation, competing forces and structures within the
the child’s development gets arrested at an individual (that must be balanced) rather
earlier stage. For example, a child who than between the individual and the
does not pass successfully through the demands of society, or between the
phallic stage fails to resolve the Oedipal individual and reality.
complex and may still feel hostile toward Jung claimed that there was a
the parent of the same sex. This failure collective unconscious consisting of
may have serious consequences for the archetypes or primordial images. These
child’s life. Such a boy may come to are not individually acquired, but are
consider that men are generally hostile, inherited. The God or the Mother Earth is
and may wish to relate to females in a a good example of archetypes. They are
dependable relationship. Regression is found in myths, dreams and arts of all
also a likely outcome in such situations. mankind. Jung held that the self strives for
It takes a person back to an earlier stage. unity and oneness. It is an archetype that
Regression occurs when a person’s is expressed in many ways. He devoted
resolution of problems at any stage of much of his efforts to the study of such
development is less than adequate. In this expressions in various traditions.
situation, people display behaviours typical According to him, for achieving unity and
of a less mature stage of development. wholeness, a person must become

increasingly aware of the wisdom available
Post-Freudian Approaches in one’s personal and collective
A number of theorists further developed unconscious, and must learn to live in
their ideas  following Freud. Some had harmony with it.

37
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



Karen Horney : Optimism Erich Fromm : The Human Concerns

Horney was another disciple of Freud who In contrast to Freud’s biological
developed a theory that deviated from basic orientation, Fromm developed his theory
Freudian principles. She adopted a more from a social orientation. He viewed human
optimistic view of human life with beings as basically social beings who
emphasis on human growth and self- could be understood in terms of their
actualisation. relationship with others. He argued that

Horney’s major contribution lies in her psychological qualities such as growth and
challenge to Freud’s treatment of women realisation of potentials resulted from a
as inferior. According to her, each sex has desire for freedom, and striving for
attributes to be admired by the other, and justice and truth.
neither sex can be viewed as superior or Fromm holds that character traits

inferior. She countered that women were (personality) develop from our experiences

more likely to be affected by social and with other individuals. While culture is

cultural factors than by biological factors. shaped by the mode of existence of a given

She argued that psychological disorders society, people’s dominant character traits

were caused by disturbed interpersonal in a given society work as forces in shaping

relationship during childhood. When the social processes and the culture itself.

parents’ behaviour toward a child is His work recognises the value of positive
qualities, such as tenderness and love in

indifferent, discouraging, and erratic, the
personality development.

child feels insecure and a feeling called
basic anxiety results. Deep resentment

Erik Erikson : Search for Identity
toward parents or basic hostility occurs
due to this anxiety. By showing excessive Erikson’s theory lays stress on rational,
dominance or indifference, or by providing conscious ego processes in personality
too much or too little approval, parents can development. In his theory, development is
generate among children feelings of viewed as a lifelong process, and ego
isolation and helplessness which interfere identity is granted a central place in this
with their healthy development. process. His concept of identity crisis of

adolescent age has drawn considerable
Alfred Adler : Lifestyle and Social Interest attention. Erikson argues that young

people must generate for themselves a
Adler’s theory is known as individual central perspective and a direction that can
psychology. His basic assumption is that give them a meaningful sense of unity and
human behaviour is purposeful and goal- purpose.
directed. Each one of us has the capacity Psychodynamic theories face strong
to choose and create. Our personal goals criticisms from many quarters. The major
are the sources of our motivation. The criticisms are as follows:
goals that provide us with security and (1) The theories are largely based on case
help us in overcoming the feelings of studies; they lack a rigorous scientific
inadequacy are important in our basis.
personality development. In Adler’s view, (2) They use small and atypical individuals
every individual suffers from the feelings as samples for advancing generali-
of inadequacy and guilt, i.e. inferiority sations.
complex, which arise from childhood. (3) The concepts are not properly defined,
Overcoming this complex is essential for and it is difficult to submit them to
optimal personality development. scientific testing.

38
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



(4) Freud has used males as the prototype learning principles that involve the use of
of all human personality development. stimuli, responses, and reinforcement in
He overlooked female experiences and different ways. The theories of classical
perspectives. conditioning (Pavlov), instrumental

conditioning (Skinner), and observational
Behavioural Approach learning (Bandura) are well-known to you.

This approach does not give importance to These theories view learning and

the internal dynamics of behaviour. The maintenance of behaviour from different
angles. The principles of these theories

behaviourists believe in data, which they
have been widely used in developing

feel are definable, observable, and
personality theories. For example,

measurable. Thus, they focus on learning
observational learning theory considers

of stimulus-response connections and their
thought processes extremely important in

reinforcement. According to them,
learning, but these find almost no place in

personality can be best understood as the
classical or instrumental conditioning

response of an individual to the
theories. Observational learning theory

environment. They see the development
also emphasises  social learning (based on

simply as a change in response
observation and imitation of others) and

characteristics, i.e. a person learns new
self-regulation, which again is missed out

behaviours in response to new
in other theories.

environments and stimuli.
For most behaviourists, the structural

unit of personality is the response. Each Observe and note your behaviour Activity

response is a behaviour, which is emitted characteristics and those of your 2.3
friends that have been imbibed from

to satisfy a specific need. As you know, all
popular youth icons.

of us eat because of hunger, but we are
also very choosy about foods. For example,
children do not like eating many of the
vegetables (e.g., spinach, pumpkin, gourds, Cultural Approach

etc.), but gradually they learn to eat them. This approach attempts to understand
Why do they do so? According to the personality in relation to the features of
behavioural approach, children may ecological and cultural environment. It
initially learn to eat such vegetables in proposes that a group’s ‘economic
anticipation of appreciation (reinforcement) maintenance system’ plays a vital role in
from their parents. Later on they may the origin of cultural and behavioural
eventually learn to eat vegetables not only variations. The climatic conditions, the
because their parents are pleased with this nature of terrain of the habitat and the
behaviour, but also because they acquire availability of food (flora and fauna) in it
the taste of those vegetables, and find them determine not only people’s economic
good. Thus, the core tendency that activities, but also their settlement
organises behaviour is the reduction of patterns, social structures, division of
biological or social needs that energise labour, and other features such as child-
behaviour. This is accomplished rearing practices. Taken together these
through responses (behaviours) that are elements constitute a child’s overall
reinforced. learning environment. People’s skills,

From your study in Class XI, you may abilities, behavioural styles, and value
recall that there are several different priorities are viewed as strongly linked to

39
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



these features. Rituals, ceremonies, cultural demands, children in hunting-
religious practices, arts, recreational gathering and agricultural societies
activities, games and play are the means develop and display different personality
through which people’s personality gets patterns.
projected in a culture. People develop
various personality (behavioural) qualities Humanistic Approach
in an attempt to adapt to the ecological and The humanistic theories are mainly
cultural features of a group’s life. Thus, the developed in response to Freud’s theory.
cultural approach considers personality as Carl Rogers and Abraham Maslow have
an adaptation of individuals or groups to particularly contributed to the development
the demands of their ecology and culture. of humanistic perspective on personality.

Let us try to understand these aspects We will briefly examine their theories.
with a concrete example. As you know, a The most important idea proposed by
good proportion of the world’s population, Rogers is that of a fully functioning
even today, lives in forests and person. He believes that fulfilment is the
mountainous regions with hunting and motivating force for personality
gathering (economic activities) as their development. People try to express their
primary means of livelihood. The Birhor (a capabilities, potentials and talents to the
tribal group) of Jharkhand represent such fullest extent possible. There is an inborn
a population. Most of them live a nomadic tendency among persons that directs them
life, which requires constant movement in to actualise their inherited nature.
small bands from one forest to another in Rogers makes two basic assumptions
search of games and other forest products about human behaviour. One is that
(e.g., fruits, roots, mushrooms, honey, behaviour is goal-directed and worthwhile.
etc.). In the Birhor society, children from The second is that people (who are innately
an early age are allowed enormous freedom good) will almost always choose adaptive,
to move into forests and learn hunting and self-actualising behaviour.
gathering skills. Their child socialisation Rogers’ theory grew out of his
practices are also aimed at making experiences of listening to patients in his
children independent (do many things clinic. He noted that self was an important
without help from elders), autonomous element in the experience of his clients.
(take several decisions for themselves), and Thus, his theory is structured around the
achievement-oriented (accept risks and concept of self. The theory assumes that
challenges such as those involved in people are constantly engaged in the
hunting) from an early age of life. process of actualising their true self.

In agricultural societies, children are Rogers suggests that each person also
socialised to be obedient to elders, has a concept of ideal self. An ideal self is
nurturant to youngsters, and responsible the self that a person would like to be.
to their duties. Since these behavioural When there is a correspondence between
qualities make people more functional in the real self and ideal self, a person is
agricultural societies, they become generally happy. Discrepancy between the
dominant features of people’s personality real self and ideal self often results in
in contrast to independence, autonomy unhappiness and dissatisfaction. Rogers’
and achievement, which are more basic principle is that people have a
functional (and thus highly valued) in tendency to maximise self-concept through
hunting-gathering societies. Because of self-actualisation. In this process, the self
different economic pursuits and grows, expands and becomes more social.

40
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Fig.2.3 : Pattern of Adjustment and Self-concept

Rogers views personality development from your study of motivation in Class XI.
as a continuous process. It involves Maslow has given a detailed account of
learning to evaluate oneself and psychologically healthy people in terms of
mastering the process of self- their attainment of self-actualisation, a
actualisation. He recognises the role of state in which people have reached their
social influences in the development of own fullest potential. Maslow had an
self-concept. When social conditions are optimistic and positive view of man who
positive, the self-concept and self-esteem has the potentialities for love, joy and to
are high. In contrast, when the conditions do creative work. Human beings are
are negative, the self-concept and self- considered free to shape their lives and to
esteem are low. People with high self- self-actualise. Self-actualisation becomes
concept and self-esteem are generally possible by analysing the motivations that
flexible and open to new experiences, so govern our life. We know that biological,
that they can continue to grow and self- security, and belongingness needs (called
actualise. survival needs) are commonly found

This situation warrants that an among animals and human beings. Thus,
atmosphere of unconditional positive an individual’s sole concern with the
regard must be created in order to ensure satisfaction of these needs reduces her/
enhancement of people’s self-concept. The him to the level of animals. The real
client-centred therapy that Rogers journey of human life begins with the
developed basically attempts to create this pursuit of self-esteem and self-
condition. actualisation needs. The humanistic

You are already familiar with the approach emphasises the significance of
hierarchy of needs propounded by Maslow positive aspects of life (see Box 2.3).

Who is a Healthy Person? Box
2.3

The humanistic theorists have indicated that healthy personality lies in not mere
adjustment to society. It involves a quest to know oneself deeply and to be true to one’s
own feelings without disguise, and to be oneself in the here-and-now. According to them,
the healthy people share the following characteristics :
1. They become aware of themselves, their feelings, and their limits; accept themselves,

and what they make of their lives as their own responsibility; have ‘the courage to be’.
2. They experience the “here-and-now”; are not trapped.
3. They do not live in the past or dwell in the future through anxious expectations and

distorted defences.

41
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



A her/him about herself/himself. This led to
SSESSMENT OF PERSONALITY

the use of self-report measures. These are
To know, understand and describe people fairly structured measures, often based on
is a task in which everybody is involved in theory, that require subjects to give verbal
day-to-day life. When we meet new people, responses using some kind of rating scale.
we often try to understand them and even The method requires the subject to
predict what they may do before we objectively report her/his own feelings with
interact with them. In our personal lives, respect to various items. The responses are
we rely on our past experiences, accepted at their face value. They are
observations, conversations and infor- scored in quantitative terms and
mation obtained from other persons. This interpreted on the basis of norms
approach to understanding others may be developed for the test. Some of the well-
influenced by a number of factors that may known self-report measures are briefly
colour our judgement and reduce described below.
objectivity. Hence, we need to organise our
efforts more formally to analyse The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
personalities. A formal effort aimed at Inventory (MMPI)
understanding personality of an individual

This inventory is widely used as a test in
is termed as personality assessment.

personality assessment. Hathaway and
Assessment refers to the procedures

McKinley developed this test as a helping
used to evaluate or differentiate people on

tool for psychiatric diagnosis, but the test
the basis of certain characteristics. The
goal of assessment is to understand and has been found very effective in identifying

predict behaviour with minimum error and varieties of psychopathology. Its revised

maximum accuracy. In assessment, we try version is available as MMPI-2. It consists

to study what a person generally does, or of 567 statements. The subject has to judge

how s/he behaves, in a given situation. each statement as ‘true’ or ‘false’ for her/

Besides promoting our understanding, him. The test is divided into 10 subscales,

assessment is also useful for diagnosis, which seek to diagnose hypochondriasis,

training, placement, counselling, and other depression, hysteria, psychopathic

purposes. deviate, masculinity-femininity, paranoia,

Psychologists have tried to assess psychasthenia, schizophrenia, mania and

personality in various ways. The social introversion. In India, Mallick and

most commonly used techniques are Joshi have developed the Jodhpur
Psychometric Tests, Self-Report Multiphasic Personality Inventory (JMPI)
Measures, Projective Techniques, and along the lines of MMPI.
Behavioural Analysis. These techniques
are rooted in dif ferent theoretical Eysenck Personality Questionnaire (EPQ)

orientations; hence they throw light on Developed by Eysenck this test initially
different aspects of personality. You have assessed two dimensions of personality,
read about psychometric tests in the called introverted-extraverted and
previous chapter. We will discuss the other emotionally stable-emotionally unstable.
methods. These dimensions are characterised by 32

personality traits. Later on, Eysenck added
Self-report Measures a third dimension, called psychoticism. It
It was Allport who suggested that the best is linked to psychopathology that
method to assess a person is by asking represents a lack of feeling for others, a

42
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



tough manner of interacting with people, to an optimum level under careful
and a tendency to defy social conventions. supervision of an expert, you should not
A person scoring high on this dimension venture into testing and interpreting the
tends to be hostile, egocentric, and personality of your friends who do not
antisocial. This test is also widely used. study psychology.

Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire Projective Techniques
(16 PF)

The techniques of personality assessment
This test was developed by Cattell. On the described so far are known as direct
basis of his studies, he identified a large techniques, because they tend to rely on
set of personality descriptors, which were information directly obtained from the
subjected to factor analysis to identify the person who clearly knows that her/his
basic personality structure. You will learn personality is being assessed. In these
about this statistical technique later. The situations, people generally become self-
test provides with declarative statements, conscious and hesitate to share their
and the subject responds to a specific private feelings, thoughts, and motivations.
situation by choosing from a set of given When they do so, they often do it in a
alternatives. The test can be used with socially desirable manner.
high school level students as well as with The psychoanalytic theory tells us that
adults. It has been found extremely useful a large part of human behaviour is
in career guidance, vocational exploration, governed by unconscious motives. Direct
and occupational testing. methods of personality assessment cannot

Apart from the few popular tests which uncover the unconscious  part of our
use self-report technique which have been behaviour. Hence, they fail to provide us
described above, there are several others with a  real picture of an individual’s
that try to assess specific dimensions of personality. These problems can be
personality (e.g., authoritarianism, locus of overcome by using indirect methods of
control, optimism, etc.). As you proceed assessment. Projective techniques fall in
further with your study of psychology, you this category.
will come to know more about them. Projective techniques were developed to

The self-report measures suffer from a assess unconscious motives and feelings.
number of problems. Social desirability is These techniques are based on the
one of them. It is a tendency on the part assumption that a less structured or
of the respondent to endorse items in a unstructured stimulus or situation will
socially desirable manner. Acquiescence is allow the individual to project her/his
another one. It is a tendency of the subject feelings, desires and needs on to that
to agree with items/questions irrespective situation. These projections are interpreted
of their contents. It often appears in the by experts. A variety of projective
form of saying ‘yes’ to items. These techniques have been developed; they use
tendencies render the assessment of various kinds of stimulus materials and
personality less reliable. situations for assessing personality. Some

It is also necessary to sound a note of of them require reporting associations with
caution at this stage. Remember that stimuli (e.g., words, inkblots), some involve
psychological testing and understanding story writing around pictures, some require
personality requires great skill and sentence completions, some require
training. Unless you have acquired these expression through drawings, and some

43
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



require choice of stimuli from a large set is prepared by asking the subject to tell
of stimuli. where, how, and on what basis was a

While the nature of stimuli and particular response made. Fine judgment
responses in these techniques vary is necessary to place the subject’s
enormously, all of them do share the responses in a meaningful context. The use
following features: and interpretation of this test requires
(1) The stimuli are relatively or fully extensive training. Computer techniques

unstructured and poorly defined. too have been developed for analysis of
(2) The person being assessed is usually data. An example of the Rorschach Inkblot

not told about the purpose of is given in Figure 2.4.
assessment and the method of scoring
and interpretation.

(3) The person is informed that there are
no correct or incorrect responses.

(4) Each response is considered to reveal
a significant aspect of personality.

(5) Scoring and interpretation are lengthy
and sometimes subjective.
Projective techniques are different from

the psychometric tests in many ways. They
cannot be scored in any objective manner.
They generally require qualitative analyses
for which a rigorous training is needed. In
the following pages, some of the well-
known projective techniques are briefly
discussed.

The Rorschach Inkblot Test Fig.2.4 : An Example of the Rorschach Inkblot

This test was developed by Hermann
The Thematic Apperception Test (TAT)

Rorschach. The test consists of 10
inkblots.  Five of them are in black and This test was developed by Morgan and
white, two with some red ink, and the Murray. It is a little more structured than
remaining three in some pastel colours. the Inkblot test. The test consists of 30
The blots are symmetrical in design with black and white picture cards and one
a specific shape or form. Each blot is blank card. Each picture card depicts one
printed in the centre of a white cardboard or more people in a variety of situations.
of about 7”´10” size. The blots were Each picture is printed on a card. Some
originally made by dropping ink on a piece cards are used with adult males or females.
of paper and then folding the paper in half Others are used with boys or girls. Still
(hence called inkblot test). The cards are others are used in some combinations.
administered individually in two phases. In Twenty cards are appropriate for a subject,
the first phase, called performance although a lesser number of cards (even
proper, the subjects are shown the cards five) have also been successfully used.
and are asked to tell what they see in each The cards are presented one at a time.
of them. In the second phase, called The subject is asked to tell a story
inquiry, a detailed report of the response describing the situation presented in the

44
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



picture: What led up to the situation, what made to examine whether the focus is on
is happening at the moment, what will the frustrating object, or on protection of
happen in the future, and what the the frustrated person, or on constructive
characters are feeling and thinking? A solution of the problem. The direction of
standard procedure is available for scoring aggression may be towards the
TAT responses. The test has been modified environment, towards oneself, or it may be
for children and for the aged. Uma tuned off in an attempt to gloss over or
Chaudhury’s Indian adaptation of TAT is evade the situation. Pareek has adapted
also available. An example of a TAT card this test for use with the Indian
is given in Figure 2.5. population.

Sentence Completion Test

This test makes use of a number of
incomplete sentences. The starting part of
the sentence is first presented and the
subject has to provide an ending to the
sentence. It is held that the type of
endings used by the subjects reflect their
attitudes, motivation and conflicts. The
test provides subjects with several
opportunities to reveal their underlying
unconscious motivations. A few sample
items of a sentence completion test are
given below.
1. My father——————————————.
2. My greatest fear is —————————.
3. The best thing about my mother is —

—————————.
4. I am proud of ————————————

————————.
Fig.2.5 : An Illustration Showing the Drawing of a

Card of TAT
Draw-a-Person Test

It is a simple test in which the subject is
Rosenzweig’s Picture-Frustration Study

asked to draw a person on a sheet of paper.
(P-F Study)

A pencil and eraser is provided to facilitate
This test was developed by Rosenzweig to drawing. After the completion of the
assess how people express aggression in drawing, the subject is generally asked to
the face of a frustrating situation. The test draw the figure of an opposite sex person.
presents with the help of cartoon like Finally, the subject is asked to make a
pictures a series of situations in which one story about the person as if s/he was a
person frustrates another, or calls character in a novel or play. Some
attention to a frustrating condition. The examples of interpretations are as follows:
subject is asked to tell what the other (1) Omission of facial features
(frustrated) person will say or do. The suggests that the person tries to evade
analysis of responses is based on the type a highly conflict-ridden interpersonal
and direction of aggression. An attempt is relationship.

45
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



(2) Graphic emphasis on the neck suggests enough potential to reveal her/his
lack of control over impulses. personality. The structured interviews

(3) Disproportionately large head suggests address very specific questions and follow
organic brain disease and pre- a set procedure. This is often done to make
occupation with headaches. objective comparison of persons being

The analysis of personality with the interviewed. Use of rating scales may

help of projective techniques appears fairly further enhance the objectivity of

interesting. It helps us to understand evaluations.

unconscious motives, deep-rooted
conflicts, and emotional complexes of an Observation

individual. However, the interpretation of Behavioural observation is another method
the responses requires sophisticated skills which is very commonly used for the
and specialised training. There are assessment of personality. Although all of
problems associated with the reliability of us watch people and form impressions
scoring and validity of interpretations. But, about their personality, use of observation
the practitioners have found these for personality assessment is a
techniques quite useful. sophisticated procedure that cannot be

carried out by untrained people. It requires
Behavioural Analysis careful training of the observer, and a fairly
A person’s behaviour in a variety of detailed guideline about analysis of
situations can provide us with meaningful behaviours in order to assess the
information about her/his personality. personality of a given person. For example,
Observation of behaviour serves as the a clinical psychologist may like to observe
basis of behavioural analysis. An observer’s her/his client’s interaction with family
report may contain data obtained from members and home visitors. With carefully
interview, observation, ratings , designed observation, the clinical
nomination, and situational tests. We psychologist may gain considerable insight
will examine these different procedures in into a client’s personality.
some detail. In spite of their frequent and

widespread use, observation and interview
Interview methods are characterised by the following
Interview is a commonly used method for limitations:
assessing personality. This involves talking (1) Professional training required for
to the person being assessed and asking collection of useful data through these
specific questions. Diagnostic interviewing methods is quite demanding and time-
generally involves in-depth interviewing consuming.
which seeks to go beyond the replies given
by the person. Interviews may be (2) Maturity of the psychologist is a

structured or unstructured depending on precondition for obtaining valid data

the purpose or goals of assessment. through these techniques.

In unstructured interviews, the (3) Mere presence of the observer may
interviewer seeks to develop an impression contaminate the results. As a stranger,
about a person by asking a number of the observer may influence the
questions. The way a person presents her/ behaviour of the person being observed
himself and answers the questions carries and thus not obtain good data.

46
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Behavioural Ratings or by developing such scales in which the
response bias is likely to be small.

Behavioural ratings are frequently used for
assessment of personality in educational

Nomination
and industrial settings. Behavioural
ratings are generally taken from people This method is often used in obtaining peer
who know the assessee intimately and assessment. It can be used with persons
have interacted with her/him over a period who have been in long-term interaction
of time or have had a chance to observe and who know each other very well. In
her/him. They attempt to put individuals using nomination, each person is asked to
into certain categories in terms of their choose one or more persons of the group
behavioural qualities. The categories may with whom s/he would like to work, study,
involve different numbers or descriptive play or participate in any other activity.
terms. It has been found that use of The person may also be asked to specify
numbers or general descriptive adjectives the reason for her/his choices.
in rating scales always creates confusion Nominations thus received may be
for the rater. In order to use ratings analysed to understand the personality
effectively, the traits should be clearly and behavioural qualities of the person.
defined in terms of carefully stated

This technique has been found to be highly
behavioural anchors.

dependable, although it may also be
The method of rating suffers from the affected by personal biases.

following major limitations:
(1) Raters often display certain biases that Situational Tests

colour their judgments of different
traits. For example, most of us are A variety of situational tests have been
greatly influenced by a single devised for the assessment of personality.
favourable or unfavourable trait. This The most commonly used test of this kind
often forms the basis of a rater’s overall is the situational stress test. It provides
judgment of a person. This tendency is us with information about how a person
known as the halo effect. behaves under stressful situations. The

(2) Raters have a tendency to place test requires a person to perform a given
individuals either in the middle of the task with other persons who are instructed
scale (called middle category bias) by to be non-cooperative and interfering. The
avoiding extreme positions, or in the test involves a kind of role playing. The
extreme positions (called extreme person is instructed to play a role for which
response bias) by avoiding middle s/he is observed. A verbal report is also
categories on the scale. obtained on what s/he was asked to do.
These tendencies can be overcome by The situation may be realistic one, or it

providing raters with appropriate training may be created through a video play.

Key Terms
Anal stage, Archetypes, Cardinal traits, Central traits, Client-centred therapy, Collective unconscious,
Defence mechanisms, Ego, Extraversion, Humanistic approach, Id, Ideal self, Inferiority complex,
Introversion, Latency period, Libido, Metaneeds, Oedipus complex, Personal identity, Phallic stage,
Projective techniques, Psychodynamic approach, Projection, Rationalisation, Reaction formation,
Regression, Repression, Self-efficacy, Self-esteem, Self-regulation, Social identity, Superego, Trait
approach, Type approach, Unconscious.

47
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



• The study of the self and the personality helps us understand ourselves as well as
others. An individual’s self develops through social interaction with significant others.

• There are different kinds of self such as personal self, social self, and relational self.
Self-esteem and self-efficacy are two very important aspects of behaviour, which
have far-reaching consequences in our life.

• The psychological techniques of self-regulation include systematic observation of one’s
behaviour, self-reinforcement, and self-instruction.

• Personality refers to psychophysical characteristics of a person that are relatively
stable across situations and over time and make her or him unique. Since personality
helps us in adapting to a variety of situations in our life, it is likely to change as a
result of external or internal forces.

• Personality has been studied through several approaches. The most prominent among
these are typological, psychodynamic, behavioural, cultural, and humanistic approaches.

• The typological approach attempts to describe personality in terms of a few types,
which are characterised by a cluster of traits. Allport, Cattell and Eysenck have
advocated a trait approach to personality, which offers a unified view of a person.

• Freud developed psychodynamic approach and discussed personality in terms of a
constant conflict between our internal forces, called id, ego, and superego. In Freud’s
view, unconscious conflicts are rooted in the process of psychosexual development,
which occurs through oral, anal, phallic, latency, and genital stages.

• Post-Freudian theorists focus on interpersonal forces and the contemporary
circumstances of life of the person. Jung, Fromm, Adler, Horney and Erikson brought
out the role of ego and social forces in personality.

• The behavioural approach views personality as the response of an individual to the
environment. They consider response as the structural unit of personality, which is
emitted to satisfy a specific need.

• The cultural approach attempts to comprehend personality in terms of the demands
of adaptation made on individuals by the economic maintenance systems and the
resulting cultural features of a group of people.

• The Humanistic approach focuses on subjective experiences of individuals and their
choices. Rogers emphasised the relationship between the ‘real self’ and the ‘ideal
self’. The congruence of these selves makes a person fully functioning. Maslow
discussed personality in terms of the interplay of needs that motivated people. The
needs could be arranged in a hierarchy from lower-order (survival related) needs to
higher-order (development related) needs.

• Personality assessment refers to the procedure of analysing and evaluating people in
terms of certain psychological characteristics. The goal is to predict an individual’s
behaviour with a high degree of accuracy.

• An individual’s personality can be assessed by using observer reports, projective
techniques, and self-report measures. Observer reports include interview, observation,
ratings, nomination and situational tests. Rorschach Inkblot Test, and Thematic
Apperception Test are widely used projective tests of personality. Self-report measures
attempt to assess personality by using fairly structured tests.

Review Questions

1. What is self ? How does the Indian notion of self differ from the Western notion?
2. What is meant by delay of gratification? Why is it considered important for adult

development?
3. How do you define personality? What are the main approaches to the study of

personality?
4. What is trait approach to personality? How does it differ from type approach?
5. How does Freud explain the structure of personality?
6. How would Horney’s explanation of depression be different from that of Alfred Adler?

48
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



7. What is the main proposition of humanistic approach to personality? What did Maslow
mean by self-actualisation?

8. Discuss the main observational methods used in personality assessment. What
problems do we face in using these methods?

9. What is meant by structured personality tests? Which are the two most widely used
structured personality tests?

10. Explain how projective techniques assess personality. Which projective tests of
personality are widely used by psychologists?

11. Arihant wants to become a singer even though he belongs to a family of doctors. Though
his family members claim to love him but strongly disapprove his choice of career.
Using Carl Rogers’ terminology, describe the attitudes shown by Arihant’s family.

Project 1. We all have some notions about our ideal selves, i.e. and what we would like to be? Take
Ideas time to imagine that you have achieved your ideal self. With this notion of your ideal

self, express your attitudes towards these categories : (a) school, (b) friends, (c) family,
and (d) money. Write a paragraph on each describing your ideal attitudes. Next write all
these categories on four sheets of paper and ask your two friends and two family members
to write about what they perceive to be your real attitudes towards these categories.
These four persons will describe your real self as they see you. Compare your ideal
descriptions with others’ real descriptions in detail. Are they very similar or dissimilar?
Prepare a report on this.

2. Select five persons whom you most admire, either from real life or from history. Collect
information about their contributions in their respective fields and identify the
characteristics in their personality that have impressed you. Do you find any similarities?
Prepare a comparative report.

Weblinks
www.ship.edu/~cgboeree/perscontents.html
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/projective_test

Pedagogical Hints
1. To make students understand the

concept of self, certain activities could
be organised, such as a student may
be asked to tell about herself/himself.

2. Prepare flow charts/diagrams to
explain the concepts. Help students
to prepare charts/diagrams related to
concepts given in the chapter.

3. Emphasise the importance of various
personality assessment techniques in
different spheres of life.

4. Sample items of various tests of
personality could be shown to
generate interest among students.
They could be asked to compare the
test items included in different
measures of personality.

49
Chapter 2 • Self and Personality

Reprint 2025-26



MEETING LIFE CHALLENGES

After reading this chapter, you would be able to:
understand the nature, types and sources of stress as life challenges,
examine the effects of stress on psychological functioning,
learn ways to cope with stress,
know about the life skills that help people to stay healthy, and
understand the factors that promote positive health and well-being.

Introduction
Nature, Types and Sources of Stress

A Measure of Stressful Life Events (Box 3.1)
Effects of Stress on Psychological Functioning and Health

Examination Anxiety (Box 3.2)
Stress and Health
General Adaptation Syndrome
Stress and Immune System
Lifestyle

Coping with Stress
CONTENTS Stress Management Techniques

Promoting Positive Health and Well-being
Life Skills
Resilience and Health (Box 3.3)

Key Terms
Summary
Review Questions
Project Ideas
Weblinks
Pedagogical Hints

50
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Raj has been studying for his final examination which is going to take
place tomorrow morning. He studies till 1 a.m. in the night. Unable to
concentrate any more, he sets the alarm for 6 a.m. and tries to go off to
sleep. As he is very tense, he keeps tossing and turning in bed. Images
flash through his mind of not being able to secure the marks he needs to
opt for the subjects of his choice. He blames himself for fooling around with
his friends and not preparing thoroughly for the examination. In the morning
he wakes up with a heavy head, misses breakfast, and barely makes it in

Introduction time to school for his examination. He opens the question paper, his heart
pounding, hands clammy with sweat and then he feels his mind has gone
completely blank.

Some of you may have lived through an experience such as Raj’s. The
challenge posed by examinations is common to all students. You are perhaps,
already thinking about a career. What if you are denied this choice? Will
you give up? Life poses challenges all the time. Think of a child who loses
her/his parents at a young age with no one to take care of her/him; a
young woman who loses her husband in a car accident; parents who bring
up children who are physically or mentally challenged; young girls/boys
who have to spend long nights in call centres and then catch up on their
sleep during the day time. Look around yourself and you will find that life
is a big challenge. All of us try to meet these challenges in our own way.
Some of us succeed while others succumb to such life stresses. Life
challenges are not necessarily stressful. Much depends on how a challenge
is viewed. A number 11 batsman in a cricket team will view facing a fast
bowler’s delivery differently than would an opening batsman, who will
look forward to such a challenge. It is said that one’s best comes out when
one is challenged. We will like to consider in this chapter how a life condition
turns into a challenge or a cause of stress. Further, we will also see how
people respond to various life challenges as well as stressful situations.

NATURE, TYPES AND S probability of one’s survival. Stress is like
OURCES OF STRESS

electricity. It gives energy, increases
While waiting to cross the road on a busy human arousal and affects performance.
Monday morning, you may be temporarily However, if the electric current is too high,
stressed. But, because you are alert, it can fuse bulbs, damage appliances, etc.
vigilant and aware of the danger, you are High stress too can produce unpleasant
able to cross the road safely. Faced with effects and cause our performance to
any challenge, we put in additional efforts deteriorate. Conversely, too little stress
and mobilise all our resources and the may cause one to feel somewhat listless
support system to meet the challenge. All and low on motivation which may lead us
the challenges, problems, and difficult to perform slowly and less efficiently. It is
circumstances put us to stress. Thus, if important to remember that not all stress
handled properly, stress increases the is inherently bad or destructive. ‘Eustress’

51
##3$$
Chapter 3 • Meeting Life Challenges

Reprint 2025-26



is the term used to describe the level of demand” that is, regardless of the cause of
stress that is good for you and is one of the threat, the individual will respond with
a person’s best assets for achieving peak the same physiological pattern of reactions.
performance and managing minor crisis. Many researchers do not agree with this
Eustress, however, has the potential of definition as they feel that the stress
turning into ‘distress’. It is this latter response is not nearly as general and non-
manifestation of stress that causes our specific as Selye suggests. Dif ferent
body’s wear and tear. Thus, stress can be stressors may produce somewhat different
described as the pattern of responses an patterns of stress reaction, and different
organism makes to stimulus event that individuals may have dif ferent
disturbs the equilibrium and exceeds a characteristic modes of response. You may

person’s ability to cope. recall the case of an opening batsman
mentioned earlier. Each one of us will see

Nature of Stress the situation through our own eyes and it
is our perception of the demands, and our

The word stress has its origin in the Latin ability to meet them, which will determine
words ‘strictus’, meaning tight or narrow whether we are feeling ‘stressed’ or not.
and ‘stringere’, the verb meaning to Stress is not a factor that resides in the
tighten. These root words reflect the individual or the environment, instead it is
internal feelings of tightness and embedded in an ongoing process that
constriction of the muscles and breathing involves individuals transacting with their
reported by many people under stress. social and cultural environments, making
Stress is often explained in terms of appraisals of those encounters and
characteristics of the environment that are attempting to cope with the issues that
disruptive to the individual. Stressors are arise. Stress is a dynamic mental/cognitive
events that cause our body to give the state. It is a disruption in homeostasis or
stress response. Such events include an imbalance that gives rise to a
noise, crowding, a bad relationship, or the requirement for resolution of that
daily commuting to school or office. The imbalance or restoration of homeostasis.
reaction to external stressors is called The perception of stress is dependent
‘strain’ (see Fig.3.1). upon the individual’s cognitive appraisal of

Stress has come to be associated with events and the resources available to deal
both the causes as well as effects. However, with them. The stress process, based on
this view of stress can cause confusion. the cognitive theory of stress propounded
Hans Selye, the father of modern stress by Lazarus and his colleagues, is described
research, defined stress as “the non- in Figure 3.2. An individual’s response to
specific response of the body to any a stressful situation largely depends upon

Fig.3.1 : Psychological Meaning of Stress

52
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



the perceived events and how they are are likely to make a secondary appraisal,
interpreted or appraised. Lazarus has which is the assessment of one’s coping
distinguished between two types of abilities and resources and whether they
appraisal, i.e. primary and secondary. will be sufficient to meet the harm, threat
Primary appraisal refers to the perception or challenge of the event. These resources
of a new or changing environment as may be mental, physical, personal or
positive, neutral or negative in its social. If one thinks one has a positive
consequences. Negative events are attitude, health, skills and social support
appraised for their possible harm, threat to deal with the crises s/he will feel less
or challenge. Harm is the assessment of stressed. This two-level appraisal process
the damage that has already been done by determines not only our cognitive and
an event. Threat is the assessment of behavioural responses but also our
possible future damage that may be emotional and physiological responses to
brought about by the event. Challenge external events.
appraisals are associated with more These appraisals are very subjective
confident expectations of the ability to cope and will depend on many factors. One
with the stressful event, the potential to factor is the past experience of dealing
overcome and even profit from the event. with such a stressful condition. If one
When we perceive an event as stressful, we has handled similar situations very

Fig.3.2 : A General Model of the Stress Process

53
Chapter 3 • Meeting Life Challenges

Reprint 2025-26



successfully in the past, they would be less (flight) are two general categories of
threatening for her/him. Another factor is behavioural responses. Cognitive
whether the stressful event is perceived as responses include beliefs about the harm
controllable, i.e. whether one has mastery or threat an event poses and beliefs about
or control over a situation. A person who its causes or controllability. These include
believes that s/he can control the onset of responses such as inability to concentrate,
a negative situation, or its adverse and intrusive, repetitive or morbid
consequences, will experience less amount thoughts.
of stress than those who have no such As indicated in Figure 3.2, the stresses
sense of personal control. For example, a which people experience also vary in terms
sense of self-confidence or efficacy can of intensity  (low intensity vs. high
determine whether the person is likely to intensity), duration (short-term vs. long-
appraise the situation as a threat or a term), complexity ( less complex vs. more
challenge. Thus, the experience and complex) and predictability (unexpected
outcome of a stressor may vary from vs. predictable). The outcome of stress
individual to individual. Stress, includes all depends on the position of a particular
those environmental and personal events, stressful experience along these
which challenge or threaten the well-being dimensions. Usually more intense,
of a person. These stressors can be prolonged or chronic, complex and
external, such as environmental (noise, air unanticipated stresses have more negative
pollution), social (break-up with a friend, consequences than have less intense,
loneliness) or psychological (conflict, short-term, less complex and expected
frustration) within the individual. stresses. An individual’s experiences of

Very often, these stressors result in a stress depend on the physiological strength
variety of stress reactions, which may be of that person. Thus, individuals with poor
physiological, behavioural, emotional, and physical health and weak constitution
cognitive (see Fig.3.2). At the physiological would be more vulnerable than would be
level, arousal plays a key role in stress- those who enjoy good health and strong
related behaviours. The hypothalamus constitution.
initiates action along two pathways. The Psychological characteristics like

first pathway involves the autonomic mental health, temperament, and self-

nervous system. The adrenal gland concept are relevant to the experience of

releases large amount of catecholamines stress. The cultural context in which we

(epinephrine and norepinephrine) into the live determines the meaning of any event

blood stream. This leads to physiological and defines the nature of response that is

changes seen in fight-or-flight response. expected under various conditions. Finally,

The second pathway involves the pituitary the stress experience will be determined by

gland, which secretes the corticosteroid the resources of the person, such as

(cortisol) which provides energy. The money, social skills, coping style, support

emotional reactions to experience of stress networks, etc. All these factors determine

include negative emotions such as fear, the appraisal of a given stressful situation.

anxiety, embarrassment, anger, depression
Signs and Symptoms of Stress

or even denial. The behavioural responses
are virtually limitless, depending on the The way we respond to stress varies
nature of the stressful event. Confrontative depending upon our personality, early
action against the stressor (fight) or upbringing and life experiences. Everyone
withdrawal from the threatening event has their own pattern of stress response.

54
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



So the warning signs may vary, as may that are often unavoidable such as air
their intensity. Some of us know our pollution, crowding, noise, heat of the
pattern of stress response and can gauge summer, winter cold, etc. Another group of
the depth of the problem by the nature and environmental stresses are catastrophic
severity of our own symptoms or changes events or disasters such as fire,
in behaviour. These symptoms of stress earthquake, floods, etc.
can be physical, emotional and
behavioural. Any of the symptoms can Psychological Stress
indicate a degree of stress which, if left These are stresses that we generate
unresolved, might have serious ourselves in our minds. These are personal
implications. and unique to the person experiencing

them and are internal sources of stress. We
worry about problems, feel anxiety, or

Activity Read the following signs of stress : become depressed. These are not only
3.1 symptoms of stress, but they cause further

Lack of concentration, Memory loss,
Poor decision-making, Inconsistency, stress for us. Some of the important
Irregular attendance and timekeeping, sources of psychological stress are
Low self-esteem, Poor long-term frustration, conflicts, internal and social
planning, Frantic bursts of energy, pressures, etc.
Extreme mood swings, Emotional Frustration results from the blocking
outbursts, Worry, Anxiety, Fear, of needs and motives by something or
Depression, Difficulties with sleep,
Difficulties with eating, Misuse of someone that hinders us from achieving a
drugs, Physical illness, e.g. stomach desired goal. There could be a number of
upset, headache, backache, etc. causes of frustration such as social

Tick those applicable to you and discrimination, interpersonal hurt, low
then discuss in groups of two or three grades in school, etc. Conflicts may occur
students in class. Can you reduce between two or more incompatible needs
some of them? Discuss how? Consult or motives, e.g. whether to study dance or
your teacher. psychology. You may want to continue

studies or take up a job. There may be a
conflict of values when you are pressurised

Types of Stress to take any action that may be against the
values held by you. Internal pressures

The three major types of stress, viz. stem from beliefs based upon expectations
physical and environmental, psychological, from inside us to ourselves such as, ‘I must
and social are listed in Figure 3.2. It is do everything perfectly’. Such expectations
important to understand that all these can only lead to disappointment. Many of
types of stress are interrelated. us drive ourselves ruthlessly towards

achieving unrealistically high standards in
Physical and Environmental Stress

achieving our goals. Social pressures may
Physical stresses are demands that change be brought about from people who make
the state of our body. We feel strained excessive demands on us. This can cause
when we overexert ourselves physically, even greater pressure when we have to
lack a nutritious diet, suffer an injury, or work with them. Also, there are people with
fail to get enough sleep. Environmental whom we face interpersonal difficulties, ‘a
stresses are aspects of our surroundings personality clash’ of sorts.

55
Chapter 3 • Meeting Life Challenges

Reprint 2025-26



Social Stress injury, the annoying frequent hassles of
everyday life and traumatic events that

These are induced externally and result
from our interaction with other people. affect our lives.

Social events like death or illness in the
Life Events

family, strained relationships, trouble with
neighbours are some examples of social Changes, both big and small, sudden and
stresses. These social stresses vary widely gradual affect our life from the moment we
from person to person. Attending parties are born. We learn to cope with small,
may be stressful for a person who likes to everyday changes but major life events can
spend quiet evenings at home while an be stressful, because they disturb our
outgoing person may find staying at home routine and cause upheaval. If several of
in the evenings stressful. these life events that are planned (e.g.

moving into a new house) or unpredicted
Sources of Stress (e.g. break-up of a long-term relationship)
A wide range of events and conditions can occur within a short period of time, we
generate stress. Among the most important find it difficult to cope with them and
of these are major stressful life events, will be more prone to the symptoms of
such as death of a loved one or personal stress.

Box A Measure of Stressful Life Events

3.1
Holmes and Rahe developed a life event measure of stress. A measure of stressful life
events based on the above scale known as the Presumptive Stressful Life Events Scale has
been developed for the Indian population by Singh, Kaur and Kaur. It is a self-rating
questionnaire made up of fifty-one life changes, which a person may have experienced.
Each of these life events is assigned a numerical value in terms of their severity. For
example, the death of one’s spouse is assigned 95, personal illness or injury 56, failure in
examination 43, appearing for examination or interview 43, change in sleeping habits 33,
as the mean stress score. Both positive and negative events are taken, believing that both
kinds of changes cause stress. The respondent’s stress score is the weighted sum of all the
items/life change events in the past one year checked by her/him.

Some sample items of the measure are :

Life Events Mean Stress Score
Death of a close family member 66
Unexpected accident or trauma 53
Illness of a family member 52
Break-up with friend 47
Appearing for examinations 43
Change in eating habits 27

The mean number of stressful life events experienced over a period of one year without
producing overt physical or mental illness is approximately two.  However, the correlations
between life events and susceptibility to any particular illness is low, indicating a weak
association between life events and stress. It has been argued as to whether life events
have caused some stress-related illness or whether stress caused the life events and illness.
The impact of most life events varies from person to person. Factors such as age at which
the event was first experienced, frequency of occurrence, duration of the stressful event
and social support must be studied in evaluating the relationship between stressful life
events and the subsequent illness episode.

56
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Hassles EFFECTS OF STRESS ON PSYCHOLOGICAL

These are the personal stresses we endure FUNCTIONING AND HEALTH

as individuals, due to the happenings in
our daily life, such as noisy surroundings, What are the effects of stress? Many of the

commuting, quarrelsome neighbours, ef fects are physiological in nature,

electricity and water shortage, traffic however, other changes also occur

snarls, and so on. Attending to various inside stressed individuals. There

emergencies are daily hassles experienced are four major ef fects of stress

by a housewife. There are some jobs in associated with the stressed state, viz.

which daily hassles are very frequent. emotional, physiological, cognitive, and

These daily hassles may sometimes have behavioural.

devastating consequences for the Emotional Effects : Those who suffer from
individual who is often the one coping stress are far more likely to experience
alone with them as others may not even be mood swings, and show erratic behaviour
aware of them as outsiders. The more that may alienate them from family and
stress people report as a result of daily friends. In some cases this can start a
hassles, the poorer is their psychological vicious circle of decreasing confidence,
well-being. leading to more serious emotional

problems. Some examples are feelings of
Traumatic Events anxiety and depression, increased physical

tension, increased psychological tension
These include being involved in a variety

and mood swings. Box 3.2 presents the
of extreme events such as a fire, train or

phenomenon of ‘Examination Anxiety’.
road accident, robbery, earthquake,
tsunami, etc. The effects of these events Physiological Effects : When the human
may occur after some lapse of time and body is placed under physical or
sometimes persist as symptoms of anxiety, psychological stress, it increases the
flashbacks, dreams and intrusive production of certain hormones, such as
thoughts, etc. Severe trauma can also adrenaline and cortisol. These hormones
strain relationships. Professional help will produce marked changes in heart rate,
be needed to cope with them especially if blood pressure levels, metabolism and
they persist for many months after the physical activity. Although, this physical
event is over. reaction will help us to function more

effectively when we are under pressure for
short periods of time, it can be extremely

Activity damaging to the body in the long-term
Identify the stressful events, which you

3.2 and two of your classmates have effects. Examples of physiological effects
experienced in the past one year. List are release of epinephrine and nor -
the stressful events and rank them epinephrine, slowing down of the digestive
from 1 to 5 that have had negative system, expansion of air passages in the
impact in your day-to-day functioning. lungs, increased heart rate, and
Then select those that are common to constriction of blood vessels.
all three of you. Find out how much
ability, skill, and family support your Cognitive Effects : If pressures due to
friends and you have in order to deal stress continue, one may suffer from
with each of these stresses. mental overload. This suffering from high

Discuss these results with your
level of stress can rapidly cause individuals

teacher.
to lose their ability to make sound

57
Chapter 3 • Meeting Life Challenges

Reprint 2025-26



decisions. Faulty decisions made at home, Stress and Health
in career, or at workplace may lead to

You must have often observed that many
arguments, failure, financial loss or even

of your friends (may be including yourself
loss of job. Cognitive effects of stress are as well!) fall sick during the examination
poor concentration, and reduced short- time. They suffer from stomach upsets,
term memory capacity. body aches, nausea, diarrhoea and fever
Behavioural Effects : Stress affects our etc. You must have also noticed that people
behaviour in the form of eating less who are unhappy in their personal lives fall
nutritional food, increasing intake of sick more often than those who are happy
stimulants such as caffeine, excessive and enjoy life. Chronic daily stress can
consumption of cigarettes, alcohol and divert an individual’s attention from caring
other drugs such as tranquillisers etc. for herself or himself. When stress is
Tranquillisers can be addictive and have prolonged, it affects physical health and
side effects such as loss of concentration, impairs psychological functioning. People
poor coordination, and dizziness. Some of experience exhaustion and attitudinal
the typical behavioural effects of stress problems when the stress due to demands
seen are disrupted sleep patterns, from the environment and constraints are
increased absenteeism, and reduced work too high and little support is available from
performance. family and friends. The physical

Box Examination Anxiety

3.2
Examination anxiety is a fairly common phenomenon that involves feelings of tension or
uneasiness that occur before, during, or after an examination. Many people experience
feelings of anxiety around examinations and find it helpful in some ways, as it can be
motivating and create the pressure that is needed to stay focused on one’s performance.
Examination nerves, worry, or fear of failure are normal for even the most talented student.
However, stress of formal examination results in such high degrees of anxiety in some
students that they are unable to perform at a level which matches the potential they have
shown in less stressful classroom situations. Examination stress has been characterised
as “evaluative apprehension” or “evaluative stress” and produces debilitating behavioural,
cognitive, and physiological effects no different from those produced by any other stressor.
High stress can interfere with the student’s preparation, concentration, and performance.
Examination stress can cause test anxiety which adversely affects test performance. Persons
who are high in test anxiety tend to perceive evaluative situations as personally threatening;
in test situations, they are often tense, apprehensive, nervous, and emotionally aroused.
Moreover, the negative self-centred cognitions which they experience distract their attention
and interfere with concentration during examinations. High test anxious students respond
to examination stress with intense emotional reactions, negative thoughts about themselves,
feelings of inadequacy, helplessness, and loss of status and esteem that impair their
performance. Generally, the high test anxious person instead of plunging into a task plunges
inward, that is, either neglects or misinterprets informational cues that may be readily
available to her/him, or experiences attentional blocks. While preparing for examinations,
one must spend enough time for study, overview and weigh one’s strengths and weaknesses,
discuss difficulties with teachers and classmates, plan a revision timetable, condense notes,
space out revision periods, and most importantly on the examination day concentrate on
staying calm.

58
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



exhaustion is seen in the signs of chronic 1. Alarm reaction stage : The presence
fatigue, weakness and low energy. The of a noxious stimulus or stressor
mental exhaustion appears in the form of leads to activation of the adrenal-
irritability, anxiety, feelings of helplessness pituitary-cortex system. This triggers
and hopelessness. This state of physical, the release of hormones producing the
emotional and psychological exhaustion is stress response. Now the individual is
known as burnout. ready for fight or flight.

There is also convincing evidence to 2. Resistance stage : If stress is prolonged,
show that stress can produce changes in the resistance stage begins. The para-
the immune system and increase the sympathetic nervous system calls for
chances of someone becoming ill. Stress more cautious use of the body’s
has been implicated in the development of resources. The organism makes efforts
cardiovascular disorders, high blood to cope with the threat, as through
pressure, as well as psychosomatic confrontation.
disorders including ulcers, asthma, 3. Exhaustion stage : Continued exposure
allergies and headaches. to the same stressor or additional

Researchers estimate that stress plays stressors drains the body of its
an important role in fifty to seventy per resources and leads to the third stage
cent of all physical illnesses. Studies also of exhaustion. The physiological
reveal that sixty per cent of medical visits systems involved in alarm reaction and
are primarily for stress-related symptoms. resistance become ineffective and

susceptibility to stress-related diseases
General Adaptation Syndrome such as high blood pressure becomes

What happens to the body when stress is more likely.

prolonged? Selye studied this issue by Selye’s model has been criticised for
subjecting animals to a variety of stressors assigning a very limited role to
such as high temperature, X-rays and psychological factors in stress. Researchers
insulin injections, in the laboratory over a have reported that the psychological
long period of time. He also observed appraisal of events is important for the
patients with various injuries and illnesses determination of stress. How people
in hospitals. Selye noticed a similar pattern respond to stress is substantially
of bodily response in all of them. He called influenced by their perceptions,
this pattern the General Adaptation personalities and biological constitutions.
Syndrome (GAS). According to him, GAS
involves three stages: alarm reaction, Stress and the Immune System
resistance, and exhaustion (see Fig.3.3).

Stress can cause illness by impairing the
workings of the immune system. The
immune system guards the body against
attackers, both from within and outside.
Psychoneuroimmunology focuses on the
links between the mind, the brain and the
immune system. It studies the effects of
stress on the immune system. How does
the immune system work? The white blood
cells (leucocytes) within the immune

Fig.3.3 : The General Adaptation Syndrome system identify and destroy foreign bodies

59
Chapter 3 • Meeting Life Challenges

Reprint 2025-26



(antigens) such as viruses. It also leads to Psychological stress is accompanied by
the production of antibodies. There are negative emotions and associated
several kinds of white blood cells or behaviours, including depression, hostility,
leucocytes within the immune system, anger and aggression. Negative emotion
including T cells, B cells and natural killer states are of particular concern to the
cells. T cells destroy invaders, and T-helper study of effects of stress on health. The
cells increase immunological activity. It is incidence of psychological disorders, such
these T-helper cells that are attacked by as panic attacks and obsessive behaviour
the Human Immuno Deficiency Virus increases with the build up of long-term
(HIV), the virus causing Acquired Immuno stress. Worries can reach such a level that
Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). B cells they surface as a frightening, painful
produce antibodies. Natural killer cells are physical sensation, which can be mistaken
involved in the fight against both viruses for a heart attack. People under prolonged
and tumours. stress are more prone to irrational fears,

Stress can affect natural killer cell mood swings and phobias, and may
cytotoxicity, which is of major importance experience fits of depression, anger and
in the defence against various infections irritability. These negative emotions appear
and cancer. Reduced levels of natural killer to be related to the function of the immune
cell cytotoxicity have been found in people system. Our ability to interpret our world
who are highly stressed, including and to invest that interpretation with
students facing important examinations, personal meaning and emotion have a
bereaved persons, and those who are powerful and direct effect on the body.
severely depressed. Studies reveal that Negative moods have been associated with
immune functioning is better in individuals poorer health outcomes. Feelings of
receiving social support. Also, changes in hopelessness are related to worsening of
the immune system will have more effect disease, increased risk of injury and death
on health among those whose immune due to various causes.
systems are already weakened. Figure 3.4
depicts this sequence comprising negative Lifestyle

emotions, release of stress hormones Stress can lead to unhealthy lifestyle or
which lead to weakening of the immune health damaging behaviour. Lifestyle is the
system, thereby affecting mental and overall pattern of decisions and behaviours
physical health. that determine a person’s health and

Fig.3.4 : Relation of Stress with Illness

60
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



quality of life. Stressed individuals may be impaired immune response and
more likely to expose themselves to diminished activity of natural killer cells.
pathogens, which are agents causing Individuals show consistent individual
physical illness. People who are stressed differences in the coping strategies they
have poor nutritional habits, sleep less and use to handle stressful situations. These
are likely to engage in other health risking can include both overt and covert
behaviours like smoking and alcohol activities. The three coping strategies given
abuse. Such health impairing behaviours by Endler and Parker are:
develop gradually and are accompanied by Task-oriented Strategy : This involves
pleasant experiences temporarily. However, obtaining information about the stressful
we tend to ignore their long-term damaging situation and about alternative courses of
effects and underestimate the risk they action and their probable outcome; it also
pose to our lives. involves deciding priorities and acting so

Studies have revealed that health as to deal directly with the stressful
promoting behaviour like balanced diet, situation. For example, schedule my time
regular exercise, family support, etc. play better, or think about how I have solved
an important role in good health. Adhering similar  problems.
to a lifestyle that includes balanced low fat

Emotion-oriented Strategy : This can
diet, regular exercise and continued

involve efforts to maintain hope and to
activity along with positive thinking

control one’s emotions; it can also involve
enhances health and longevity. The

venting feelings of anger and frustration,
modern lifestyle of excesses in eating,

or deciding that nothing can be done to
drinking and the so called fast-paced good change things. For example, tell myself
life has led to violation of  basic principles that it is not really happening to me, or
of health  in some of us, as to what we eat, worry about what I am going to do.
think or do with our lives.

Avoidance-oriented Strategy : This
involves denying or minimising the

COPING WITH STRESS seriousness of the situation; it also involves

In recent years the conviction has grown conscious suppression of stressful

that it is how we cope with stress and not thoughts and their replacement by self-

the stress one experiences that influences
our psychological well-being, social Respond to the following items on a Activity
functioning and health. Coping is a 5-point scale ranging from 5 = always 3.3
dynamic situation-specific reaction to to 1 = never.

stress. It is a set of concrete responses to I express emotions openly and

stressful situations or events that are directly.

intended to resolve the problem and reduce I work towards my own personal
goals.

stress. The way we cope with stress often
I accept situations that cannot be

depends on rigid deep-seated beliefs, based altered.
on experience, e.g. when caught in a traffic I discuss my worries with friends.
jam we feel angry, because we believe that I may not get everything just right.

the traffic ‘should’ move faster. To manage Discuss your answers with your
stress we often need to reassess the way classmates and teacher. The higher

we think and learn coping strategies. the score, the better would be your
ability to cope.

People who cope poorly with stress have an

61
Chapter 3 • Meeting Life Challenges

Reprint 2025-26



protective thoughts. Examples of this are
watching TV, phone up a friend, or try to Which of the following coping Activity

behaviours are problem-focused? Why? 3.4
be with other people.

• Discussing your problem with a
Lazarus and Folkman has

friend.
conceptualised coping as a dynamic • Feeling sorry for failing in an
process rather than an individual trait. examination.
Coping refers to constantly changing • Finding fault with classmates for
cognitive and behavioural efforts to master, poor marks in tests.

reduce or tolerate the internal or external • Hiding examination results from

demands that are created by the stressful parents.
• Blaming friends for bad habits.

transaction. Coping serves to allow the
• Reading essential books for the

individual to manage or alter a problem annual examination.
and regulate the emotional response to • Making efforts to improve one’s
that problem. According to them coping performance after a setback.

responses can be divided into two types of • Missing school when assignments

responses, problem-focused and emotion- not completed.
Discuss the answers with your

focused. Problem-focused strategies attack
classmates and teacher.

the problem itself, with behaviours
designed to gain information, to alter the
event, and to alter belief and commitments. manage stress. Some of these techniques
They increase the person’s awareness, level are:
of knowledge, and range of behavioural
and cognitive coping options. They can act Relaxation Techniques : It is an active

to reduce the threat value of the event. For skill that reduces symptoms of stress and

example “I made a plan of action and decreases the incidence of illnesses such

followed it”. Emotion-focused strategies call as high blood pressure and heart disease.

for psychological changes designed Usually relaxation starts from the lower

primarily to limit the degree of emotional part of the body and progresses up to the

disruption caused by an event, with facial muscles in such a way that the
whole body is relaxed. Deep breathing is

minimal effort to alter the event itself. For
used along with muscle relaxation to calm

example “I did some things to let it out of
the mind and relax the body.

my system”. While both problem-focused
and emotion-focused coping are necessary Meditation Procedures : The yogic method
when facing stressful situations, research of meditation consists of a sequence of
suggests that people generally tend to use learned techniques for refocusing of
the former more often than the latter. attention that brings about an altered state

of consciousness. It involves such a
Stress Management Techniques thorough concentration that the meditator

becomes unaware of any outside
Stress is a silent killer. It is estimated to

stimulation and reaches a different state
play a significant role in physical illness

of consciousness.
and disease. Hypertension, heart disease,
ulcers, diabetes and even cancer are linked Biofeedback : It is a procedure to monitor
to stress. Due to lifestyle changes stress is and reduce the physiological aspects of
on the increase. Therefore, schools, other stress by providing feedback about current
institutions, offices and communities are physiological activity and is often
concerned about knowing techniques to accompanied by relaxation training.

62
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Biofeedback training involves three stages : times a week for 30 minutes at a time.
developing an awareness of the particular Each session must have a warm-up,
physiological response, e.g. heart rate, exercise and cool down phases.
learning ways of controlling that
physiological response in quiet conditions;

PROMOTING POSITIVE HEALTH AND
and transferring that control into the

WELL-BEING
conditions of everyday life.

Creative Visualisation : It is an effective It is unlikely that we will go through life
technique for dealing with stress. Creative without some experience of personal crises
visualisation is a subjective experience that causing acute pressure for a while. Many
uses imagery and imagination. Before people sail through and rebuild their lives
visualising one must set oneself a realistic very positively. They are likely to have
goal, as it helps build confidence. It is constructive attitudes and also have lots of
easier to visualise if one’s mind is quiet, emotional and social support of various
body relaxed and eyes are closed. This kinds available to them. When we find
reduces the risk of interference from ways of managing these pressures and can
unbidden thoughts and provides the use the energy to create something positive
creative energy needed for turning an out of the situation, then we will have
imagined scene into reality. learned to survive healthily and this will

leave us more stress fit for future crises.
Cognitive Behavioural Techniques :

It is like being immunised against the
These techniques aim to inoculate people
against stress. Stress inoculation training dangers of unhealthy stress.

is one ef fective method developed by Stress Resistant Personality : Recent
Meichenbaum. The essence of this studies by Kobasa have shown that people
approach is to replace negative and with high levels of stress but low levels of
irrational thoughts with positive and illness share three characteristics, which
rational ones. There are three main phases are referred to as the personality traits of
in this : assessment, stress reduction hardiness. It consists of ‘the three Cs’, i.e.
techniques, and application and follow- commitment, control, and challenge.
through. Assessment involves discussing Hardiness is a set of beliefs about oneself,
the nature of the problem and seeing it the world, and how they interact. It takes
from the viewpoint of the person/client. shape as a sense of personal commitment
Stress reduction involves learning the to what you are doing, a sense of control
techniques of reducing stress such as over your life, and a feeling of challenge.
relaxation and self-instruction. Stress resistant personalities have control
Exercise : Exercise can provide an active which is a sense of purpose and direction
outlet for the physiological arousal in life; commitment to work, family,
experienced in response to stress. Regular hobbies and social life; and challenge, that
exercise improves the efficiency of the is, they see changes in life as normal and
heart, enhances the function of the lungs, positive rather than as a threat.
maintains good circulation, lowers blood Everyone does not have these
pressure, reduces fat in the blood and characteristics, many of us have to relearn
improves the body’s immune system. specific life skills in areas such as rational
Swimming, walking, running, cycling, thinking, and assertiveness to equip
skipping, etc. help to reduce stress. One ourselves better to cope with the demands
must practice these exercises at least four of everyday life, etc.

63
Chapter 3 • Meeting Life Challenges

Reprint 2025-26



Life Skills images from the past, which affect our
perception of the present and the future.

Life skills are abilities for adaptive and
Some of the principles of rational thinking

positive behaviour that enable individuals
are: challenging your distorted thinking and

to deal effectively with the demands and
irrational beliefs, driving out potentially

challenges of everyday life. Our ability to
intrusive negative anxiety-provoking

cope depends on how well we are prepared
thoughts, and making positive statements.

to deal with and counterbalance everyday
demands, and keep equilibrium in our Improving Relationships : The key to a
lives. These life skills can be learned and sound lasting relationship is communi-
even improved upon. Assertiveness, time cation. This consists of three essential
management, rational thinking, improving skills: listening to what the other person
relationships, self-care, and overcoming is saying, expressing how you feel and
unhelpful habits such as perfectionism, what you think, and accepting the other
procrastination, etc. are some life skills person’s opinions and feelings, even if they
that will help to meet the challenges of life. are dif ferent from your own. It also

Assertiveness : Assertiveness is a requires us to avoid misplaced jealousy

behaviour or skill that helps to and sulking behaviour.

communicate, clearly and confidently, our Self-care : If we keep ourselves healthy, fit
feelings, needs, wants, and thoughts. It is and relaxed, we are better prepared
the ability to say no to a request, to state physically and emotionally to tackle the
an opinion without being self-conscious, or stresses of everyday life. Our breathing
to express emotions such as love, anger, patterns reflect our state of mind and
etc. openly. If you are assertive, you feel emotions. When we are stressed or
confident, and have high self-esteem and anxious, we tend towards rapid and
a solid sense of your own identity. shallow breathing from high in the chest,

Time Management : The way you spend with frequent sighs. The most relaxed

your time determines the quality of your breathing is slow, stomach-centred

life. Learning how to plan time and breathing from the diaphragm, i.e. a dome

delegate can help to relieve the pressure. like muscle between the chest and the

The major way to reduce time stress is to abdominal cavity. Environmental stresses

change one’s perception of time. The like noise, pollution, space, light, colour,

central principle of time management is to etc. can all exert an influence on our mood.
spend your time doing the things that you These have a noticeable effect on our
value, or that help you to achieve your ability to cope with stress, and well-being.
goals. It depends on being realistic about Overcoming Unhelpful Habits : Unhelpful
what you know and that you must do it habits such as perfectionism, avoidance,
within a certain time period, knowing what procrastination, etc. are strategies that
you want to do, and organising your life to help to cope in the short-term but which
achieve a balance between the two. make one more vulnerable to stress.
Rational Thinking : Many stress-related Perfectionists are persons who have to get
problems occur as a result of distorted everything just right. They have difficulty
thinking. The way you think and the way in varying standards according to factors
you feel are closely connected. When we such as time available, consequences of
are stressed, we have an inbuilt selective not being able to stop work, and the effort
bias to attend to negative thoughts and needed. They are more likely to feel tense

64
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



and find it difficult to relax, are critical of Diet : A balanced diet can lift one’s mood,
self and others, and may become inclined give more energy, feed muscles, improve
to avoid challenges. Avoidance is to put the circulation, prevent illness, strengthen the
issue under the carpet and refuse to accept immune system and make one feel better
or face it. Procrastination means putting off to cope with stresses of life. The key to
what we know we need to do. We all are healthy living is to eat three main meals
guilty of saying “I will do it later”. People a day, and eat a varied well-balanced diet.
who procrastinate are deliberately avoiding How much nutrition one needs depends on
confronting their fears of failure or rejection. one’s activity level, genetic make-up,

Various factors have been identified climate, and health history. What people
which facilitate the development of eat, and how much do they weigh involve
positive health. Health is a state of behavioural processes. Some people are
complete physical, mental, social and able to maintain a healthy diet and weight
spiritual well-being, and not merely the while others become obese. When we are
absence of disease or infirmity. Positive stressed, we seek ‘comfort foods’ which are
health comprises the following constructs: high in fats, salt and sugar.
“a healthy body; high quality of personal
relationships; a sense of purpose in life; Exercise : A large number of studies

self-regard, mastery of life’s tasks; and confirm a consistently positive relationship

resilience to stress, trauma, and change”. between physical fitness and health. Also,

Box 3.3 presents the relationship between of all the measures an individual can take

resilience and health. Specifically, factors to improve health, exercise is the lifestyle

that act as stress buffers and facilitate change with the widest popular approval.
positive health are diet, exercise, positive Regular exercise plays an important role in
attitude, positive thinking, and social managing weight and stress, and is shown
support. to have a positive ef fect on reducing

Resilience and Health Box
3.3

In recent years, there has been a lot of research in understanding resilience in children
and adolescents. Resilience is a dynamic developmental process referring to the maintenance
of positive adjustment under challenging life conditions. It has been described as the capacity
to ‘bounce back’ in the face of stress and adversity. Resilience has been conceptualised as
reflecting feelings of self-worth and self-confidence, autonomy and self-reliance, finding
positive role models, seeking a confidant, cognitive skills such as problem solving, creativity,
resourcefulness, and flexibility and a belief that one’s life has purpose and meaning. Resilient
individuals are able to overcome the effects of trauma, stress and adversity and learn to
live psychologically healthy and meaningful lives.

Resilience has recently been defined in terms of three resources: I HAVE (social and
interpersonal strengths), i.e. ‘people around me I trust and who love me no matter what’, I
AM (inner strengths), i.e. ‘respectful of myself and others’, and I CAN ( interpersonal and
problem solving skills), i.e. ‘find ways to solve problems I face’. For a child to be resilient,
s/he needs to have more than one of these strengths. For example, children may have
plenty of self-esteem (I am), but may lack anyone whom they can turn to for support (I
have), and do not have the capacity to solve problems (I can), will not be resilient. Outcomes
of longitudinal studies of children provide evidence that in spite of extreme vulnerabilities
related to poverty and other social disadvantages, many individuals develop into capable
and caring adults.

65
Chapter 3 • Meeting Life Challenges

Reprint 2025-26



tension, anxiety and depression. Physical Social Support : Social support is defined
exercises that are essential for good health as the existence and availability of people
are stretching exercises such as yogic on whom we can rely upon, people who let
asanas and aerobic exercises such as us know that they care about, value, and
jogging, swimming, cycling, etc. Whereas love us. Someone who believes that s/he
stretching exercises have a calming effect, belongs to a social network of
aerobic exercises increase the arousal level communication and mutual obligation
of the body. The health benefits of exercise experiences social support. Perceived
work as a stress buffer. Studies suggest support, i.e. the quality of social support
that fitness permits individuals to is positively related to health and well-
maintain general mental and physical well- being, whereas social network, i.e. the
being even in the face of negative life quantity of social support is unrelated to
events. well-being, because it is very time-

consuming and demanding to maintain a
Positive Attitude : Positive health and

large social network. Studies have revealed
well-being can be realised by having a

that women exposed to life event stresses,
positive attitude. Some of the factors

who had a close friend, were less likely to
leading to a positive attitude are: having a

be depressed and had lesser medical
fairly accurate perception of reality; a sense

complications during pregnancy. Social
of purpose in life and responsibility;

support can help to provide protection
acceptance and tolerance for different

against stress. People with high levels of
viewpoints of others; and taking credit for

social support from family and friends may
success and accepting blame for failure.

experience less stress when they confront
Finally, being open to new ideas and

a stressful experience, and they may cope
having a sense of humour with the ability

with it more successfully.
to laugh at oneself help us to remain

Social support may be in the form of
centred, and see things in a proper

tangible support or assistance involving
perspective.

material aid, such as money, goods,
Positive Thinking : The power of positive services, etc. For example, a child gives
thinking has been increasingly recognised notes to her/his friend, since s/he was
in reducing and coping with stress. absent from school due to sickness. Family
Optimism, which is the inclination to and friends also provide informational
expect favourable life outcomes, has been support about stressful events. For
linked to psychological and physical well- example, a student facing a stressful event
being. People differ in the manner in which such as a difficult board examination, if
they cope. For example, optimists tend to provided information by a friend who has
assume that adversity can be handled faced a similar one, would not only be able
successfully whereas pessimists anticipate to identify the exact procedures involved,
disasters. Optimists use more problem- but also it would facilitate in determining
focused coping strategies, and seek advice what resources and coping strategies could
and help from others. Pessimists ignore the be useful to successfully pass the
problem or source of stress, and use examination. During times of stress, one
strategies such as giving up the goal with may experience sadness, anxiety, and loss
which stress is interfering or denying that of self-esteem. Supportive friends and
stress exists. family provide emotional support by

66
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



reassuring the individual that she/he is
loved, valued, and cared for. Research has Identify a child in your neighbourhood Activity

demonstrated that social support who had undergone some major stress 3.5
in life such as a serious accident or been

effectively reduces psychological distress through a recent traumatic experience
such as depression or anxiety, during like a robbery, fire, etc. Talk to the child
times of stress. There is growing evidence and family. Can you identify some

that social support is positively related to factors that have helped her/him to
cope and overcome the trauma? Do you

psychological well-being. Generally, social
see any similar factors in your own life?

support leads to mental health benefits for Discuss with your teacher.
both the giver and the receiver.

Key Terms
Alarm reaction, Appraisal, Coping, Exhaustion, General adaptation syndrome, Hardiness, Homeostasis,
Life skills, Optimism, Positive health, Psychoneuroimmunology, Resilience, Social support, Stress,
Stressors.

• Stress is a part of life. Stress is neither a stimulus nor a response but an ongoing
transactional process between the individual and the environment.

• There are three major types of stresses, physical and environmental, psychological
and social. Sources of stress are life events, everyday hassles, traumatic events.
The response to stress is emotional, physiological, cognitive and behavioural.

• Coping is a dynamic situation-specific individual reaction to stress. There are three
main types of coping, task-oriented, emotion-oriented, and avoidance-oriented coping.
Coping responses may be problem-focused or emotion-focused. Problem-focused coping
focuses to alter the environment and acts to reduce the threat value of the event.
Emotion-focused coping are strategies for changing emotions and aim to limit the
degree of emotional disruption caused by the event.

• It is essential to have a healthy lifestyle for handling stress and effective coping.
Assertiveness, time management, rational thinking, improving relationships, self-
care, and overcoming unhelpful habits are life skills that help us to meet life’s
challenges.

• Positive health and well-being come through balanced diet, exercise, positive attitude,
positive optimistic thinking, and social support. There is also a need for overall
harmonious conditions in society. We must avoid taking unhealthy escape routes of
smoking, alcohol, drugs and other harmful behaviours.

Review Questions

1. Explain the concept of stress. Give examples from daily life.
2. State the symptoms and sources of stress.
3. Describe the GAS model and illustrate the relevance of this model with the help of

an example.
4. Enumerate the different ways of coping with stress.
5. Explain the effect of stress on psychological functioning.
6. Describe how life skills can help meet life’s challenges.
7. Discuss the factors that lead to positive health and well-being.
8. How does stress affect the immune system?

67
Chapter 3 • Meeting Life Challenges

Reprint 2025-26



9. Give an example of a life event which is likely to be stressful. Suggest reasons why it
is likely to cause different degrees of stress to the person experiencing it.

10. Given what you know about coping strategies, what suggestions would you give to
your friends to avoid stress in their everyday lives.

11. Reflect on the environmental factors that have (a) a positive impact on the being, and
(b) a negative effect.

12. We know that certain lifestyle factors can cause stress and may lead to diseases like
cancer and coronary heart disease, yet we are unable to change our behaviour.
Explain why?

Project 1. Record the stresses in the lives of 5–10 teenagers. Are these different for girls and boys?
Ideas Find out the ways by which they cope with them.

2. Discuss with your parents and grandparents the unique stressors they face in their
lives and how they cope with them.

Weblinks
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/stress.html
http://www.teachhealth.com
http://www.lifepositive.com/stress.html

Pedagogical Hints
1. It is important to make students

realise that stress is an integral part
of life. They must, therefore, be
encouraged to recognise the signs
of stress in themselves and in
others.

2. Students could brainstorm for
possible ways of dealing with
different types of stressors.

3. Drawing examples from students’
lives, they need to be made to
understand the harmful effects of
stress on physical and mental
health.

4. Students should be encouraged to
search for literature in newspapers,
magazines, Internet, etc. suggesting
ways of dealing with stress. This
could be followed by discussion in
the classroom.

68
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS

After reading this chapter, you would be able to:
understand the basic issues in abnormal behaviour and the criteria used to identify such
behaviours,
appreciate the factors which cause abnormal behaviour,
explain the different models of abnormal behaviour, and
describe the major psychological disorders.

Introduction
Concepts of Abnormality and Psychological Disorders
Classification of Psychological Disorders
Factors Underlying Abnormal Behaviour
Major Psychological Disorders

Anxiety Disorders
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
Dissociative Disorders
Salient Features of Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders

CONTENTS and Dissociative Disorders (Box 4.1)
Depressive Disorders
Bipolar and Related Disorders
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Key Terms
Psychotic Disorders Summary
Neurodevelopmental Disorders Review Questions
Disruptive, Impulse-Control and Conduct Disorders Project Ideas
Feeding and Eating Disorders

Weblinks
Substance - Related and Addictive Disorders

Pedagogical Hints
Effects of Alcohol : Some Facts (Box 4.2)
Commonly Abused Substances (Box 4.3)

69
##4##
Chapter 4 • Psychological Disorders

Reprint 2025-26



You must have come across people who are unhappy, troubled and
dissatisfied. Their minds and hearts are filled with sorrow, unrest and
tension and they feel that they are unable to move ahead in their lives; they
feel life is a painful, uphill struggle, sometimes not worth living. Famous
analytical psychologist Carl Jung has quite remarkably said, “How can I
be substantial without casting a shadow? I must have a dark side, too, if I
am to be whole and by becoming conscious of my shadow, I remember
once more that I am a human being like any other”. At times, some of you

Introduction may have felt nervous before an important examination, tense and concerned
about your future career or anxious when someone close to you was unwell.
All of us face major problems at some point of our lives. However, some
people have an extreme reaction to the problems and stresses of life. In this
chapter, we will try to understand what goes wrong when people develop
psychological problems, what are the causes and factors which lead to
abnormal behaviour, and what are the various signs and symptoms
associated with different types of psychological disorders?

The study of psychological disorders has intrigued and mystified all
cultures for more than 2,500 years. Psychological disorders or mental
disorders (as they are commonly referred to), like anything unusual may
make us uncomfortable and even a little frightened. Unhappiness,
discomfort, anxiety, and unrealised potential are seen all over the world.
These failures in living are mainly due to failures in adaptation to life
challenges. As you must have studied in the previous chapters, adaptation
refers to the person’s ability to modify her/his behaviour in response to
changing environmental requirements. When the behaviour cannot be
modified according to the needs of the situation, it is said to be maladaptive.
Abnormal Psychology is the area within psychology that is focused on
maladaptive behaviour – its causes, consequences, and treatment.

C way), and possibly dangerous (to the
ONCEPTS OF ABNORMALITY AND

person or to others).
PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS

This definition is a useful starting point
Although many definitions of abnormality from which we can explore psychological
have been used over the years, none has abnormality. Since the word ‘abnormal’
won universal acceptance. Still, most literally means “away from the normal”, it
definitions have certain common features, implies deviation from some clearly defined
often called the ‘four Ds’: deviance, norms or standards. In psychology, we
distress, dysfunction and danger. That is, have no ‘ideal model’ or even ‘normal
psychological disorders are deviant model’ of human behaviour to use as a
(different, extreme, unusual, even bizarre), base for comparison. Various approaches
distressing (unpleasant and upsetting to have been used in distinguishing between
the person and to others), dysfunctional normal and abnormal behaviours. From
(interfering with the person’s ability to these approaches, there emerge two basic
carry out daily activities in a constructive and conflicting views:

70
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



The first approach views abnormal prefers to remain silent even when s/he
behaviour as a deviation from social has questions in her/his mind. Describing
norms. Many psychologists have stated behaviour as maladaptive implies that a
that ‘abnormal’ is simply a label that is problem exists; it also suggests that
given to a behaviour which is deviant from vulnerability in the individual, inability to
social expectations. Abnormal behaviour, cope, or exceptional stress in the
thoughts and emotions are those that differ environment have led to problems in life.
markedly from a society’s ideas of proper  If you talk to people around, you will
functioning. Each society has norms, see that they have vague ideas about
which are stated or unstated rules for psychological disorders that are
proper conduct. Behaviours, thoughts and characterised by superstition, ignorance
emotions that break societal norms are and fear. Again it is commonly believed
called abnormal. A society’s norms grow that psychological disorder is something to
from its particular culture — its history, be ashamed of. The stigma attached to
values, institutions, habits, skills, mental illness means that people are
technology, and arts. Thus, a society whose hesitant to consult a doctor or psychologist
culture values competition and because they are ashamed of their
assertiveness may accept aggressive problems. Actually, psychological disorder
behaviour, whereas one that emphasises which indicates a failure in adaptation
cooperation and family values (such as in should be viewed as any other illness.
India) may consider aggressive behaviour
as unacceptable or even abnormal. A

Talk to three people: one of your Activity
society’s values may change over time, friends, a friend of your parents, and 4.1
causing its views of what is psychologically your neighbour.
abnormal to change as well. Serious Ask them if they have seen
questions have been raised about this someone who is mentally ill or who has

definition. It is based on the assumption mental problems. Try to understand

that socially accepted behaviour is not why they find this behaviour
abnormal, what are the signs and

abnormal, and that normality is nothing
symptoms shown by this person, what

more than conformity to social norms. caused this behaviour and can this
The second approach views abnormal person be helped.

behaviour as  maladaptive. Many Share the information you elicited

psychologists believe that the best criterion in class and see if there are some

for determining the normality of behaviour common features, which make us label
others as ‘abnormal’.

is not whether society accepts it but
whether it fosters the well-being of the
individual and eventually of the group to

Historical Background
which s/he belongs. Well-being is not
simply maintenance and survival but also To understand psychological disorders, we
includes growth and fulfilment, i.e. the would require a brief historical account of
actualisation of potential, which you must how these disorders have been viewed over
have studied in Maslow’s need hierarchy the ages. When we study the history of
theory. According to this criterion, abnormal psychology, we find that certain
conforming behaviour can be seen as theories have occurred over and over again.
abnormal if it is maladaptive, i.e. if it One ancient theory that is still
interferes with optimal functioning and encountered today holds that abnormal
growth. For example, a student in the class behaviour can be explained by the

71
Chapter 4 • Psychological Disorders

Reprint 2025-26



operation of supernatural and magical body fluids, viz. blood, black bile, yellow
forces such as evil spirits (bhoot-pret), or bile, and phlegm. Each of these fluids was
the devil (shaitan). Exorcism, i.e. removing seen to be responsible for a different
the evil that resides in the individual temperament. Imbalances among the
through countermagic and prayer, is still humours were believed to cause various
commonly used. In many societies, the disorders. This is similar to the Indian
shaman, or medicine man (ojha) is a notion of the three doshas of vata, pitta
person who is believed to have contact with and kapha which were mentioned in the
supernatural forces and is the medium Atharva Veda and Ayurvedic texts. You
through which spirits communicate with have already read about it in Chapter 2.
human beings. Through the shaman, an In the Middle Ages, demonology and
afflicted person can learn which spirits are superstition gained renewed importance in
responsible for her/his problems and what the explanation of abnormal behaviour.
needs to be done to appease them. Demonology related to a belief that people

A recurring theme in the history of with mental problems were evil and there
abnormal psychology is the belief that are numerous instances of ‘witch-hunts’
individuals behave strangely because their during this period.  During the early
bodies and their brains are not working Middle Ages, the Christian spirit of charity
properly. This is the biological or organic prevailed and St. Augustine wrote
approach. In the modern era, there is extensively about feelings, mental anguish
evidence that body and brain processes and conflict. This laid the groundwork for
have been linked to many types of modern psychodynamic theories of
maladaptive behaviour. For certain types of abnormal behaviour.
disorders, correcting these defective The Renaissance Period was marked
biological processes results in improved by increased humanism and curiosity
functioning. about behaviour. Johann Weyer

Another approach is the psychological emphasised psychological conflict and
approach. According to this point of view, disturbed interpersonal relationships as
psychological problems are caused by causes of psychological disorders. He also
inadequacies in the way an individual insisted that ‘witches’ were mentally
thinks, feels, or perceives the world. disturbed and required medical, not

All three of these perspectives — theological, treatment.
supernatural, biological or organic, and The seventeenth and eighteenth
psychological — have recurred throughout centuries were known as the Age of
the history of Western civilisation. In the Reason and Enlightenment, as the
ancient Western world, it was philosopher- scientific method replaced faith and
physicians of ancient Greece such as dogma as ways of understanding
Hippocrates, Socrates, and in particular abnormal behaviour. The growth of a
Plato who developed the organismic scientific attitude towards psychological
approach and viewed disturbed behaviour disorders in the eighteenth century
as arising out of conflicts between emotion contributed to the Reform Movement and
and reason. Galen elaborated on the role to increased compassion for people who
of the four humours in personal character suffered from these disorders. Reforms of
and temperament. According to him, the asylums were initiated in both Europe
material world was made up of four and America. One aspect of the reform
elements, viz. earth, air, fire, and water movement was the new inclination for
which combined to form four essential deinstitutionalisation which placed

72
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



emphasis on providing community care clinical features or symptoms, and of
for recovered mentally ill individuals. other associated features including

In recent years, there has been a diagnostic guidelines is provided in this
convergence of these approaches, which scheme.
has resulted in an interactional, or bio-
psycho-social approach. From this
perspective, all three factors, i.e. biological, Certain behaviours like eating sand Activity

would be considered abnormal. But not 4.2
psychological and social play important

if it was done after being stranded on
roles in influencing the expression and a beach in a plane crash.
outcome of psychological disorders. Listed below are ‘abnormal’

behaviours followed by situations
where the behaviours might be

CLASSIFICATION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL
considered normal.

DISORDERS (i) talking to yourself - you are
praying.

In order to understand psychological (ii) standing in the middle of the street
disorders, we need to begin by classifying waving your arms wildly - you are

them. A classification of such disorders a traffic policeman.

consists of a list of categories of specific Think about it and list similar
examples.

psychological disorders grouped into
various classes on the basis of some
shared characteristics. Classifications are
useful because they enable users like FACTORS UNDERLYING ABNORMAL

psychologists, psychiatrists and social BEHAVIOUR

workers to communicate with each other In order to understand something as
about the disorder and help in complex as abnormal behaviour,
understanding the causes of psychological psychologists use different approaches.
disorders and the processes involved in Each approach in use today emphasises a
their development and maintenance. different aspect of human behaviour, and

The American Psychiatric Association explains and treats abnormality in line
(APA) has published an official manual with that aspect. These approaches also
describing and classifying various kinds emphasise the role of different factors such
of psychological disorders. The current as biological, psychological and
version of it, the Diagnostic and interpersonal, and socio-cultural factors.
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, We will examine some of the approaches
5th Edition (DSM-5), presents discrete which are currently being used to explain
clinical criteria which indicate the abnormal behaviour.
presence or absence of disorders. Biological factors influence all aspects

The classification scheme officially of our behaviour. A wide range of biological
used in India and elsewhere is the tenth factors such as faulty genes, endocrine
revision of the International imbalances, malnutrition, injuries and
Classification of Diseases (ICD-10), other conditions may interfere with normal
which is known as the ICD-10 development and functioning of the human
Classification of Behavioural and body. These factors may be potential
Mental Disorders. It was prepared by the causes of abnormal behaviour. We have
World Health Organisation (WHO). For already come across the biological model.
each disorder, a description of the main According to this model, abnormal

73
Chapter 4 • Psychological Disorders

Reprint 2025-26



behaviour has a biochemical or warmth and stimulation during early
physiological basis. Biological years of life), faulty parent-child
researchers have found that psychological relationships (rejection, overprotection,
disorders are often related to problems over-permissiveness, faulty discipline, etc.),
in the transmission of messages from one maladaptive family structures (inadequate
neuron to another. You have studied in or disturbed family), and severe stress.
Class XI, that a tiny space called synapse The psychological models include the
separates one neuron from the next, and psychodynamic, behavioural, cognitive,
the message must move across that and humanistic-existential models. The
space. When an electrical impulse psychodynamic model is the oldest and
reaches a neuron’s ending, the nerve most famous of the modern psychological
ending is stimulated to release a models. You have already read about this
chemical, called a neuro-transmitter. model in Chapter 2 on Self and
Studies indicate that abnormal activity Personality. Psychodynamic theorists
by certain neuro-transmitters can lead to believe that behaviour, whether normal
specific psychological disorders. Anxiety or abnormal, is determined by
disorders have been linked to low activity psychological forces within the person of
of the neurotransmitter gamma which s/he is not consciously aware.
aminobutyric acid (GABA), schizophrenia These internal forces are considered
to excess activity of dopamine, and dynamic, i.e. they interact with one
depression to low activity of serotonin. another and their interaction gives shape

Genetic factors have been linked to to behaviour, thoughts and emotions.
bipolar and related disorders, Abnormal symptoms are viewed as the
schizophrenia, intellectual disability and result of conflicts between these forces.
other psychological disorders. Researchers This model was first formulated by Freud
have not, however, been able to identify who believed that three central forces
the specific genes that are the culprits. shape personality — instinctual needs,
It appears that in most cases, no single drives and impulses (id), rational thinking
gene is responsible for a particular (ego), and moral standards (superego).
behaviour or a psychological disorder. Freud stated that abnormal behaviour is
Infact, many genes combine to help bring a symbolic expression of unconscious
about our various behaviours and mental conflicts that can be generally
emotional reactions, both functional and traced to early childhood or infancy.
dysfunctional. Although there is sound Another model that emphasises the role
evidence to believe that genetic/ of psychological factors is the behavioural
biochemical factors are involved in mental model. This model states that both normal
disorders as diverse as schizophrenia, and abnormal behaviours are learned and
depression, anxiety, etc. but biology alone psychological disorders are the result of
cannot account for most mental disorders. learning maladaptive ways of behaving. The

There are several psychological model concentrates on behaviours that are
models which provide a psychological learned through conditioning and proposes
explanation of mental disorders. These that what has been learned can be
models maintain that psychological and unlearned. Learning can take place by
interpersonal factors have a significant classical conditioning (temporal association
role to play in abnormal behaviour. These in which two events repeatedly occur close
factors include maternal deprivation together in time), operant conditioning
(separation from the mother, or lack of (behaviour is followed by a reward), and

74
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



social learning (learning by imitating others’ abnormal functioning in individual
behaviour). These three types of members. Some families have an
conditioning account for behaviour, enmeshed structure in which the
whether adaptive or maladaptive. members are overinvolved in each other’s

Psychological factors are also activities, thoughts, and feelings.
emphasised by the cognitive model. This Children from this kind of family may
model states that abnormal functioning have difficulty in becoming independent
can result from cognitive problems. in life. The broader social networks in
People may hold assumptions and which people operate include their social
attitudes about themselves that are and professional relationships. Studies
irrational and inaccurate. People may have shown that people who are isolated
also repeatedly think in illogical ways and and lack social support, i.e. strong and
make overgeneralisations, that is, they fulfilling interpersonal relationships in
may draw broad, negative conclusions on their lives are likely to become more
the basis of a single insignificant event. depressed and remain depressed longer

Another psychological model is the than those who have good friendships.
humanistic-existential model which Socio-cultural theorists also believe that
focuses on broader aspects of human abnormal functioning is influenced by the
existence. Humanists believe that human societal labels and roles assigned to
beings are born with a natural tendency troubled people. When people break the
to be friendly, cooperative and constructive, norms of their society, they are called
and are driven to self-actualise, i.e. to fulfil deviant and ‘mentally ill’. Such labels
this potential for goodness and growth. tend to stick so that the person may be
Existentialists believe that from birth we viewed as ‘crazy’ and encouraged to act
have total freedom to give meaning to our sick. The person gradually learns to
existence or to avoid that responsibility. accept and play the sick role, and
Those who shirk from this responsibility functions in a disturbed manner.
would live empty, inauthentic, and In addition to these models, one of the
dysfunctional lives. most widely accepted explanations of

In addition to the biological and abnormal behaviour has been provided by
psychosocial factors, socio-cultural the diathesis-stress model. This model
factors such as war and violence, group states that psychological disorders
prejudice and discrimination, economic develop when a diathesis (biological
and employment problems, and rapid predisposition to the disorder) is set off by
social change, put stress on most of us a stressful situation. This model has
and can also lead to psychological three components. The first is the
problems in some individuals. According diathesis or the presence of some
to the socio-cultural model, abnormal biological aberration which may be
behaviour is best understood in light of inherited. The second component is that
the social and cultural forces that the diathesis may carry a vulnerability
influence an individual. As behaviour is to develop a psychological disorder. This
shaped by societal forces, factors such as means that the person is ‘at risk’ or
family structure and communication, ‘predisposed’ to develop the disorder. The
social networks, societal conditions, and third component is the presence of
societal labels and roles become more pathogenic stressors, i.e. factors/
important. It has been found that certain stressors that may lead to
family systems are likely to produce psychopathology. If such “at risk” persons

75
Chapter 4 • Psychological Disorders

Reprint 2025-26



are exposed to these stressors, their include worry and apprehensive feelings
predisposition may actually evolve into a about the future; hypervigilance, which
disorder. This model has been applied to involves constantly scanning the
several disorders including anxiety, environment for dangers. It is marked by
depression, and schizophrenia. motor tension, as a result of which the

person is unable to relax, is restless, and

M visibly shaky and tense.
AJOR PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDERS

Another type of anxiety disorder is

Anxiety Disorders panic disorder, which consists of
recurrent anxiety attacks in which the

One day while driving home, Deb felt his person experiences intense terror. A panic
heart beating rapidly, he started sweating attack denotes an abrupt surge of intense
profusely, and even felt short of breath. He anxiety rising to a peak when thoughts of
was so scared that he stopped the car and a particular stimuli are present. Such
stepped out. In the next few months, these thoughts occur in an unpredictable
attacks increased and now he was hesitant manner. The clinical features include
to drive for fear of being caught in traffic shortness of breath, dizziness, trembling,
during an attack. Deb started feeling that palpitations, choking, nausea, chest pain
he had gone crazy and would die. Soon he or discomfort, fear of going crazy, losing
remained indoors and refused to move out control or dying.
of the house. You might have met or heard of

We experience anxiety when we are someone who was afraid to travel in a lift
waiting to take an examination, or to visit or climb to the tenth floor of a building, or
a dentist, or even to give a solo refused to enter a room if s/he saw a
performance. This is normal and expected lizard. You may have also felt it yourself or
and even motivates us to do our task well. seen a friend unable to speak a word of a
On the other hand, high levels of anxiety well-memorised and rehearsed speech
that are distressing and interfere with before an audience. These kinds of fears
effective functioning indicate the presence are termed as phobias. People who have
of an anxiety disorder — the most common phobias have irrational fears related to
category of psychological disorders. specific objects, people, or situations.

Everyone has worries and fears. The Phobias often develop gradually or begin
term anxiety is usually defined as a with a generalised anxiety disorder.
diffuse, vague, very unpleasant feeling of Phobias can be grouped into three main
fear and apprehension. The anxious types, i.e. specific phobias, social phobias,
individual also shows combinations of the and agoraphobia.
following symptoms: rapid heart rate, Specific phobias are the most
shortness of breath, diarrhoea, loss of commonly occurring type of phobia. This
appetite, fainting, dizziness, sweating, group includes irrational fears such as
sleeplessness, frequent urination and intense fear of a certain type of animal, or
tremors. There are many types of anxiety of being in an enclosed space. Intense and
disorders (see Table 4.1). They include incapacitating fear and embarrassment
generalised anxiety disorder, which when dealing with others characterises
consists of prolonged, vague, unexplained social anxiety disorder (social phobia).
and intense fears that are not attached Agoraphobia is the term used when
to any particular object. The symptoms people develop a fear of entering

76
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



unfamiliar situations. Many people with going to school alone, are fearful of
agoraphobia are afraid of leaving their entering new situations, and cling to and
home. So their ability to carry out normal shadow their parents’ every move. To avoid
life activities is severely limited. separation, children with SAD may fuss,

Separation anxiety disorder (SAD) is scream, throw severe tantrums, or make
another type of anxiety disorder. suicidal gestures.
Individuals with separation anxiety
disorder are fearful and anxious about Obsessive-Compulsive and Related
separation from attachment figures to an Disorders
extent that is developmentally not

Have you ever noticed someone
appropriate. Children with SAD may have

washing their hands everytime they
difficulty being in a room by themselves,

touch something, or washing even things
like coins, or stepping only within the
patterns on the floor or road while

Activity walking? People affected by obsessive-
Recall how you felt before your

4.3 Class X Board examination. How did compulsive disorder are unable to
you feel when the examinations were control their preoccupation with specific
drawing near (one month before the ideas or are unable to prevent themselves
examinations; one week before the from repeatedly carrying out a particular
examinations; on the day of the act or series of acts that affect their
examination, and when you were ability to carry out normal activities.
entering the examination hall)? Also try

Obsessive behaviour is the inability to
to recollect what you felt when you
were awaiting your results. Write down stop thinking about a particular idea or
your experiences in terms of bodily topic. The person involved, often finds
symptoms (e.g. ‘butterflies in the these thoughts to be unpleasant and
stomach’, clammy hands, excessive shameful. Compulsive behaviour is the
perspiration, etc.) as well as mental need to perform certain behaviours over
experiences (e.g. tension, worry,

and over again. Many compulsions deal
pressure, etc.). Compare your
symptoms with those of your with counting, ordering, checking,
classmates and classify them as Mild, touching and washing. Other disorders
Moderate, or Severe. in this category include hoarding

Table 4.1 : Major Anxiety Disorders and their Symptoms

1. Generalised Anxiety Disorder : prolonged, vague, unexplained and intense fears that have no
object, accompanied by hypervigilance and motor tension.

2. Panic Disorder : frequent anxiety attacks characterised by feelings of intense terror and
dread; unpredictable ‘panic attacks’ along with physiological symptoms like breathlessness,
palpitations, trembling, dizziness, and a sense of loosing control or even dying.

3. Specific Phobia : irrational fears related to specific objects, interactions with others, and
unfamiliar situations.

4. Separation Anxiety Disorder : extreme distress when expecting or going through separation
from home or other significant people to whom the individual is immensely attached to.

5. Other disorders included under this category are Selective Mutism, Substance/Medication-
Induced Anxiety Disorder, Anxiety Disorder Due to Another Medical condition, etc.

77
Chapter 4 • Psychological Disorders

Reprint 2025-26



disorder, trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder are overly concerned about
disorder), excoriation (skin-picking) undiagnosed disease, negative diagnostic
disorder etc. results, do not respond to assurance by

doctors, and are easily alarmed about
Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders illness such as on hearing about someone

Very often people who have been else's ill-health or some such news.

caught in a natural disaster (such as In general, both somatic symptom
tsunami) or have been victims of bomb disorder and illness anxiety disorder are
blasts by terrorists, or been in a serious concerned with medical illnesses. But,
accident or in a war-related situation, the difference lies in the way this concern
experience post-traumatic stress is expressed. In the case of somatic
disorder (PTSD). PTSD symptoms vary symptom disorder, this expression is in
widely but may include recurrent dreams, terms of physical complaints while in
flashbacks, impaired concentration, and case of illness anxiety disorder, as the
emotional numbing. Adjustment name suggests, it is the anxiety which
Disorders and Acute Stress Disorder are is the main concern.
also included under this category. The symptoms of conversion

disorders are the reported loss of part
Somatic Symptom and Related or all of some basic body functions.
Disorders Paralysis, blindness, deafness and

These are conditions in which there are difficulty in walking are generally among

physical symptoms in the absence of a the symptoms reported. These symptoms

physical disease. In these disorders, the often occur after a stressful experience

individual has psychological difficulties and may be quite sudden.

and complains of physical symptoms, for
which there is no biological cause. These Dissociative Disorders

include conversion disorders, somatic Dissociation can be viewed as severance
symptom disorder, and illness anxiety of the connections between ideas and
disorder among others. emotions. Dissociation involves feelings of

Somatic symptom disorder involves unreality, estrangement, depersonalisation,
a person having persistent body-related and sometimes a loss or shift of identity.
symptoms which may or may not be Sudden temporary alterations of
related to any serious medical condition. consciousness that blot out painful
People with this disorder tend to be overly experiences are a defining characteristic
preoccupied with their symptoms and they of dissociative disorders. Conditions
continually worry about their health and included in this are Dissociative Amnesia,
make frequent visits to doctors. As a Dissociative Identity Disorder, and
result, they experience significant distress Depersonalisation/Derealisation Disorder.
and disturbances in their daily life. Salient features of somatic symptom and

Illness anxiety disorder involves related disorders and dissociative disorders
persistent preoccupation about developing are given in Box 4.1.
a serious illness and constantly worrying Dissociative amnesia is characterised
about this possibility. This is by extensive but selective memory loss that
accompanied by anxiety about one’s has no known organic cause (e.g., head
health. Individuals with illness anxiety injury). Some people cannot remember

78
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Salient Features of Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders and Dissociative Disorders Box
4.1

Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders Dissociative Disorders

Somatic Symptom Disorder : The person Dissociative amnesia : The person is unable
experiences body-related symptoms in the to recall important, personal information
absence of any medical condition (or even often related to a stressful and traumatic
if medical condition is present, it is not as report. The extent of forgetting is beyond
serious as the symptoms presented). normal.

Illness Anxiety Disorder : The person Depersonalisation/Derealisation Disorder :
experiences worry about the possibility of The person experiences a change in the
developing a serious medical condition. person's sense of reality and perception

of self.
Conversion : The person suffers from a loss
or impairment of motor or sensory function Dissociative identity (multiple personality)
(e.g., paralysis, blindness, etc.) that has no Disorder : The person exhibits two or more
physical cause but may be a response to separate and contrasting personalities,
stress and psychological problems. generally associated with a history of abuse.

anything about their past. Others can no Depressive Disorders
longer recall specific events, people, places,

One of the most widely prevalent and
or objects, while their memory for other

recognised of all mental disorders is
events remains intact. A part of dissociative

depression. Depression covers a variety
amnesia is dissociative fugue. Essential

of negative moods and behavioural
feature of this could be an unexpected

changes. Depression can refer to a
travel away from home and workplace, the

symptom or a disorder. In day-to-day life,
assumption of a new identity, and the

we often use the term depression to refer
inability to recall the previous identity. The

to normal feelings after a significant loss,
fugue usually ends when the person
suddenly ‘wakes up’ with no memory of the such as the break-up of a relationship, or

events that occurred during the fugue. This the failure to attain a significant goal.

disorder is often associated with an Major depressive disorder is defined as

overwhelming stress. a period of depressed mood and/or loss of

Dissociative identity disorder, often interest or pleasure in most activities,

referred to as multiple personality, is the together with other symptoms which may

most dramatic of the dissociative include change in body weight, constant

disorders. It is often associated with sleep problems, tiredness, inability to

traumatic experiences in childhood. In think clearly, agitation, greatly slowed

this disorder, the person assumes behaviour, and thoughts of death and
alternate personalities that may or may suicide. Other symptoms include excessive
not be aware of each other. guilt or feelings of worthlessness.

Depersonalisation/Derealisation Factors Predisposing towards
disorder involves a dreamlike state in Depression : Genetic make-up, or heredity
which the person has a sense of being is an important risk factor for major
separated both from self and from reality. depression and other depressive
In depersonalisation, there is a change disorders. Age is also a risk factor. For
of self-perception, and the person’s sense instance, women are particularly at risk
of reality is temporarily lost or changed. during young adulthood, while for men

79
Chapter 4 • Psychological Disorders

Reprint 2025-26



the risk is highest in early middle age. of life. Previous suicidal attempt is the
Similarly gender also plays a great role strongest risk factor.
in this differential risk addition. For Often, suicidal behavior indicates
example, women in comparison to men difficulties in problem-solving, stress
are more likely to report a depressive management, and emotional expression.
disorder. Other risk factors are Suicidal thoughts lead to suicidal action
experiencing negative life events and lack only when acting on these thoughts seems
of social support. to be the only way out of a person’s

difficulties. These thoughts are
Bipolar and Related Disorders heightened under acute emotional and

Bipolar I disorder involves both mania other distress. The ramifications of

and depression, which are alternately suicide on social circle and communities

present and sometimes interrupted by tend to be devastating and long-lasting.

periods of normal mood. Manic episodes The stigma surrounding suicide

rarely appear by themselves; they continues despite recent advances in

usually alternate with depression. research in this field. Due to this, many

Bipolar mood disorders were earlier people who are contemplating or even

referred to as manic-depressive disorders. attempting suicide do not seek help thus,

Some examples of types of bipolar and preventing timely help from reaching
related disorders include Bipolar I them. Therefore improving identification,
Disorder, Bipolar II disorder and referral, and management of behaviour

Cyclothymic Disorder. are crucial for preventing suicide.

Every suicide is a misfortune. Suicide Therefore we need to identify
takes place throughout the lifespan. vulnerability; comprehend the
Suicide is a result of complex interface circumstances leading to such behaviour
of biological, genetic, psychological, and accordingly plan interventions.
sociological, cultural and environmental Suicides are preventable. There is a
factors. need for comprehensive multi-sectoral

Some other risk factors are having approach where the government, media
mental disorders (especially depression and civil society all play important role
and alcohol use disorders), going through as stakeholders. Some measures
natural disasters, experiencing violence, suggested by WHO include:
abuse or loss and isolation at any stage • limiting access to the means of suicide;

• reporting of suicide by media in a
responsible way;

Activity You may have got some bad news in • bringing in alcohol-related policies;
4.4 the family (for example, death of a • early identification, treatment and

close relative) or watched your care of people at risk;
favourite character dying in a film or • training health workers in assessing
got less marks than you hoped for or

and managing for suicide;
lost your pet. This may have made you
sad and depressed and hopeless • care for people who attempted suicide
about the future. Try and recall such and providing community support.
incidents in your life. List the
situations that led to this reaction. Identifying students in distress : Any
Compare your list and reactions with unexpected or striking change affecting
those of others in class. the adolescent’s performance, attendance

80
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



or behaviour should be taken seriously, positive symptoms (i.e. excesses of
such as: thought, emotion, and behaviour),

negative symptoms (i.e. deficits of
• lack of interest in common activities

thought, emotion, and behaviour), and
• declining grades

psychomotor symptoms.
• decreasing effort

Positive symptoms are ‘pathological
• misbehavior in the classroom

excesses’ or ‘bizarre additions’ to a
• mysterious or repeated absence

person’s behaviour. Delusions,
• smoking or drinking, or drug misuse

disorganised thinking and speech,

Strengthening students’ self-esteem : heightened perception and hallucinations,

Having a positive self-esteem is important and inappropriate affect are the ones most

in face of distress and helps in coping often found in schizophrenia.

adequately. In order to foster positive self- Many people with schizophrenia

esteem in children the following develop delusions. A delusion is a false

approaches can be useful: belief that is firmly held on inadequate
grounds. It is not affected by rational

• accentuating positive life experiences argument, and has no basis in reality.
to develop positive identity. This Delusions of persecution are the most
increases confidence in self. common in schizophrenia. People with

• providing opportunities for this delusion believe that they are being
development of physical, social and plotted against, spied on, slandered,
vocational skills.

• establishing a trustful communication.
Can you list some characters in films Activity

• goals for the students should be
you have seen or books you have read 4.5

specific, measurable, achievable, who suffered from any of the disorders
relevant, to be completed within a we have studied here like depression
relevant time frame. or schizophrenia showing some of

these delusions?

Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Can you identify which kind of

Psychotic Disorders delusion each of these is?
1. A person who believes that s/he

Schizophrenia is the descriptive term for is going to be the next President of

a group of psychotic disorders in which India.
2. One who believes that the

personal, social and occupational
intelligence agencies/police are

functioning deteriorate as a result of conspiring to trap her/him in a spy
disturbed thought processes, strange scandal.
perceptions, unusual emotional states, 3. One who believes that s/he is the

and motor abnormalities. It is a incarnation of God and can make

debilitating disorder. The social and things happen.
4. One who believes that the tsunami

psychological costs of schizophrenia are
occurred to prevent her/him from

tremendous, both to patients as well as enjoying her/his holidays.
to their families and society. 5. One who believes that her/his

actions are controlled by the
Symptoms of Schizophrenia satellite through a chip implanted

in her/his brain by some
The symptoms of schizophrenia can be extraterrestrial beings.
grouped into three categories, viz.

81
Chapter 4 • Psychological Disorders

Reprint 2025-26



threatened, attacked or deliberately People with schizophrenia also show
victimised. People with schizophrenia inappropriate affect, i.e. emotions that
may also experience delusions of are unsuited to the situation.
reference in which they attach special Negative symptoms are ‘pathological
and personal meaning to the actions of deficits’ and include poverty of speech,
others or to objects and events. In blunted and flat affect, loss of volition,
delusions of grandeur, people believe and social withdrawal. People with
themselves to be specially empowered schizophrenia show alogia or poverty of
persons and in delusions of control, they speech, i.e. a reduction in speech and
believe that their feelings, thoughts and speech content. Many people with
actions are controlled by others. schizophrenia show less anger, sadness,

People with schizophrenia may not be joy, and other feelings than most people
able to think logically and may speak in do. Thus they have blunted affect. Some
peculiar ways. These formal thought show no emotions at all, a condition
disorders can make communication known as flat affect. Also patients with
extremely difficult. These include rapidly schizophrenia experience avolition, or
shifting from one topic to another so that apathy and an inability to start or
the normal structure of thinking is complete a course of action. People with
muddled and becomes illogical (loosening this disorder may withdraw socially and
of associations, derailment), inventing new become totally focused on their own ideas
words or phrases (neologisms), and and fantasies.
persistent and inappropriate repetition of People with schizophrenia also show
the same thoughts (perseveration). psychomotor symptoms. They move less

People with schizophrenia may have spontaneously or make odd grimaces and
hallucinations, i.e. perceptions that gestures. These symptoms may take
occur in the absence of external stimuli. extreme forms known as catatonia.

Auditory hallucinations are most People in a catatonic stupor remain

common in schizophrenia. Patients hear motionless and silent for long stretches

sounds or voices that speak words, of time. Some show catatonic rigidity,

phrases and sentences directly to the i.e. maintaining a rigid, upright posture

patient (second-person hallucination) or for hours. Others exhibit catatonic

talk to one another referring to the posturing, i.e. assuming awkward,

patient as s/he (third-person hallucination). bizarre positions for long periods of time.

Hallucinations can also involve the other
senses. These include tactile Neurodevelopmental Disorders

hallucinations (i.e. forms of tingling, A common feature of the
burning), somatic hallucinations (i.e. neurodevelopmental disorders is that
something happening inside the body they manifest in the early stage of
such as a snake crawling inside one’s development. Often the symptoms appear
stomach), visual hallucinations (i.e. before the child enters school or during
vague perceptions of colour or distinct the early stage of schooling. These
visions of people or objects), gustatory disorders result in hampering personal,
hallucinations (i.e. food or drink taste social, academic and occupational
strange), and olfactory hallucinations functioning. These get characterised as
(i.e. smell of poison or smoke). deficits or excesses in a particular

82
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



behaviour or delays in achieving a have marked difficulties in social interaction
particular age-appropriate behaviour. and communication across different

We will now discuss several disorders contexts, a restricted range of interests, and
like Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity strong desire for routine. About 70 per cent
Disorder (ADHD), Autism Spectrum of children with autism  spectrum disorder
Disorder, Intellectual Disability, and have intellectual disabilities.
Specific Learning Disorder. These Children with autism spectrum
disorders, if not attended, can lead to disorder experience profound difficulties
more serious and chronic disorders as in relating to other people. They are
the child moves into adulthood. unable to initiate social behaviour and

The two main features of ADHD are seem unresponsive to other people’s
inattention  and hyperactivity- feelings. They are unable to share
impulsivity. Children who are experiences or emotions with others.
inattentive find it difficult to sustain They also show serious abnormalities in
mental effort during work or play. They communication and language that
have a hard time keeping their minds on persist over time. Many of them never
any one thing or in following develop speech and those who do, have
instructions. Common complaints are repetitive and deviant speech patterns.
that the child does not listen, cannot Such children often show narrow
concentrate, does not follow instructions, patterns of interests and repetitive
is disorganised, easily distracted, behaviours such as lining up objects or
forgetful, does not finish assignments, stereotyped body movements such as
and is quick to lose interest in boring rocking. These motor movements may be
activities. Children who are impulsive self-stimulatory such as hand flapping
seem unable to control their immediate or self-injurious such as banging their
reactions or to think before they act. They head against the wall.  Due to the nature
find it difficult to wait or take turns, have of these difficulties in terms of verbal
difficulty resisting immediate temptations and non-verbal communication,
or delaying gratification. Minor mishaps individuals with autism spectrum
such as knocking things over are common disorder tend to experience difficulties
whereas more serious accidents and in starting, maintaining and even
injuries can also occur. Hyperactivity

understanding relationships.
also takes many forms. Children with

You have already read about
ADHD are in constant motion. Sitting still

variations in intelligence in Chapter 1.
through a lesson is impossible for them.

Intellectual disability refers to below
The child may fidget, squirm, climb and

average intellectual functioning (with an
run around the room aimlessly. Parents

IQ of approximately 70 or below), and
and teachers describe them as ‘driven by
a motor’, always on the go, and talk deficits or impairments in adaptive

incessantly. behaviour (i.e. in the areas of

Autism Spectrum Disorder is communication, self-care, home living,

characterised by widespread impairments social/interpersonal skills, functional

in social interaction and communication academic skills, work, etc.) which are

skills, and stereotyped patterns of manifested before the age of 18 years.
behaviours, interests and activities. Table 4.2 describes characteristics of the
Children with autism spectrum disorder intellectually disabled persons.

83
Chapter 4 • Psychological Disorders

Reprint 2025-26



In case of specific learning disorder, the name-calling, swearing), physical
individual experiences difficulty in aggression (i.e. hitting, fighting), hostile
perceiving or processing information aggression (i.e. directed at inflicting
efficiently and accurately. These get injury to others), and proactive
manifested during early school years and aggression (i.e. dominating and bullying
the individual encounters problems in basic others without provocation).
skills in reading, writing and/or
mathematics. The affected child tends to Feeding and Eating Disorders
perform below average for her/his age. Another group of disorders which are of
However, individuals may be able to reach special interest to young people are
acceptable performance levels with eating disorders. These include anorexia
additional inputs and efforts. Specific nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating.
learning disorder is likely to impair In anorexia nervosa, the individual
functioning and performance in activities/ has a distorted body image that leads her/
occupations dependent on the related skills. him to see herself/himself as overweight.

Often refusing to eat, exercising
Disruptive, Impulse-Control and compulsively and developing unusual
Conduct Disorders habits such as refusing to eat in front of
The disorders included under this others, the person with anorexia may lose
category are Oppositional Defiant large amounts of weight and even starve
Disorder, Conduct Disorder and others. herself/himself to death. In bulimia
Children with Oppositional Defiant nervosa, the individual may eat excessive
Disorder (ODD) display age-inappropriate amounts of food, then purge her/his body
amounts of stubbornness, are irritable, of food by using medicines such as
defiant, disobedient, and behave in a laxatives or diuretics or by vomiting. The

hostile manner. Individuals with ODD do person often feels disgusted and ashamed

not see themselves as angry, when s/he binges and is relieved of

oppositional, or defiant and often justify tension and negative emotions after

their behaviour as reaction to purging. In binge eating, there are

circumstances/demands. Thus, the frequent episodes of out-of-control eating.

symptoms of the disorder become The individual tends to eat at a higher

entangled with the problematic speed than normal and continues eating
till s/he feels uncomfortably full. In fact,

interactions with others. The terms
large amount of food may be eaten even

conduct disorder and antisocial
when the individual is not feeling hungry.

behaviour refer to age-inappropriate
actions and attitudes that violate family

Substance-Related and Addictive
expectations, societal norms, and the

Disorders
personal or property rights of others. The
behaviours typical of conduct disorder Addictive behaviour, whether it involves
include aggressive actions that cause or excessive intake of high calorie food
threaten harm to people or animals, non- resulting in extreme obesity or involving
aggressive conduct that causes property the abuse of substances such as alcohol
damage, major deceitfulness or theft, and or cocaine, is one of the most severe
serious rule violations. Children show problems being faced by society today.
many different types of aggressive Disorders relating to maladaptive
behaviour, such as verbal aggression (i.e. behaviours resulting from regular and

84
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Table 4.2 : Characteristics of Individuals with Different Levels of Intellectual Disability

Area of Mild Moderate Severe
Functioning (IQ range = 55 to (IQ range = 35–40 (IQ range = 20–25 to

approximately 70) to approximately approximately 35–40)
50–55) and Profound

(IQ = below 20–25)

Self-help Skills Feeds and dresses Has difficulties and No skills to partial
self and cares for requires training but skills, but some can
own toilet needs can learn adequate care for personal needs

self-help skills on limited basis

Speech and Receptive and Receptive and Receptive language
Communication expressive language expressive language is limited;

is adequate; is adequate; expressive language
understands has speech problems is poor
communication

Academics Optimal learning Very few academic No academic skills
environment; third skills; first or second
to sixth grade grade is maximal

Social Skills Has friends; can Capable of making Not capable of having
learn to adjust friends but has real friends; no social
quickly difficulty in many interactions

social situations

Vocational Can hold a job; Sheltered work Generally no
Adjustment competitive to semi- environment; usually employment; usually

competitive; primarily needs consistent needs constant care
unskilled work supervision

Adult Living Usually marries, Usually does not No marriage or
has children; needs marry or have children; always
help during stress children; dependent dependent on others

consistent use of the substance involved and ability to think and work.  Their bodies
are included under substance related and then build up a tolerance for alcohol and
addictive disorders. These disorders they need to drink even greater amounts to
include problems associated with the use feel its effects. They also experience
and abuse of alcohol, cocaine, tobacco withdrawal responses when they stop
and opiods among others, which alter the drinking. Alcoholism destroys millions of
way people think, feel and behave. While families, social relationships and careers.

there are many disorders listed under Intoxicated drivers are responsible for many

this category, few frequently  used road accidents. It also has serious effects on

substances are discussed below: the children of persons with this disorder.
These children have higher rates of

Alcohol psychological problems, particularly anxiety,
depression, phobias and substance-related

People who abuse alcohol drink large disorders. Excessive drinking can seriously
amounts regularly and rely on it to help damage physical health. Some of the ill-
them face difficult situations. Eventually the effects of alcohol on health and psychological
drinking interferes with their social behaviour functioning are presented in Box 4.2.

85
Chapter 4 • Psychological Disorders

Reprint 2025-26



Box Effects of Alcohol : Some Facts

4.2
• All alcohol beverages contain ethyl alcohol.
• This chemical is absorbed into the blood and carried into the central nervous system

(brain and spinal cord) where it depresses or slows down functioning.
• Ethyl alcohol depresses those areas in the brain that control judgment and inhibition;

people become more talkative and friendly, and they feel more confident and happy.
• As alcohol is absorbed, it affects other areas of the brain. For example, drinkers are

unable to make sound judgments, speech becomes less careful and less clear, and
memory falters; many people become emotional, loud and aggressive.

• Motor difficulties increase. For example, people become unsteady when they walk and
clumsy in performing simple activities; vision becomes blurred and they have trouble
in hearing; they have difficulty in driving or in solving simple problems.

Heroin and function poorly in social
relationships and at work. It may also

Heroin intake significantly interferes
cause problems in short-term memory

with social and occupational
and attention. Dependence may develop,

functioning. Most abusers further
so that cocaine dominates the person’s

develop a dependence on heroin,
life, more of the drug is needed to get

revolving their lives around the
the desired effects, and stopping it

substance, building up a tolerance for
results in feelings of depression, fatigue,

it, and experiencing a withdrawal
sleep problems, irritability and anxiety.

reaction when they stop taking it. The
Cocaine poses serious dangers. It has

most direct danger of heroin abuse is
dangerous effects on psychological

an overdose, which slows down the
functioning and physical well-being.

respiratory centres in the brain, almost
Some of the commonly abused

paralysing breathing, and in many
substances are given in Box 4.3.

cases causing death.

Cocaine

Regular use of cocaine may lead to a
pattern of abuse in which the person
may be intoxicated throughout the day

Box Commonly Abused Substances (Following the DSM-5 Classification)
4.3

• Alcohol
• Stimulants: dextroamphetamines, metaamphetamines, cocaine
• Caffeine: coffee, tea, caffeinated soda, analgesics, chocolate, cocoa
• Cannabis: marijuana or ‘bhang’
• Hallucinogens: LSD, mescaline
• Inhalants: gasoline, glue, paint thinners, spray paints, typewriter correction fluid,

sprays
• Tobacco: cigarettes, bidi
• Opioid: morphine, heroin, cough syrup, painkillers (analgesics, anaesthetics)
• Sedatives, Hypnotics or Anxiolytics : sleeping pills, anti-anxiety medication

86
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Key Terms
Abnormal psychology, Antisocial behaviour, Anxiety, Autism spectrum disorder, Bipolar and related
disorders, Deinstitutionalisation, Delusions, Depressive disorders, Diathesis-stress model, Feeding
and eating disorders, Genetics, Hallucinations, Hyperactivity, Intellectual disability,
Neurodevelopmental disorders, Neurotransmitters, Norms, Obsessive-compulsive disorders, Phobias,
Schizophrenia, Somatic symptom and related disorders, Substance related and addictive disorders.

• Abnormal behaviour is behaviour that is deviant, distressing, dysfunctional, and
dangerous. Those behaviours are seen as abnormal which represent a deviation
from social norms and which interfere with optimal functioning and growth.

• In the history of abnormal behaviour, the three perspectives are, i.e. the supernatural,
the biological or organic, and the psychological. In interactional or bio-psycho-social
approach, all three factors, viz. biological, psychological and social play important
roles in psychological disorders.

• Classification of psychological disorders has been done by the WHO (ICD-10) and
the American Psychiatric Association (DSM-5).

• A variety of models have been used to explain abnormal behaviour. These are the
biological, psychodynamic, behavioural, cognitive, humanistic-existential, diathesis-
stress systems, and socio-cultural approaches.

• The major psychological disorders include anxiety, obsessive-compulsive and related,
trauma-and stressor-related, somatic symptom and related, dissociative, depressive,
bipolar and related, schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic,
neurodevelopmental, disruptive, impulse-control and conduct, feeding and eating,
and substance related and addictive disorders.

Review Questions

1. Identify the symptoms associated with depression and mania.
2. Describe the characteristics of children with hyperactivity.
3. What are the consequences of alcohol substance addiction?
4. Can a distorted body image lead to eating disorders? Classify the various forms of it.
5. “Physicians make diagnosis looking at a person’s physical symptoms”. How are

psychological disorders diagnosed?
6. Distinguish between obsessions and compulsions.
7. Can a long-standing pattern of deviant behaviour be considered abnormal? Elaborate.
8. While speaking in public the patient changes topics frequently, is this a positive or

a negative symptom of schizophrenia? Describe the other symptoms of
schizophrenia.

9. What do you understand by the term ‘dissociation’? Discuss its various forms.
10. What are phobias? If someone had an intense fear of snakes, could this simple phobia

be a result of faulty learning? Analyse how this phobia could have developed.
11. Anxiety has been called the “butterflies in the stomach feeling”. At what stage does

anxiety become a disorder? Discuss its types.

87
Chapter 4 • Psychological Disorders

Reprint 2025-26



1. All of us have changes in mood or mood swings all day. Keep a small diary or notebook with
Project

you and jot down your emotional experiences over 3–4 days. As you go through the day (for
Ideas instance, when you wake up, go to school/college, meet your friends, return home), you

will observe that there are many highs and lows, ups and downs in your moods. Note down
when you felt happy or unhappy, felt joy or sadness, felt anger, irritation and other commonly
experienced emotions. Also note down the situations which elicited these various emotions.
After collecting this information, you will have a better understanding of your own moods
and how they fluctuate through the day.

2. Studies have shown that current standards of physical attractiveness have contributed to
eating disorders. Thinness is valued in fashion models, actors, and dancers. To study this,
observe the people around you. Select at least 10 people (they may include your family,
friends and other acquaintances), and rate them in terms of Large, Average and Thin. Then
pick up any fashion or film magazine. Look at the pictures of models, winners of beauty
competitions, and film stars. Write a paragraph or two describing the magazine’s message
to its readers about the normal or acceptable male or female body. Does this view match
what you see as normal body types in the general population?

3. Make a list of movies, TV shows, or plays you have seen where a particular psychological
disorder has been highlighted. Match the symptoms shown to the ones you have read.
Prepare a report.

Weblinks
http://www.mental-health-matters.com/disorders
http://psyweb.com
http://mentalhealth.com

Pedagogical Hints
1. The contents on psychological

disorders have to be handled
sensitively. After becoming familiar
with various kinds of disorders and
their symptoms, students may
begin to feel and may express that
they are suffering from one or more
of the given disorders. It is
important to explain to the
students, not to draw any definite
conclusions on the basis of some
signs/symptoms experienced.

2. Students need to be made aware
that mere knowledge and
information about psychological
disorders do not provide the
necessary skills for either
diagnosing or treating
psychological disorders.

3. Students should be discouraged
from attempting to treat each
other, as they are not qualified to
do so. Specialised training in
clinical psychology/counselling is
required to undertake psycho-
diagnostic testing.

88
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



THERAPEUTIC APPROACHES

After reading this chapter, you would be able to:
familiarise yourself with the basic nature and process of psychotherapy,
appreciate that there are different types of therapies for helping people,
understand the use of psychological forms of intervention, and
know how people with mental disorders can be rehabilitated.

Nature and Process of Psychotherapy
Therapeutic Relationship

Type of Therapies
Steps in the Formulation of a Client’s Problem (Box 5.1)
Behaviour Therapy
Relaxation Procedures (Box 5.2)
Cognitive Therapy
Humanistic-existential Therapy
Alternative Therapies

Rehabilitation of the Mentally Ill
CONTENTS

Key Terms
Summary
Review Questions
Project Ideas
Weblinks
Pedagogical Hints

89
##5##
Chapter 5 • Therapeutic Approaches

Reprint 2025-26



In the preceding chapter, you have studied about major psychological
disorders and the distress caused by them to the patient and others. In this
chapter, you will learn about the various therapeutic methods that are used
by psychotherapists to help their patients. There are various types of
psychotherapy. Some of them focus on acquiring self-understanding; other
therapies are more action-oriented. All approaches hinge on the basic issue
of helping the patient overcome her/his debilitating condition. The
effectiveness of a therapeutic approach for a patient depends on a number

Introduction of factors such as severity of the disorder, degree of distress faced by others,
and the availability of time, effort and money, among others.

All therapeutic approaches are corrective and helping in nature. All of
them involve an interpersonal relationship between the therapist and the
client or patient. Some of them are directive in nature, such as
psychodynamic, while some are non-directive such as person-centred. In
this chapter, we will briefly discuss some of the major forms of
psychotherapy.

NATURE AND PROCESS OF P An untrained person may unintentionally
SYCHOTHERAPY

cause more harm than any good, (iii) the
Psychotherapy is a voluntary relationship therapeutic situation involves a therapist
between the one seeking treatment or the and a client who seeks and receives help

client and the one who treats or the for her/his emotional problems (this

therapist. The purpose of the relationship person is the focus of attention in the

is to help the client to solve the therapeutic process), and (iv) the

psychological problems being faced by her interaction of these two persons — the

or him. The relationship is conducive for therapist and the client — results in the
consolidation/formation of the therapeutic

building the trust of the client so that
relationship. This is a confidential,

problems may be freely discussed.
interpersonal, and dynamic relationship.

Psychotherapies aim at changing the
This human relationship is central to any

maladaptive behaviours, decreasing the
sort of psychological therapy and is the

sense of personal distress, and helping
vehicle for change.

the client to adapt better to her/his
All psychotherapies aim at a few or

environment. Inadequate marital, all of the following goals :
occupational and social adjustment also (i) Reinforcing client’s resolve for
requires that major changes be made in betterment.
an individual’s personal environment. (ii) Lessening emotional pressure.

All psychotherapeutic approaches have (iii) Unfolding the potential for positive
the following characteristics : (i) there is growth.
systematic application of principles (iv) Modifying habits.
underlying the different theories of therapy, (v) Changing thinking patterns.
(ii) persons who have received practical (vi) Increasing self-awareness.
training under expert supervision can (vii) Improving interpersonal relations
practice psychotherapy, and not everybody. and communication.

90
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



(viii) Facilitating decision-making. sympathy, one has compassion and pity
(ix) Becoming aware of one’s choices in towards the suffering of another but is

life. not able to feel like the other person.
(x) Relating to one’s social environment Intellectual understanding is cold in the

in a more creative and self-aware sense that the person is unable to feel
manner. like the other person and does not feel

sympathy either. On the other hand,
Therapeutic Relationship empathy is present when one is able to

understand the plight of another person,
The special relationship between the

and feel like the other person. It means
client and the therapist is known as the

understanding things from the other
therapeutic relationship or alliance. It is

person’s perspective, i.e. putting oneself
neither a passing acquaintance, nor a

in the other person’s shoes. Empathy
permanent and lasting relationship.

enriches the therapeutic relationship and
There are two major components of a

transforms it into a healing relationship.
therapeutic alliance. The first component

The therapeutic alliance also requires
is the contractual nature of the

that the therapist must keep strict
relationship in which two willing

confidentiality of the experiences, events,
individuals, the client and the therapist,
enter into a partnership which aims at feelings or thoughts disclosed by the

helping the client overcome her/his client. The therapist must not exploit the

problems. The second component of trust and the confidence of the client in

therapeutic alliance is the limited anyway. Finally, it is a professional

duration of the therapy. This alliance relationship, and must remain so.

lasts until the client becomes able to deal
with her/his problems and take control A classmate or friend of yours or your Activity
of her/his life. This relationship has favourite character in a TV serial may 5.1

several unique properties. It is a trusting have recently experienced a negative

and confiding relationship.  The high or a traumatic life event (e.g., death

level of trust enables the client to of a loved one, break-up of an
important friendship or relationship)

unburden herself/himself to the therapist
of which you are aware. Try to put

and confide her/his psychological and
yourself in the other person’s shoes,

personal problems to the latter. The try to experience how that person is
therapist encourages this by being feeling, what s/he is thinking and try
accepting, empathic, genuine and warm to take her/his perspective of the
to the client. The therapist conveys by entire situation. This will help you to
her/his words and behaviours that s/he understand better how that person is

is not judging the client and will continue feeling.

to show the same positive feelings (Note : This exercise may be done in
towards the client even if the client is class, so that teachers can help
rude or confides all the ‘wrong’ things students in overcoming any distress
that s/he may have done or thought experienced).

about. This is the unconditional positive
regard which the therapist has for the TYPE OF THERAPIES
client. The therapist has empathy for the
client. Empathy is different from Though all psychotherapies aim at
sympathy and intellectual understanding removing human distress and fostering
of another person’s situation. In effective behaviour, they differ greatly in

91
Chapter 5 • Therapeutic Approaches

Reprint 2025-26



concepts, methods, and techniques. thoughts and feelings of the client.

Psychotherapies may be classified into This material is interpreted to the

three broad groups, viz. the client to help her/him to confront and

psychodynamic, behaviour, and existential resolve the conflicts and thus overcome

psychotherapies. In terms of the problems. Behaviour therapy identifies

chronological order, psychodynamic the faulty conditioning patterns and

therapy emerged first followed by sets up alternate behavioural

behaviour therapy while the existential contingencies to improve behaviour.

therapies which are also called the third The cognitive methods employed in this

force, emerged last. The classification of type of therapy challenge the faulty

psychotherapies is based on the following thinking patterns of the client to help

parameters: her/him overcome psychological
distress. The existential therapy

1. What is the cause, which has led to the provides a therapeutic environment
problem? which is positive, accepting, and non-
Psychodynamic therapy is of the view judgmental. The client is able to talk
that intrapsychic conflicts, i.e. the about the problems and the therapist
conflicts that are present within the acts as a facilitator. The client arrives
psyche of the person, are the source at the solutions through a process of
of psychological problems. According personal growth.
to behaviour therapies, psychological

4. What is the nature of the therapeutic
problems arise due to faulty learning

relationship between the client and the
of behaviours and cognitions. The

therapist?
existential therapies postulate that

Psychodynamic therapy assumes
the questions about the meaning of

that the therapist understands the
one’s life and existence are the cause

client’s intrapsychic conflicts better
of psychological problems.

than the client and hence it is the
2. How did the cause come into existence? therapist who interprets the thoughts

In the psychodynamic therapy, and feelings of the client to her/him
unfulfilled desires of childhood and so that s/he gains an understanding
unresolved childhood fears lead to of the same. The behaviour therapy
intrapsychic conflicts. The behaviour assumes that the therapist is able to
therapy postulates that faulty discern the faulty behaviour and
conditioning patterns, faulty learning, thought patterns of the client. It
and faulty thinking and beliefs lead to further assumes that the therapist is
maladaptive behaviours that, in turn, capable of finding out the correct
lead to psychological problems. The behaviour and thought patterns,
existential therapy places importance which would be adaptive for the
on the present. It is the current client. Both the psychodynamic and
feelings of loneliness, alienation, sense the behaviour therapies assume that
of futility of one’s existence, etc., which the therapist is capable of arriving at
cause psychological problems. solutions to the client’s problems. In

3. What is the chief method of treatment? contrast to these therapies, the

Psychodynamic therapy uses the existential therapies emphasise that

methods of free association and the therapist merely provides a

reporting of dreams to elicit the warm, empathic relationship in
which the client feels secure to

92
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



explore the nature and causes of her/ oneself, and one’s aspirations,
his problems by herself/himself. emotions and motives.

5. What is the chief benefit to the client? 6. What is the duration of treatment?
Psychodynamic therapy values The duration of classical psycho-
emotional insight as the important analysis may continue for several
benefit that the client derives from years. However, several recent
the treatment. Emotional insight is versions of  psychodynamic therapies
present when the client understands are completed in 10–15 sessions.
her/his conflicts intellectually; is Behaviour and cognitive behaviour
able to accept the same emotionally; therapies as well as existential
and is able to change her/his therapies are shorter and are
emotions towards the conflicts. The completed in a few months.
client’s symptoms and distresses Thus, different types of psycho-
reduce as a consequence of this therapies differ on multiple parameters.
emotional insight. The behaviour However, they all share the common
therapy considers changing faulty method of providing treatment for
behaviour and thought patterns to psychological distress through psycho-
adaptive ones as the chief benefit of logical means. The therapist, the
the treatment. Instituting adaptive or therapeutic relationship, and the process
healthy behaviour and thought of therapy become the agents of change
patterns ensures reduction of in the client leading to the alleviation of
distress and removal of symptoms. psychological distress. The process of
The humanistic therapy values psychotherapy begins by formulating the
personal growth as the chief benefit. client’s problem. Steps involved in the
Personal growth is the process of formulation of a client’s problem are
gaining increasing understanding of given in Box 5.1.

Steps in the Formulation of a Client’s Problem Box
5.1

Clinical formulation refers to formulating the problem of the client in the therapeutic model
being used for the treatment. The clinical formulation has the following advantages:

1. Understanding of the problem : The therapist is able to understand the full implications
of the distress being experienced by the client.

2. Identification of the areas to be targetted for treatment in psychotherapy : The theoretical
formulation clearly identifies the problem areas to be targetted for therapy.  Thus, if a
client seeks help for inability to hold a job and reports inability to face superiors, the
clinical formulation in behaviour therapy would state it as lack of assertiveness skills
and anxiety.  The target areas have thus been identified as inability to assert oneself
and heightened anxiety.

3. Choice of techniques for treatment : The choice of techniques for treatment depends on
the therapeutic system in which the therapist has been trained. However, even within
this broad domain, the choice of techniques, timing of the techniques, and expectations
of outcome of the therapy depend upon the clinical formulation.

The clinical formulation is an ongoing process. Formulations may require reformulations
as clinical insights are gained in the process of therapy. Usually the first one or two sessions
yield enough clinical material for the initial clinical formulation.  It is not advisable to start
psychotherapy without a clinical formulation.

93
Chapter 5 • Therapeutic Approaches

Reprint 2025-26



Method of Treatment
Activity Gather information about some

5.2 institutions you know which offer The client with psychological distress or
psychiatric/psychotherapeutic help. with physical symptoms, which cannot

be attributed to physical disease, is
interviewed with a view to analyse her/
his behaviour patterns. Behavioural

The following sections explain different analysis is conducted to find
types of therapies three major systems malfunctioning behaviours, the
of psychotherapy mentioned earlier. antecedents of faulty learning, and the

factors that maintain or continue faulty
Behaviour Therapy

learning. Malfunctioning behaviours are
Behaviour therapies postulate that those behaviours which cause distress to
psychological distress arises because of the client. Antecedent factors are those
faulty behaviour patterns or thought causes which predispose the person to
patterns. It is, therefore, focused on the indulge in that behaviour. Maintaining
behaviour and thoughts of the client in factors are those factors which lead to the
the present. The past is relevant only to persistence of the faulty behaviour. An
the extent of understanding the origins example would be a young person who
of the faulty behaviour and thought has acquired the malfunctioning
patterns. The past is not activated or behaviour of smoking and seeks help to
relived. Only the faulty patterns are get rid of smoking. Behavioural analysis
corrected in the present. conducted by interviewing the client and

The clinical application of learning the family members reveals that the
theory principles constitute behaviour person started smoking when he was
therapy. Behaviour therapy consists of a preparing for the annual examination.
large set of specific techniques and He had reported relief from anxiety upon
interventions. It is not a unified theory, smoking. Thus, anxiety-provoking
which is applied irrespective of the situation becomes the causative or
clinical diagnosis or the symptoms antecedent factor. The feeling of relief
present. The symptoms of the client and becomes the maintaining factor for him
the clinical diagnosis are the guiding to continue smoking. The client has
factors in the selection of the specific acquired the operant response of
techniques or interventions to be applied. smoking, which is maintained by the
Treatment of phobias or excessive and reinforcing value of relief from anxiety.
crippling fears would require the use of Once the faulty behaviours which
one set of techniques while that of anger cause distress, have been identified, a
outbursts would require another. A treatment package is chosen. The aim of
depressed client would be treated the treatment is to extinguish or
differently from a client who is anxious. eliminate the faulty behaviours and
The foundation of behaviour therapy is substitute them with adaptive behaviour
on formulating dysfunctional or faulty patterns. The therapist does this through
behaviours, the factors which reinforce establishing antecedent operations and
and maintain these behaviours, and consequent operations. Antecedent
devising methods by which they can be operations control behaviour by changing
changed. something that precedes such a

behaviour. The change can be done by

94
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



increasing or decreasing the reinforcing or avoid and escape from them provide
value of a particular consequence. This negative reinforcement. For example, one
is called establishing operation. For learns to put on woollen clothes, burn
example, if a child gives trouble in eating firewood or use electric heaters to avoid the
dinner, an establishing operation would unpleasant cold weather. One learns to
be to decrease the quantity of food served move away from dangerous stimuli
at tea time. This would increase the because they provide negative
hunger at dinner and thereby increase reinforcement. Aversive conditioning
the reinforcing value of food at dinner. refers to repeated association of undesired
Praising the child when s/he eats response with an aversive consequence.
properly tends to encourage this behaviour. For example, an alcoholic is given a mild
The antecedent operation is the reduction electric shock and asked to smell the
of food at tea time and the consequent alcohol. With repeated pairings the smell of
operation is praising the child for eating alcohol is aversive as the pain of the shock
dinner. It establishes the response of is associated with it and the person will
eating dinner. give up alcohol. If an adaptive behaviour

Behavioural Techniques occurs rarely, positive reinforcement is
given to increase the deficit. For example,

A range of techniques is available for
if a child does not do homework regularly,

changing behaviour. The principles of
positive reinforcement may be used by the

these techniques are to reduce the
child’s mother by preparing the child’s

arousal level of the client, alter behaviour
favourite dish whenever s/he does

through classical conditioning or operant
homework at the appointed time. The

conditioning with different contingencies
positive reinforcement of food will increase

of reinforcements, as well as to use the behaviour of doing homework at the
vicarious learning procedures, if appointed time. Persons with behavioural
necessary. problems can be given a token as a reward

Negative reinforcement and aversive every time a wanted behaviour occurs.  The
conditioning are the two major techniques tokens are collected and exchanged for a
of behaviour modification. As you have reward such as an outing for the patient or
already studied in Class XI, responses that a treat for the child. This is known as
lead organisms to get rid of painful stimuli token economy.

Box
Relaxation Procedures

5.2
Anxiety is a manifestation of the psychological distress for which the client seeks treatment.
The behavioural therapist views anxiety as increasing the arousal level of the client, thereby
acting as an antecedent factor in causing the faulty behaviour. The client may smoke to
decrease anxiety, may indulge in other activities such as eating, or be unable to concentrate
for long hours on her/his study because of the anxiety. Therefore, reduction of anxiety would
decrease the unwanted behaviours of excessive eating or smoking. Relaxation procedures are
used to decrease the anxiety levels. For instance, progressive muscular relaxation and meditation
induce a state of relaxation. In progressive muscular relaxation, the client is taught to contract
individual muscle groups in order to give the awareness of tenseness or muscular tension.
After the client has learnt to tense the muscle group such as the forearm, the client is asked
to let go the tension. The client is told that the tension is what the client has at present and
that s/he has to get into the opposite state. With repeated practice the client learns to relax all
the muscles of the body. You will learn about meditation at a later point in this chapter.

95
Chapter 5 • Therapeutic Approaches

Reprint 2025-26



Unwanted behaviour can be reduced The principle of reciprocal inhibition
and wanted behaviour can be increased operates here. This principle states that
simultaneously through differential the presence of two mutually opposing
reinforcement. Positive reinforcement for forces at the same time, inhibits the
the wanted behaviour and negative weaker force. Thus, the relaxation
reinforcement for the unwanted response is first built up and mildly
behaviour attempted together may be anxiety-provoking scene is imagined, and
one such method. The other method is the anxiety is overcome by the relaxation.
to positively reinforce the wanted The client is able to tolerate progressively
behaviour and ignore the unwanted greater levels of anxiety because of her/
behaviour. The latter method is less his relaxed state. Modelling is the
painful and equally effective. For procedure wherein the client learns to
example, let us consider the case of a behave in a certain way by observing the
girl who sulks and cries when she is not behaviour of a role model or the therapist
taken to the cinema when she asks. The who initially acts as the role model.
parent is instructed to take her to the Vicarious learning, i.e. learning by
cinema if she does not cry and sulk but observing others, is used and through a
not to take her if she does. Further, the process of rewarding small changes in the
parent is instructed to ignore the girl behaviour, the client gradually learns to
when she cries and sulks. The wanted acquire the behaviour of the model.
behaviour of politely asking to be taken There is a great variety of techniques
to the cinema increases and the
unwanted behaviour of crying and Your friend is feeling very nervous Activity
sulking decreases. and panicky before the examinations. 5.3

You read about phobias or irrational S/he is pacing up and down, is
fears in the previous chapter. unable to study and feels s/he has

Systematic desensitisation is a forgotten all that s/he has learnt. Try

technique introduced by Wolpe for to help her/him to relax by inhaling
(taking in a deep breath), holding it

treating phobias or irrational fears. The for sometime (5–10 seconds), then
client is interviewed to elicit fear - exhaling (releasing the breath). Ask
provoking situations and together with her/him to repeat this 5–10 times.
the client, the therapist prepares a Also ask her/him to remain focused

hierarchy of anxiety-provoking stimuli on her/his breathing. You can do

with the least anxiety-provoking stimuli the same exercise when you feel
nervous.

at the bottom of the hierarchy. The
therapist relaxes the client and asks the
client to think about the least anxiety-

in behaviour therapy. The skill of the
provoking situation. Box 5.2 gives details

therapist lies in conducting an accurate
of relaxation procedures. The client is

behavioural analysis and building a
asked to stop thinking of the fearful

treatment package with the appropriate
situation if the slightest tension is felt.

techniques.
Over sessions, the client is able to
imagine more severe fear -provoking Cognitive Therapy
situations while maintaining the
relaxation. The client gets systematically Cognitive therapies locate the cause of
desensitised to the fear. psychological distress in irrational

96
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



thoughts and beliefs. Albert Ellis society develop core schemas or systems,
formulated the Rational Emotive which include beliefs and action patterns
Therapy (RET). The central thesis of this in the individual. Thus, a client, who was
therapy is that irrational beliefs mediate neglected by the parents as a child,
between the antecedent events and their develops the core schema of “I am not
consequences. The first step in RET is wanted”. During the course of life, a
the antecedent-belief-consequence (ABC) critical incident occurs in her/his life. S/
analysis. Antecedent events, which he is publicly ridiculed by the teacher in
caused the psychological distress, are school. This critical incident triggers the
noted. The client is also interviewed to core schema of “I am not wanted” leading
find the irrational beliefs, which are to the development of negative automatic
distorting the present reality. Irrational thoughts. Negative thoughts are
beliefs may not be supported by empirical persistent irrational thoughts such as
evidence in the environment. These “nobody loves me”, “I am ugly”, “I am
beliefs are characterised by thoughts stupid”, “I will not succeed”, etc. Such

with ‘musts’  and ‘shoulds’, i.e. things negative automatic thoughts are

‘must’ and ‘should’ be in a particular characterised by cognitive distortions.

manner.  Examples of irrational beliefs Cognitive distortions are ways of thinking

are, “One should be loved by everybody which are general in nature but which

all the time”,  “Human misery is caused distort the reality in a negative manner.

by external events over which one does These patterns of thought are called

not have any control”, etc. This distorted dysfunctional cognitive structures.

perception of the antecedent event due They lead to errors of cognition about the

to the irrational belief leads to the social reality.

consequence, i.e. negative emotions and Repeated occurrence of these

behaviours. Irrational beliefs are assessed thoughts leads to the development of

through questionnaires and interviews. feelings of anxiety and depression. The
therapist uses questioning, which is

In the process of RET, the irrational
gentle, non-threatening disputation of

beliefs are refuted by the therapist
the client’s beliefs and thoughts.

through a process of non-directive
Examples of such question would be,

questioning. The nature of questioning is
“Why should everyone love you?”, “What

gentle, without probing or being directive.
does it mean to you to succeed?”, etc.

The questions make the client to think
The questions make the client think in

deeper into her/his assumptions about
a direction opposite to that of the

life and problems. Gradually the client
negative automatic thoughts whereby s/

is able to change the irrational beliefs
he gains insight into the nature of her/

by making a change in her/his
his dysfunctional schemas, and is able

philosophy about life. The rational belief
to alter her/his cognitive structures. The

system replaces the irrational belief
aim of the therapy is to achieve this

system and there is a reduction in
cognitive restructuring which, in turn,

psychological distress.
Another cognitive therapy is that of reduces anxiety and depression.

Aaron Beck. His theory of psychological Similar to behaviour therapy,

distress characterised by anxiety or cognitive therapy focuses on solving a

depression, states that childhood specific problem of the client. Unlike

experiences provided by the family and psycho-dynamic therapy, behaviour

97
Chapter 5 • Therapeutic Approaches

Reprint 2025-26



therapy is open, i.e. the therapist shares become more complex, balanced, and
her/his method with the client.  It is integrated, i.e. achieving the complexity
short, lasting between 10–20 sessions. and balance without being fragmented.

Integrated means a sense of whole, being
Cognitive Behaviour Therapy a complete person, being in essence the

The most popular therapy presently is the same person in spite of the variety of

Cognitive Behaviour Therapy (CBT). experiences that one is subjected to. Just

Research into the outcome and as lack of food or water causes distress,

effectiveness of psychotherapy has frustration of self-actualisation also
causes distress.

conclusively established CBT to be a short
Healing occurs when the client is able

and efficacious treatment for a wide
to perceive the obstacles to self-

range of psychological disorders such as
actualisation in her/his life and is able

anxiety, depression, panic attacks, and
to remove them. Self-actualisation

borderline personality, etc. CBT adopts a
requires free emotional expression. The

bio-psychosocial approach to the
family and society curb emotional

delineation of psychopathology. It
expression, as it is feared that a free

combines cognitive therapy with
expression of emotions can harm society

behavioural techniques.
by unleashing destructive forces. This

The rationale is that the client’s
curb leads to destructive behaviour and

distress has its origins in the biological,
negative emotions by thwarting the

psychological, and social realms. Hence,
process of emotional integration.

addressing the biological aspects through
Therefore, the therapy creates a

relaxation procedures, the psychological
permissive, non-judgmental and accepting

ones through behaviour therapy and
atmosphere in which the client’s emotions

cognitive therapy techniques and the
can be freely expressed and the

social ones with environmental
complexity, balance and integration could

manipulations makes CBT a
be achieved. The fundamental assumption

comprehensive technique which is easy
is that the client has the freedom and

to use, applicable to a variety of disorders,
responsibility to control her/his own

and has proven efficacy.
behaviour. The therapist is merely a
facilitator and guide. It is the client who

Humanistic-existential Therapy
is responsible for the success of therapy.

The humanistic-existential therapies The chief aim of the therapy is to expand
postulate that psychological distress the client’s awareness. Healing takes
arises from feelings of loneliness, place by a process of understanding the
alienation, and an inability to find unique personal experience of the client
meaning and genuine fulfilment in life. by herself/himself. The client initiates the
Human beings are motivated by the desire process of self-growth through which
for personal growth and self- healing takes place.
actualisation, and an innate need to
grow emotionally. When these needs are Existential Therapy
curbed by society and family, human Victor Frankl, a psychiatrist and
beings experience psychological distress. neurologist propounded the Logotherapy.
Self-actualisation is defined as an innate Logos is the Greek word for soul and
or inborn force that moves the person to Logotherapy means treatment for the soul.

98
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Frankl calls this process of finding client’s experience as if it were her/his
meaning even in life-threatening own, is warm and has unconditional
circumstances as the process of meaning positive regard, i.e. total acceptance of
making. The basis of meaning making is the client as s/he is. Empathy sets up
a person’s quest for finding the spiritual an emotional resonance between the
truth of one’s existence. Just as there is therapist and the client. Unconditional
an unconscious, which is the repository positive regard indicates that the
of instincts (see Chapter 2), there is a positive warmth of the therapist is not
spiritual unconscious, which is the dependent on what the client reveals or
storehouse of love, aesthetic awareness, does in the therapy sessions. This
and values of life. Neurotic anxieties arise unique unconditional warmth ensures
when the problems of life are attached to that the client feels secure and can
the physical, psychological or spiritual trust the therapist. The client feels
aspects of one’s existence. Frankl secure enough to explore her/his
emphasised the role of spiritual anxieties feelings. The therapist reflects the
in leading to meaninglessness and hence feelings of the client in a non-
it may be called an existential anxiety, judgmental manner. The reflection is
i.e. neurotic anxiety of spiritual origin. achieved by rephrasing the statements
The goal of logotherapy is to help the of the client, i.e. seeking simple
patients to find meaning and clarifications to enhance the meaning of
responsibility in their life irrespective of the client’s statements. This process of
their life circumstances. The therapist reflection helps the client to become
emphasises the unique nature of the integrated. Personal relationships
patient’s life and encourages them to find improve with an increase in adjustment.
meaning in their life. In essence, this therapy helps a client

In Logotherapy, the therapist is open to become her/his real self with the
and shares her/his feelings, values and therapist working as a facilitator.
his/her own existence with the client. The
emphasis is on here and now. Gestalt Therapy
Transference is actively discouraged. The The German word gestalt means ‘whole’.
therapist reminds the client about the This therapy was given by Freiderick
immediacy of the present. The goal is to (Fritz) Perls together with his wife Laura
facilitate the client to find the meaning Perls. The goal of gestalt therapy is to
of her/his being. increase an individual’s self-awareness

and self-acceptance. The client is taught
Client-centred Therapy to recognise the bodily processes and the
Client-centred therapy was given by Carl emotions that are being blocked out from
Rogers. Rogers combined scientific awareness. The therapist does this by
rigour with the individualised practice encouraging the client to act out
of client-centred psychotherapy. Rogers fantasies about feelings and conflicts.
brought into psychotherapy the concept This therapy can also be used in

of self, with freedom and choice as the group settings.

core of one’s being. The therapy provides
a warm relationship in which the client Factors Contributing to Healing in

can reconnect with her/his Psychotherapy

disintegrated feelings. The therapist As we have read, psychotherapy is a
shows empathy, i.e. understanding the treatment of psychological distress. There

99
Chapter 5 • Therapeutic Approaches

Reprint 2025-26



are several factors which contribute to Ethics in Psychotherapy
the healing process. Some of these factors

Some of the ethical standards that need
are as follows :

to be practiced by professional psycho-
1. A major factor in the healing is the

therapists are :
techniques adopted by the therapist

1. Informed consent needs to be taken.
and the implementation of the same

2. Confidentiality of the client should be
with the patient/client. If the

maintained.
behavioural system and the CBT

3. Alleviating personal distress and
school are adopted to heal an anxious

suffering should be the goal of all
client, the relaxation procedures and

attempts of the therapist.
the cognitive restructuring largely

4. Integrity of the practitioner-client
contribute to the healing.

relationship is important.
2. The therapeutic alliance, which is

5. Respect for human rights and dignity.
formed between the therapist and the

6. Professional competence and skills are
patient/client, has healing properties,

essential.
because of the regular availability of
the therapist, and the warmth and

Alternative Therapies
empathy provided by the therapist.

3. At the outset of therapy while the Alternative therapies are so called,
patient/client is being interviewed in because they are alternative treatment
the initial sessions to understand the possibilities to the conventional drug
nature of the problem, s/he treatment or psychotherapy.  There are
unburdens the emotional problems many alternative therapies such as yoga,
being faced. This process of emotional meditation, acupuncture, herbal
unburdening is known as catharsis, remedies and so on.  In the past 25 years,
and it has healing properties. yoga and meditation have gained

4. There are several non-specific factors popularity as treatment programmes for
associated with psychotherapy. Some psychological distress.
of these factors are attributed to the Yoga is an ancient Indian technique
patient/client and some to the detailed in the Ashtanga Yoga of
therapist.  These factors are called Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras. Yoga as it is
non-specific because they occur commonly called today either refers to
across different systems of only the asanas or body posture
psychotherapy and across different component or to breathing practices or
clients/patients and different pranayama, or to a combination of the
therapists. Non-specific factors two. Meditation refers to the practice of
attributable to the client/patient are focusing attention on breath or on an
motivation for change, expectation of object or thought or a mantra. Here
improvement due to the treatment, attention is focused. In Vipasana
etc.  These are called patient variables. meditation, also known as mindfulness-
Non-specific factors attributable to based meditation, there is no fixed
the therapist are positive nature, object or thought to hold the attention.
absence of unresolved emotional The person passively observes the
conflicts, presence of good mental various bodily sensations and thoughts
health, etc. These are called therapist that are passing through in her or his
variables. awareness.

100
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



The rapid breathing techniques to REHABILITATION OF THE MENTALLY ILL
induce hyperventilation as in Sudarshana
Kriya Yoga (SKY) is found to be a beneficial, The treatment of psychological disorders
low-risk, low-cost adjunct to the treatment has two components, i.e. reduction of
of stress, anxiety, post-traumatic stress symptoms, and improving the level of
disorder (PTSD), depression, stress-related functioning or quality of life.  In the case
medical illnesses, substance abuse, and of milder disorders such as generalised
rehabilitation of criminal offenders. SKY anxiety, reactive depression or phobia,
has been used as a public health reduction of symptoms is associated with
intervention technique to alleviate PTSD in an improvement in the quality of life.
survivors of mass disasters. Yoga However, in the case of severe mental
techniques enhance well-being, mood, disorders such as schizophrenia,
attention, mental focus, and stress reduction of symptoms may not be
tolerance. Proper training by a skilled associated with an improvement in the
teacher and a 30-minute practice every day quality of life. Many patients suffer from
will maximise the benefits. Research negative symptoms such as disinterest
conducted at the National Institute of and lack of motivation to do work or to
Mental Health and Neurosciences interact with people. Rehabilitation is
(NIMHANS), India, has shown that SKY required to help such patients become
reduces depression. Further, alcoholic self-sufficient. The aim of rehabilitation
patients who practice SKY have reduced is to empower the patient to become a
depression and stress levels. Insomnia is productive member of society to the
treated with yoga.  Yoga reduces the time extent possible. In rehabilitation, the
to go to sleep and improves the quality patients are given occupational therapy,
of sleep. social skills training, and vocational

Kundalini Yoga taught in the USA has therapy. In occupational therapy, the
been found to be effective in treatment patients are taught skills such as candle
of mental disorders. The Institute for Non- making, paper bag making and weaving
linear Science, University of California, to help them to form a work discipline.
San Diego, USA has found that Kundalini Social skills training helps the patients
Yoga is ef fective in the treatment of to develop interpersonal skills through
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Kundalini role play, imitation and instruction. The
Yoga combines pranayama or breathing objective is to teach the patient to
techniques with chanting of mantras. function in a social group. Cognitive
Prevention of repeated episodes of retraining is given to improve the basic
depression may be helped by cognitive functions of attention, memory
mindfulness-based meditation or and executive functions. After the patient
Vipasana. This meditation would help the improves sufficiently, vocational training
patients to process emotional stimuli is given wherein the patient is helped to
better and hence prevent biases in the gain skills necessary to undertake
processing of these stimuli. productive employment.

Key Terms
Alternative therapy, Behaviour therapy, Client-centred therapy, Cognitive behaviour therapy,
Empathy, Gestalt therapy, Humanistic therapy, Psycho dynamic therapy, Psychotherapy,
Rehabilitation, Resistance, Self-actualisation, Therapeutic alliance, Unconditional positive regard.

101
Chapter 5 • Therapeutic Approaches

Reprint 2025-26



• Psychotherapy is a treatment for the healing of psychological distress. It is not a
homogenous treatment method. There are about 400 different types of psychotherapy.

• Psychoanalysis, behavioural, cognitive and humanistic-existential are the important
systems of psychotherapy. There are many schools within each of the above systems.

• The important components of psychotherapy are the clinical formulation, i.e. statement
of the client’s problem and treatment in the framework of a particular therapy.

• Therapeutic alliance is the relation between the therapist and the client in which the
client has trust in the therapist and the therapist has empathy for the client.

• The predominant mode of psychotherapy for adults with psychological distress is
individual psychotherapy. The therapist requires to be professionally trained before
embarking on the journey of psychotherapy.

• Alternative therapies such as some yogic and meditative practices have been found
to be effective in treating certain psychological disorders.

• Rehabilitation of the mentally ill is necessary to improve their quality of life once their
active symptoms are reduced.

Review Questions

1. Describe the nature and scope of psychotherapy. Highlight the importance of
therapeutic relationship in psychotherapy.

2. What are the different types of psychotherapy? On what basis are they classified?
3. Discuss the various techniques used in behaviour therapy.
4. Explain with the help of an example how cognitive distortions take place.
5. Which therapy encourages the client to seek personal growth and actualise their

potential? Write about the therapies which are based on this principle.
6. What are the factors that contribute to healing in psychotherapy? Enumerate

some of the alternative therapies.
7. What are the techniques used in the rehabilitation of the mentally ill?
8. How would a social learning theorist account for a phobic fear of lizards/

cockroaches? How would a psychoanalyst account for the same phobia?
9. What kind of problems is cognitive behaviour therapy best suited for?

Project 1. In school at times you get good points (or gold points or stars) when you do well and
Ideas bad or black points when you do something wrong. This is an example of a token

system. With the help of your classmates make a list of all those school and classroom
activities for which you are rewarded or receive praise from your teacher or appreciation
from your friends. Also make a list of all those activities for which your teacher scolds
you or your classmates get angry with you.

2. Describe a person in your past or present who has consistently demonstrated
unconditional positive regard towards you. What effect, if any, did (or does) this have
on you? Explain. Gather the same information from more friends and prepare a report.

102
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Weblinks
http://www.sciencedirect.com
http://allpsych.com
http://mentalhealth.com

Pedagogical Hints
1. Students could be asked to connect

the different therapeutic
approaches to some of the theories
of personality they have studied in
Chapter 2 on Self and Personality.

2. Role-play and dramatisation of
certain student-related behavioural
issues, such as break-up of
relationship with a friend would
evoke interest among the students
and also emphasise the application
of psychology.

3. As therapy is a highly skilled
process requiring professional
training, students should be
refrained from treating it in a
frivolous manner.

4. Any activity/discussion, which may
have a serious impact on the psyche
of the students, should be properly
transacted in the presence of the
teacher.

103
Chapter 5 • Therapeutic Approaches

Reprint 2025-26



ATTITUDE AND SOCIAL COGNITION

After reading this chapter, you would be able to:
understand what are attitudes, how they are formed and changed.

Introduction
Explaining Social Behaviour
Nature and Components of Attitudes

A ‘Green Environment’ : The A-B-C Components of an
Attitude (Box 6.1)

Attitude Formation and Change
Attitude Formation
Attitude Change
Telling a Lie for Twenty Dollars (Box 6.2)
Attitude-Behaviour Relationship

CONTENTS Prejudice and Discrimination
Strategies for Handling Prejudice

Key Terms
Summary
Review Questions
Project Ideas
Weblinks
Pedagogical Hints

104
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Social psychology is that branch of psychology which investigates how the
behaviour of individuals is affected by others and the social environment.
All of us form attitudes, or ways of thinking about specific topics and
people.  Many of these social behaviours seem to be simple. Yet, explaining

Introduction the processes that lie behind these behaviours is a complex matter.  This
chapter will describe the basic ideas related to attitudes, as explained by
social psychologists.

important are these opinions to you? The
EXPLAINING SOCIAL BEHAVIOUR

topics of some of these opinions may be only
Social behaviour is a necessary part of moderately important to you; they are
human life, and being social means much simply ways of thinking, and it does not
more than merely being in the company of matter much to you that others agree or
others. You may recall from what you disagree with your views. On the other
studied in Class XI that social psychology hand, you may find that some other topics
deals with all behaviour that takes place in are extremely important to you. If someone
the actual, imagined, or implied presence opposes or challenges your views about
of others. Social psychologists examine these topics, you get emotional. You may
various forms of social behaviour, and try have made some of these views part of your
to explain their basis. Because of social behaviour. In other words, if your views are
influences, people form views, or attitudes not merely thoughts, but also have
about people, and about different issues in emotional and action components, then
life, that exist in the form of behavioural these views are more than ‘opinions’; they
tendencies. In order to understand are examples of attitudes.
completely how the social context All definitions of attitudes agree that an
influences the individual, it is necessary attitude is a state of the mind, a set of views,
to study both social-cognitive processes or thoughts, regarding some topic (called
and social behaviour.  Social psychologists the ‘attitude object’), which have an
have shown that one must go beyond evaluative feature (positive, negative or
common sense and folk wisdom in order neutral quality). It is accompanied by an
to explain how people observe and make emotional component, and a tendency to

sense of their own and others’ diverse act in a particular way with regard to the

behaviours. attitude object. The thought component is
referred to as the cognitive aspect, the
emotional component is known as the

NATURE AND COMPONENTS OF ATTITUDES affective aspect, and the tendency to act
is called the behavioural (or conative)

For a few minutes quietly do the following
aspect.  Taken together, these three

mental exercise. Today, how many times did
aspects have been referred to as the A-B-

you tell yourself : “In my opinion…” or
C components (Affective-Behavioural-

“Others may say so and so, but I feel…”?
Cognitive components) of attitude. Note

What you fill in the blanks are called
that attitudes are themselves not

opinions.  Now continue the exercise : how

105
##6##
Chapter 6 • Attitude and Social Cognition

Reprint 2025-26



behaviour, but they represent a tendency situations. For example, our attitude
to behave or act in certain ways.  They towards foreigners may indirectly provide
are part of cognition, along with an a mental ‘layout’ or ‘blueprint’ for the way
emotional component, and cannot be in which we should behave whenever we
observed from outside. Box 6.1 presents meet one.
an example of an attitude towards the In addition to the affective, cognitive and
environment, showing the relationship behavioural components, attitudes also
between the three components. have other properties. Four significant

Attitudes have to be distinguished from features of attitudes are : Valence (positivity
two other closely related concepts, or negativity), Extremeness, Simplicity or
namely, beliefs and values. Beliefs refer Complexity (multiplexity), and Centrality.
to the cognitive component of attitudes, Valence (positivity or negativity) : The
and form the ground on which attitudes valence of an attitude tells us whether an
stand, such as belief in God, or belief in attitude is positive or negative towards the
democracy as a political ideology. Values attitude object. Suppose an attitude (say,
are attitudes or beliefs that contain a towards nuclear research) has to be
‘should’ or ‘ought’ aspect, such as moral expressed on a 5-point scale, ranging from
or ethical values.  One example of a value 1 (Very bad), 2 (Bad), 3 (Neutral — neither
is the idea that one should work hard, or good nor bad), and 4 (Good), to 5 (Very
that one should always be honest, good). If an individual rates her/his view
because honesty is the best policy. Values towards nuclear research as 4 or 5, this is
are formed when a particular belief or clearly a positive attitude. This means that
attitude becomes an inseparable part of the person likes the idea of nuclear research
the person’s outlook on life. Consequently, and thinks it is something good. On the
values are difficult to change. other hand, if the rating is 1 or 2, the

What is the purpose served by an attitude is negative. This means that the
attitude? We find that attitudes provide a person dislikes the idea of nuclear research,
background that makes it easier for a and thinks it is something bad. We also
person to decide how to act in new allow for neutral attitudes. In this

Box
6.1 A ‘Green Environment’ : The A-B-C Components of an Attitude

Suppose a group of people in your neighbourhood start a tree plantation campaign as part
of a ‘green environment’ movement. Based on sufficient information about the environment,
your view towards a ‘green environment’ is positive (cognitive or ‘C’ component, along with
the evaluative aspect). You feel very happy when you see greenery. You feel sad and angry
when you see trees being cut down. These aspects reflect the affective (emotional), or ‘A’
component of the same attitude. Now suppose you also actively participate in the tree
plantation campaign. This shows the behavioural or ‘B’ component of your attitudes towards
a ‘green environment’. In general, we expect all three components to be consistent with
each other, that is, in the same direction. However, such consistency may not necessarily
be found in all situations. For example, it is quite possible that the cognitive aspect of your
‘green environment’ attitude is very strong, but the affective and behavioural components
may be relatively weaker. Or, the cognitive and affective components may be strong and
positive, but the behavioural component may be neutral. Therefore, predicting one
component on the basis of the other two may not always give us the correct picture about
an attitude.

106
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



example, a neutral attitude towards attitude towards high military expenditure
nuclear research would be shown by a may be present as a core or central
rating of 3 on the same scale. A neutral attitude that influences all other attitudes
attitude would have neither positive nor in the multiple attitude system.
negative valence.

Extremeness : The extremeness of an ATTITUDE FORMATION AND CHANGE

attitude indicates how positive or negative
an attitude is. Taking the nuclear Attitude Formation
research example given above, a rating of

One important question that psychologists
1 is as extreme as a rating of 5 : they are

are interested in answering is : how are
only in the opposite directions (valence).

attitudes formed? Like many other thoughts
Ratings of 2 and 4 are less extreme. A

and concepts that develop and become part
neutral attitude, of course, is lowest on

of our cognitive system, attitudes towards
extremeness.

different topics, things and people also are
Simplicity or Complexity (multiplexity) : formed as we interact with others. However,
This feature refers to how many attitudes there are specific conditions that lead to the
there are within a broader attitude. Think formation of specific attitudes.
of an attitude as a family containing several In general, attitudes are learned
‘member’ attitudes. In case of various topics, through one’s own experiences, and
such as health and world peace, people hold through interaction with others. There are
many attitudes instead of single attitude. a few research studies that show some sort
An attitude system is said to be ‘simple’ if it of inborn aspect of attitudes, but such
contains only one or a few attitudes, and genetic factors influence attitudes only
‘complex’ if it is made up of many attitudes. indirectly, along with learning. Therefore,
Consider the example of attitude towards most social psychologists have focused on
health and well-being. This attitude system the conditions which lead to the learning
is likely to consist of several ‘member’ of attitudes.
attitudes, such as one’s concept of physical
and mental health, views about happiness Process of Attitude Formation
and well-being, and beliefs about how one
should achieve health and happiness. By The processes and conditions of learning
contrast, the attitude towards a particular may be different, resulting in varying
person is likely to consist of mainly one attitudes among people.
attitude. The multiple member-attitudes • Learning attitudes by association : You
within an attitude system should not be might have seen that students often
confused with the three components develop a liking for a particular subject
described earlier. Each member attitude because of the teacher. This is because
that belongs to an attitude system also has they see many positive qualities in that
A-B-C components. teacher; these positive qualities get

Centrality : This refers to the role of a linked to the subject that s/he

particular attitude in the attitude system. teaches, and ultimately get expressed
An attitude with greater centrality would in the form of liking for the subject.
influence the other attitudes in the system In other words, a positive attitude
much more than non-central (or peripheral) towards the subject is learned through
attitudes would. For example, in the the positive association between a
attitude towards world peace, a negative teacher and a student.

107
Chapter 6 • Attitude and Social Cognition

Reprint 2025-26



• Learning attitudes by being rewarded When individuals see that such
or punished : If an individual is praised behaviour is shown by others, is
for showing a particular attitude, expected and socially approved, they
chances are high that s/he will develop may ultimately develop a positive
that attitude further. For example, if attitude towards such behaviour and the
a teenager does yogasanas regularly, associated feelings of devotion.
and gets the honour of being ‘Miss Good • Learning through exposure to
Health’ in her school, she may develop information : Many attitudes are learned
a positive attitude towards yoga and in a social context, but not necessarily
health in general. Similarly, if a child in the physical presence of others.
constantly falls ill because s/he eats Today, with the huge amount of
junk food instead of proper meals, then information that is being provided
the child is likely to develop a negative through various media, both positive
attitude towards junk food, and also a and negative attitudes are being formed.
positive attitude towards eating healthy By reading the biographies of self-
food. actualised persons, an individual may

• Learning attitudes through modelling develop a positive attitude towards hard
(observing others) : Often it is not work and other aspects as the means of
through  association, or through reward achieving success in life.
and punishment, that we learn
attitudes. Instead, we learn them by Factors that Influence Attitude Formation
observing others being rewarded or The following factors provide the context for
punished for expressing thoughts, or the learning of attitudes through the
showing behaviour of a particular kind processes described above.
towards the attitude object. For
example, children may form a respectful 1. Family and School Environment :

attitude towards elders, by observing Particularly in the early years of life,
that their parents show respect for parents and other family members play
elders, and are appreciated for it. a significant role in shaping attitude

• Learning attitudes through group or formation. Later, the school
cultural norms : Very often, we learn environment becomes an important
attitudes through the norms of our background for attitude formation.
group or culture. Norms are unwritten Learning of attitudes within the family
rules about behaviour that everyone is and school usually takes place by
supposed to show under specific association, through rewards and
circumstances. Over time, these norms punishments, and through modelling.
may become part of our social cognition, 2. Reference Groups : Reference groups
in the form of attitudes. Learning indicate to an individual the norms
attitudes through group or cultural regarding acceptable behaviour and
norms may actually be an example of ways of thinking. Thus, they reflect
all three forms of learning described learning of attitudes through group or
above — learning through association, cultural norms. Attitudes towards
reward or punishment, and modelling. various topics, such as political,
For example, offering money, sweets, religious and social groups,
fruit and flowers in a place of worship is occupations, national and other issues
a normative behaviour in some religions. are often developed through reference

108
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



groups. Their influence is noticeable gathered, and therefore no control over
especially during the beginning of the attitudes that are being formed, or
adolescence, at which time it is the direction of change in the existing
important for the individual to feel that attitudes. The media can be used to
s/he belongs to a group. Therefore, the create consumerist attitudes where
role of reference groups in attitude none existed, and can also be harnessed
formation may also be a case of learning to create positive attitudes to facilitate
through reward and punishment. social harmony.

3. Personal Experiences : Many attitudes
Attitude Change

are formed, not in the family
environment or through reference During the process of attitude formation,
groups, but through direct personal and also after this process, attitudes may
experiences which bring about a drastic be changed and modified through various
change in our attitude towards people influences.  Some attitudes change more
and our own life. Here is a real-life than others do. Attitudes that are still in
example. A driver in the army went the formative stage, and are more like
through a personal experience that opinions, are much more likely to change
transformed his life. On one mission, he compared to attitudes that have become
narrowly escaped death although all his firmly established, and have become a part
companions got killed. Wondering about of the individual’s values. From a practical
the purpose of his own life, he gave up point of view, bringing about a change in
his job in the army, returned to his people’s attitudes is of interest to
native village in Maharashtra, and community leaders, politicians, producers
worked actively as a community leader. of consumer goods, advertisers, and others.
Through a purely personal experience Unless we find out how attitudes change,
this individual evolved a strong positive and what conditions account for such
attitude towards community upliftment. change, it would not be possible to take
His efforts completely changed the face steps to bring about attitude change.
of his village.

Process of Attitude Change
4. Media-related Influences : Technological

advances in recent times have made Three major concepts that draw attention

audio-visual media and the Internet very to some important processes in attitude

powerful sources of information that change are described below :

lead to attitude formation and change. (a) The concept of balance, proposed by
In addition, school level textbooks also Fritz Heider is sometimes described in the
influence attitude formation. These form of the ‘P-O-X ’ triangle, which
sources first strengthen the cognitive represents the relationships between three
and affective components of attitudes, aspects or components of the attitude. P is
and subsequently may also affect the the person whose attitude is being studied,
behavioural component. The media can O is another person, and X is the topic
exert both good and bad influences on towards which the attitude is being studied
attitudes. On one hand, the media and (attitude object). It is also possible that all
Internet make people better informed three are persons.
than other modes of communication. On The basic idea is that an attitude
the other hand, there may be no check changes if there is a state of imbalance
on the nature of information being between the P-O attitude, O-X attitude,

109
Chapter 6 • Attitude and Social Cognition

Reprint 2025-26



and P-X attitude. This is because think about the following ideas
imbalance is logically uncomfortable. (‘cognitions’) :
Therefore, the attitude changes in the Cognition I :  Pan masala causes
direction of balance. mouth cancer which is fatal.

Imbalance is found when (i) all three Cognition II :  I eat pan masala.
sides of the P-O-X  triangle are negative, or Holding these two ideas or cognitions
(ii) two sides are positive, and one side is will make any individual feel that something
negative. Balance is found when (i) all three is ‘out of tune’, or dissonant, in the attitude
sides are positive, or (ii) two sides are towards pan masala. Therefore, one of these
negative, and one side is positive. ideas will have to be changed, so that

Consider the example of dowry as an consonance can be attained.  In the example
attitude topic (X).  Suppose a person (P) has given above, in order to remove or reduce
a positive attitude towards dowry (P-X the dissonance, I will stop eating pan
positive). P is planning to get his son masala (change Cognition II). This would
married to the daughter of some person (O) be the healthy, logical and sensible way of
who has a negative attitude towards dowry reducing dissonance.
(O-X negative).  What would be the nature Festinger and Carlsmith, two social
of the P-O attitude, and how would it psychologists, conducted an experiment
determine balance or imbalance in the that showed how cognitive dissonance
situation? If O initially has a positive works (see Box 6.2).
attitude towards P, the situation would be Both balance and cognitive dissonance
unbalanced. P-X is positive, O-P is positive, are examples of cognitive consistency.

but O-X is negative. That is, there are two Cognitive consistency means that two
positives and one negative in the triangle. components, aspects or elements of the
This is a situation of imbalance.  One of the attitude, or attitude system, must be in
three attitudes will therefore have to the same direction. Each element should
change. This change could take place in the logically fall in line with other elements.
P-X relationship (P starts disliking dowry If this does not happen, then the person
as a custom), or in the O-X relationship (O experiences a kind of mental discomfort, i.e.
starts liking dowry as a custom), or in the the sense that ‘something is not quite right’
O-P relationship (O starts disliking P). In in the attitude system. In such a state, some
short, an attitude change will have to take aspect in the attitude system changes in
place so that  there will be  three positive the direction of consistency, because our
relationships, or two negative and one cognitive system requires logical
positive relationship, in the triangle. consistency.

(b) The concept of cognitive dissonance (c) The two-step concept was proposed by
was proposed by Leon Festinger. It S.M. Mohsin, an Indian psychologist.
emphasises the cognitive component. Here According to him, attitude change takes
the basic idea is that the cognitive place in the form of two steps.  In the first
components of an attitude must be step, the target of change identifies with the
‘consonant’ (opposite of ‘dissonant’), i.e., source. The ‘target’ is the person whose
they should be logically in line with each attitude is to be changed. The ‘source’ is
other. If an individual finds that two the person through whose influence the
cognitions in an attitude are dissonant, change is to take place. Identification
then one of them will be changed in means that the target has liking and
the direction of consonance. For example, regard for the source. S/he puts herself/

110
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



himself in the place of the target, and tries sportsperson must first show positive
to feel like her/him. The source must also feelings for her/his fans, and then actually
have a positive attitude towards the target, change her/his own habit of consuming
and the regard and attraction becomes that soft drink (Step I) — perhaps by
mutual.  In the second step, the source substituting it with a health drink. If the
herself/himself shows an attitude sportsperson actually changes her/his
change, by actually changing her/him behaviour, it is very likely that now Preeti
behaviour towards the attitude object. will also change her attitude and
Observing the source’s changed attitude behaviour, and stop consuming the
and behaviour, the target also shows an harmful soft drink (Step II).
attitude change through behaviour. This
is a kind of imitation or observational Factors that Influence Attitude Change
learning. Whether attitudes will change, and if so,

Consider the following example of two- to what extent, is a question that puzzles
step attitude change. Preeti reads in the

many psychologists. However, most of
newspapers that a particular soft drink that

them agree upon the following major
she enjoys is extremely harmful.  But Preeti

factors that influence attitude change :
sees that her favourite sportsperson has
been advertising the same soft drink. She • Characteristics of the existing attitude :
has identified herself with the sportsperson, All four properties of attitudes mentioned
and would like to imitate her/him. Now, earlier, namely, valence (positivity or
suppose the sportsperson wishes to change negativity), extremeness, simplicity or
people’s attitude towards this soft drink complexity (multiplexity), and centrality
from positive to negative.  The or significance of the attitude, determine

Telling a Lie for Twenty Dollars Box
6.2

After participating in a very boring experiment, a group of students were asked to tell
another group of students waiting outside that the experiment was very interesting. For
telling this lie to the waiting students, half of the first group of students was paid $ 1, and
the other half were paid $ 20. After some weeks, the participants of the boring experiment
were asked to recall the experiment, and to say how interesting they had found that
experiment to be. The responses showed that the $ 1 group described the experiment as
more interesting than the $ 20 group. The explanation was : the $ 1 students changed
their attitude towards the experiment because they experienced cognitive dissonance.

In the $ 1 group,
The initial cognitions would be : The changed cognitions would be:

(Dissonant cognitions) (Dissonance reduced)
“The experiment was very boring” ; “The experiment was actually interesting” ;
“I told the waiting students that it “I told the waiting students that it was
was interesting”; interesting” ;
“I told a lie for only $ 1.” “I would not have told a lie for only $ 1.”

The $ 20 group did not experience cognitive dissonance. So, they did not change their
attitude towards the experiment, and rated it as very boring.
The cognitions in the $ 20 (No dissonance) group would be :

“The experiment was very boring”;
“I told the waiting students that it was interesting”;
“I told a lie because I was paid $ 20.”

111
Chapter 6 • Attitude and Social Cognition

Reprint 2025-26



attitude change. In general, positive cavities,  they may not believe the
attitudes are easier to change than negative pictures, and may become less positive
attitudes are. Extreme attitudes, and about dental care. Research has found
central attitudes are more difficult to change that fear sometimes works well in
than the less extreme, and peripheral (less convincing people but if a message
significant) attitudes are. Simple attitudes generates too much fear, it turns off the
are easier to change than multiple receiver and has little persuasive effect.
attitudes are. • Source characteristics : Source

In addition, one must also consider the credibility and attractiveness are two
direction and extent of attitude change. An features that affect attitude change.
attitude change may be congruent — it Attitudes are more likely to change when
may change in the same direction as the the message comes from a highly credible
existing attitude (for example, a positive source rather than from a low-credible
attitude may become more positive, or a source. For example, adults who are
negative attitude may become more planning to buy a laptop are more
negative). For instance, suppose a person convinced by a computer engineer who
has a somewhat positive attitude towards points out the special features of a
empowerment of women. Reading about particular brand of laptop, than they
a successful woman may make this would be by a schoolchild who might give
attitude more positive. This would be a the same information. But, if the buyers
congruent change. On the other hand, an are themselves schoolchildren, they may
attitude change may be incongruent — be convinced more by another schoolchild
it may change in a direction opposite to advertising a laptop than they would be
the existing attitude (for example, a by a professional giving the same
positive attitude becomes less positive, or information (see Figure 6.1). In the case
negative, or a negative attitude becomes of some products such as cars, sales may
less negative, or positive).  In the example increase if they are publicised, not
just given, after reading about successful necessarily by experts, but by popular
women, a person may think that women public figures.
might soon become too powerful, and

• Message characteristics : The message
neglect their family responsibilities. This is the information that is presented in
may make the person’s existing positive order to bring about an attitude change.
attitude towards empowerment of women, Attitudes will change when the amount
less positive, or even negative.  If this of information that is given about the topic
happens, then it would be a case of is just enough, neither too much nor too
incongruent change. It has been found little. Whether the message contains a
that, in general, congruent changes are rational or an emotional appeal, also
easier to bring about than are the makes a difference. For example, an
incongruent changes in attitudes. advertisement for cooking food in a

Moreover, an attitude may change in pressure cooker may point out that this
the direction of the information that is saves fuel such as cooking gas (LPG) and
presented, or in a direction opposite to is economical (rational appeal).
that of the information presented. Posters Alternatively, the advertisement may say
describing the importance of brushing that pressure-cooking preserves nutrition,
one’s teeth would strengthen a positive and that if one cares for the family,
attitude towards dental care. But if people nutrition would be a major concern
are shown frightening pictures of dental (emotional appeal) (see Figure 6.2).

112
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



 
 
My laptop is my key
to success — 100 GB  
storage capacity,  

My laptop is my key
light in weight, can to success — 100 GB
do wonders for me !! storage capacity,
Buy one now, and light in weight,  can
see how you grow !! do wonders for me !!

Buy one now, and
see how you grow !!

Picture A Picture B

Fig.6.1 : Which Picture will Make You More Eager to Buy a Laptop – Picture A, or Picture B ? Why?

The motives activated by the message make a person healthy and good-looking,
also determine attitude change. For or more energetic and more successful at
example, drinking milk may be said to one’s job.

 Rational appeal Emotional appeal
(saving money) (caring for your family)

 
A r e you spending too If you care for your

much on cooking gas? family, nothing is

Switch to the pressure more important than

cooker, and say nutrition. Switch to

goodbye to your the pressure cooker,

budget problems! and ensure healthy
eating!

Fig.6.2 : Rational and Emotional Appeals

113
Chapter 6 • Attitude and Social Cognition

Reprint 2025-26

 
  



 

 “ORS will
protect

 
your child

“
from heat  ORS will

protect your
in the

child from
summer”

heat in the
summer”

Fig.6.3 : Face-to-face Interaction versus Media Transmission. Which one works better? Why?

Finally, the mode of spreading more easily. Advertisers benefit most from
the message plays a significant role. such people. People with strong prejudices
Face-to-face transmission of the message are less prone to any attitude change than
is usually more effective than indirect those who do not hold strong prejudices.
transmission, as for instance, through Persons who have a low self-esteem, and
letters and pamphlets, or even through do not have sufficient confidence in
mass media. For example, a positive themselves, change their attitudes more
attitude towards Oral Rehydration Salts easily than those who are high on self-
(ORS) for young children is more esteem. More intelligent people may
effectively created if community social change their attitudes less easily than
workers and doctors spread the message those with lower intelligence. However,
by talking to people directly, than by only sometimes more intelligent persons
describing the benefits of ORS on the radio change their attitudes more willingly than
(see Figure 6.3). These days transmission less intelligent ones, because they base
through visual media such as television their attitude on more information
and the Internet are similar to face-to- and thinking.
face interaction, but not a substitute for
the latter. Attitude-Behaviour Relationship

• Target characteristics : Qualities of the We usually expect behaviour to follow
target, such as persuasibility, strong logically from attitudes. However, an
prejudices, self-esteem, and intelligence individual’s attitudes may not always be
influence the likelihood and extent of exhibited through behaviour. Likewise,
attitude change. People, who have a more one’s actual behaviour may be contrary to
open and flexible personality, change one’s attitude towards a particular topic.

114
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



    Psychologists have found that there occasions they were refused service by one
would be consistency between attitudes of the hotels.  Sometime later, LaPiere sent
and behaviour when : out questionnaires to managers of hotels
• the attitude is strong, and occupies a and tourist homes in the same areas where

central place in the attitude system, the Chinese couple had travelled, asking
• the person is  aware of her/his them if they would give accommodation to

attitude, Chinese guests. A very large percentage said

• there is very little or no external that they would not do so. This response

pressure for the person to behave in a showed a negative attitude towards the

particular way. For example, when Chinese, which was inconsistent with the

there is no group pressure to follow a positive behaviour that was actually shown

particular norm, towards the travelling Chinese couple.
Thus, attitudes may not always predict

• the person’s behaviour is not being
actual pattern of one’s behaviour.

watched or evaluated by others, and
Sometimes it is behaviour that decides

• the person thinks that the behaviour the attitude.  In the experiment by
would have a positive consequence, and Festinger and Carlsmith (see Box 6.2),
therefore, intends to engage in that students who got only one dollar for telling
behaviour. others that the experiment was interesting,

discovered that they liked the experiment.
That is, on the basis of their behaviour

Activity Cut out an advertisement from a

6.1 newspaper or magazine, that (telling others that the experiment was
contains something special and interesting, for only a small amount of
catches your attention. Write down money), they concluded that their attitude
the following details about that towards the experiment was positive (“I
advertisement, and present it to your

would not have told a lie for this small
class.
• The topic of the advertisement amount of money, which means that the

(for example, whether the experiment was actually interesting”).
advertisement is about a
consumer product, some food, a PREJUDICE AND DISCRIMINATION
company, a health matter, a
national theme, etc.). Prejudices are examples of attitudes

• Good and bad consequences of
towards a particular group. They are

the advertisement.
• Whether it contains an emotional usually negative, and in many cases, may

appeal or a rational appeal. be based on stereotypes (the cognitive
• Whether it contains a popular component) about the specific group. As will

figure : an expert source, or a be discussed below in the section on social
well-liked person.

cognition, a stereotype is a cluster of ideas
regarding the characteristics of a specific
group. All members belonging to this

In the days when Americans were said group are assumed to possess these
to be prejudiced against the Chinese, characteristics. Often, stereotypes consist
Richard LaPiere, an American social of undesirable characteristics about the
psychologist, conducted the following target group, and they lead to negative
study. He asked a Chinese couple to travel attitudes or prejudices towards members
across the United States, and stay in of specific groups. The cognitive
different hotels. Only once during these component of prejudice is frequently

115
Chapter 6 • Attitude and Social Cognition

Reprint 2025-26



accompanied by dislike or hatred, the and show low adjusting capacity,
affective component.  Prejudice may also anxiety, and feelings of hostility against
get translated into discrimination, the the outgroup.
behavioural component, whereby people • A strong social identity and ingroup bias :
behave in a less positive way towards a Individuals who have a strong sense of
particular target group compared to social identity and have a very positive
another group which they favour. History attitude towards their own group boost
contains numerous examples of this attitude by holding negative
discrimination based on race and social attitudes towards other groups. These
class or caste. The genocide committed are shown as prejudices.
by the Nazis in Germany against Jewish • Scapegoating : This is a phenomenon by
people is an extreme example of how which the majority group places the
prejudice can lead to hatred, blame on a minority outgroup for its own
discrimination and mass killing of social, economic or political problems.
innocent people. The minority is too weak or too small in

Prejudices can exist without being number to defend itself against such
shown in the form of discrimination. accusations. Scapegoating is a group-
Similarly, discrimination can be shown based way of expressing frustration, and
without prejudice. Yet, the two go together it often results in negative attitudes or
very often. Wherever prejudice and prejudice against the weaker group.
discrimination exist, conflicts are very • Kernel of truth concept : Sometimes
likely to arise between groups within the people may continue to hold
same society. Our own society has stereotypes because they think that,
witnessed many deplorable instances of after all, there must be some truth, or
discrimination, with and without ‘kernel of truth’ in what everyone says
prejudice, based on gender, religion, about the other group. Even a few
community, caste, physical handicap, and examples are sufficient to support the
illnesses such as AIDS. Moreover, in ‘kernel of truth’ idea.
many cases discriminatory behaviour can • Self-fulfilling prophecy :  In some cases,
be curbed by law. But, the cognitive and the group that is the target of prejudice
emotional components of prejudice are is itself responsible for continuing the
more difficult to change. prejudice.  The target group may behave

Social psychologists have shown that in ways that justify the prejudice, that
prejudice has one or more of the following is, confirm the negative expectations.
sources : For example, if the target group is
• Learning : Like other attitudes, described as ‘dependent’ and therefore

prejudices can also be learned through unable to make progress, the members
association, reward and punishment, of this target group may actually behave
observing others, group or cultural in a way that proves this description to
norms and exposure to information that be true.  In this way, they strengthen
encourages prejudice. The family, the existing prejudice.
reference groups, personal experiences
and the media may play a role in the
learning of prejudices (see section on STRATEGIES FOR HANDLING PREJUDICE

‘Attitude Formation and Change’).
Knowing about the causes or sources

People who learn prejudiced attitudes
would be the first step in handling

may develop a ‘prejudiced personality’,

116
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



prejudice. Thus, the strategies for mistrust between the groups, and even
handling prejudice would be effective if discovery of positive qualities in the
they aim at : outgroup. However, these strategies
(a) minimising opportunities for learning are successful only if :

prejudices, - the two groups meet in a cooperative
(b) changing such attitudes, rather than competitive context,
(c) de-emphasising a narrow social identity - close interactions between the

based on the ingroup, and groups helps them to know each
(d) discouraging the tendency towards other better, and

self-fulfilling prophecy among the - the two groups are not different in
victims of prejudice. power or status.
These goals can be accomplished • Highlighting individual identity rather

through : than group identity, thus weakening
• Education and information the importance of group (both ingroup

dissemination, for correcting stereotypes and outgroup) as a basis of evaluating

related to specific target groups, and the other person.  More details about

tackling the problem of a strong social identity and intergroup conflict

ingroup bias. have been presented in the next

• Increasing intergroup contact allows for chapter on Social Influence and Group

direct communication, removal of Processes.

Key Terms

Attitudes, Balance, Beliefs, Centrality of attitude, Cognitive consistency, Cognitive dissonance,
Congruent attitude change, Discrimination, Extremeness of attitude, Identification, Incongruent
attitude change, Kernel of truth, Persuasibility, Prejudice, Scapegoating, Self-fulfilling prophecy,
Simplicity or complexity (multiplexity) of attitude, Valence of attitude, Values.

• Human beings have a need to interact with and relate to others, and to explain their
own as well as others’ behaviour.

• People develop attitudes, or thoughts and behavioural tendencies, through learning
processes, family and school influences, reference groups and the media. Attitudes
have an affective, cognitive and behavioural component, and can be understood in
terms of valence, extremeness, simplicity or complexity (multiplexity) and centrality.

• Attitude change takes according to the balance concept, cognitive consonance and
the two-step concept. Attitude change is affected by characteristics of the source, the
target, and the message. Negative attitudes (prejudices) towards a group often create
conflicts within a society, and are expressed through discrimination, but there are
practical strategies for handling prejudice.

117
Chapter 6 • Attitude and Social Cognition

Reprint 2025-26



Review Questions

1. Define attitude. Discuss the components of an attitude.
2. Are attitudes learnt? Explain how?
3. What are the factors that influence the formation of an attitude?
4. Is behaviour always a reflection of one’s attitude? Explain with a relevant example.
5. Differentiate between prejudice and stereotype.
6. Prejudice can exist without discrimination and vice versa. Comment.
7. Your friend eats too much junk food, how would you be able to bring about a

change in her/his attitude towards food?

Project 1. Attitudes Towards and Awareness of Waste Management : A Survey
Ideas The problem of household garbage (domestic waste) is common in most Indian cities.

The concern for a clean environment is increasing, but we do not know to what extent
citizens know how to dispose of the garbage that collects in their household.  Along
with some of your classmates, conduct a survey in your own colony to find out what
people do about household garbage. Each student may visit two houses in their colony,
and ask the heads of the household the following questions. Their answers must be
written down.
1. What do you do with old newspapers, magazines, tins, and bottles ?
2. What do you do with plastic packets, and other plastic objects (for example, toys,

containers etc.)?
3. How do you dispose of kitchen waste (e.g., vegetable and fruit peels, used tea leaves

or tea-bags, left-over food that cannot be eaten etc.)?
4. How do you dispose of other used objects that contain chemical substances (e.g.

torch cells, used or damaged CDs, cassettes, insecticide and pesticide containers
etc.)?

5. Do you put all the garbage collected in your house everyday in the same place, or do
you put different kinds of garbage in separate dustbins/waste-baskets?

6. What happens to the garbage that is collected from your house and neighbourhood
and where is it taken?

7. What is the meaning of ‘recycling’?
8. What can you do (personally) to make your colony/neighbourhood more clean?

Compare the responses collected by all the students, and see what kind of attitudes
and awareness people show about waste management at the household level.

2. Interpersonal Judgment Exercise
The following exercise will help you to see how well you and your best friend know each
other.

For each quality listed below, give ratings for yourself (Column 1) and for your best
friend in your class (Column 2).  Also ask your  friend to do the same kind of rating, for
himself/herself (Column 1) and for you (Column 2). Use the following rating scale :

1 2 3 4 5
Very low Low Neither low High Very high

on the quality nor high on the quality

After you and your friend have completed the ratings, copy Column 2 ratings from
your friend’s sheet on your sheet, under Column 3.  Compare Column 3 ratings with

118
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Column 1 ratings in the case of each quality. Ask your friend to do the same task – that is,
copy Column 2 ratings from your sheet on her/his sheet, under Column 3, and compare
these ratings with her/his Column 1 ratings.  Enter Column 3 minus         Column 1 under
Column 4.

Column 1 Column 2 Column 3 Column 4
You rate You rate Rating of you Column 3
yourself your friend by your friend minus Column 1

Friendly
Tense
Sincere
Pleasant
Open to new ideas

Examine the following. Are there any zeros in Column 4? On which quality is the difference
greatest? On which quality is the difference smallest (other than zero)?
In general, have you given yourself a higher or lower rating than what your friend has given
you? Has your friend given herself/himself a higher or lower rating than what you have given
your friend? The sign of the difference (plus or minus) should be noted only to see the direction
of the difference.

The closer the ratings between Column 1 and Column 3 for both of you, the better you
know each other.  You can also compare your Column 1 with your friend’s Column 1. The
more similar these two ratings are, the greater the similarity between you and your friend.

Weblinks
http://tip.psychology.org/attitude.html

Pedagogical Hints
1. In the topic of attitudes, students

should be made to understand the
distinction between attitudes as
such (with the A-B-C components)
on one hand, and behaviour related
to the attitude, on the other.

2. To explain attitude change, students
may be encouraged to think of real-
life examples of attitude change, for
instance, attempts made by
advertisers to promote their
products through media. Then
discuss whether these attempts to
change attitude are actually
successful or not.

119
Chapter 6 • Attitude and Social Cognition

Reprint 2025-26



SOCIAL INFLUENCE AND GROUP

PROCESSES

After reading this chapter, you would be able to:
understand the nature and types of groups and know how they are formed, and
examine the influence of group on individual behaviour.

CONTENTS Introduction
Nature and Formation of Groups

Groupthink (Box 7.1)
Type of Groups

The Minimal Group Paradigm Experiments
(Box 7.2)
Influence of Group on Individual Behaviour Key Terms

Social Loafing Summary
Group Polarisation Review Questions

Project Ideas
Weblinks
Pedagogical Hints

120
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Think about your day-to-day life and the various social interactions you have.
In the morning, before going to school, you interact with your family members;
in school, you discuss topics and issues with your teachers and classmates;
and after school you phone up, visit or play with your friends.  In each of
these instances, you are part of a group which not only provides you the
needed support and comfort but also facilitates your growth and development
as an individual. Have you ever been away to a place where you were Introduction
without your family, school, and friends?  How did you feel?  Did you feel
there was something vital missing in your life?
    Our lives are influenced by the nature of group membership we have.  It is,
therefore, important to be part of groups which would influence us positively
and help us in becoming good citizens. In this chapter, we shall try to
understand what groups are and how they influence our behaviour. At this
point, it is also important to acknowledge that not only do others influence us,
but we, as individuals, are also capable of changing others and the society.

A group may be defined as an
NATURE AND FORMATION OF GROUPS

organised system of two or more

What is a Group? individuals, who are interacting and
interdependent, who have common motives,

The preceding introduction illustrates the have a set of role relationships among its
importance of groups in our lives. One

members, and have norms that regulate
question that comes to mind is: “How are the behaviour of its members.
groups (e.g., your family, class, and the   Groups have the following salient
group with which you play) different from characteristics :
other collections of people?” For example, • A social unit consisting of two or more
people who have assembled to watch a individuals who perceive themselves
cricket match or your school function are as belonging to the group. This
at one place, but are not interdependent characteristic of the group helps in
on each other. They do not have defined distinguishing one group from the
roles, status and expectations from each other and gives the group its unique
other. In the case of your family, class, identity.
and the group with which you play, you • A collection of individuals who have
will realise that there is mutual common motives and goals. Groups
interdependence, each member has roles, function either working towards a
there are status differentials, and there given goal, or away from certain
are expectations from each other. Thus, threats facing the group.
your family, class and playgroup are

• A collection of individuals who are
examples of groups and are different from

interdependent, i.e. what one is doing
other collections of people.

may have consequences for others.

121
##7##
Chapter 7 • Social Influence and Group Processes

Reprint 2025-26



Suppose one of the fielders in a cricket road and an accident takes place. Soon
team drops an important catch during a large number of people tend to collect.
a match — this will have consequence This is an example of a crowd. There is
for the entire team. neither any structure nor feeling of

• Individuals who are trying to satisfy belongingness in a crowd. Behaviour of
a need through their joint association people in crowds is irrational and there
also influence each other. is no interdependence among members.

• A gathering of individuals who interact Teams are special kinds of groups.
with one another either directly or Members of teams often have comple-
indirectly. mentary skills and are committed to a

• A collection of individuals whose common goal or purpose. Members are
interactions are structured by a set mutually accountable for their activities.
of roles and norms. This means that In teams, there is a positive synergy
the group members perform the same attained through the coordinated efforts
functions every time the group meets of the members. The main differences
and the group members adhere to between groups and teams are:
group norms. Norms tell us how we • In groups, performance is dependent
ought to behave in the group and on contributions of individual
specify the behaviours expected from members.  In teams, both individual
group members. contributions and teamwork matter.
Groups can be differentiated from • In groups, the leader or whoever is

other collections of people. For example, heading the group holds responsibility
a crowd is also a collection of people who for the work. However in teams,
may be present at a place/situation by although there is a leader, members
chance. Suppose you are going on the hold themselves responsible.

Picture A Picture B

Fig.7.1 : Look at these Two Pictures
Picture A shows a football team — a group in which members interact with one another, have roles
and goals. Picture B depicts an audience watching the football match — a mere collection of people
who by some coincidence (may be their interest in football) happened to be in the same place at the

same time.

122
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



An audience is also a collection of • Satisfaction of one’s psychological
people who have assembled for a special and social needs : Groups satisfy
purpose, may be to watch a cricket match one’s social and psychological needs
or a movie. Audiences are generally passive such as sense of belongingness, giving
but sometimes they go into a frenzy and and receiving attention, love, and
become mobs. In mobs, there is a definite power through a group.
sense of purpose. There is polarisation in • Goal achievement : Groups help in
attention, and actions of persons are in a achieving such goals which cannot be
common direction. Mob behaviour is attained individually. There is power in
characterised by homogeneity of thought the majority.
and behaviour as well as impulsivity. • Provide knowledge and information :

Group membership provides knowledge
Why Do People Join Groups? and information and thus broadens our

All of you are members of your family, view. As individuals, we may not have

class and groups with which you interact all the required information. Groups

or play. Similarly, other people are also supplement this information and

members of a number of groups at any knowledge.

given time. Dif ferent groups satisfy
Group Formation

different needs, and therefore, we are
simultaneously members of dif ferent In this section, we will see how groups are
groups. This sometimes creates pressures formed. Basic to group formation is some
for us because there may be competing contact and some form of interaction
demands and expectations. Most often we between people. This interaction is
are able to handle these competing facilitated by the following conditions:
demands and expectations. People join • Proximity : Just think about your
groups because these groups satisfy a group of friends. Would you have been
range of needs. In general, people join friends if you were not living in the
groups for the following reasons : same colony, or going to the same
• Security : When we are alone, we feel school, or may be playing in the same

insecure. Groups reduce this playground? Probably your answer
insecurity. Being with people gives a would be ‘No’. Repeated interactions
sense of comfort, and protection. As a with the same set of individuals give us
result, people feel stronger, and are less a chance to know them, and their
vulnerable to threats. interests and attitudes. Common

• Status : When we are members of a interests, attitudes, and background
group that is perceived to be important are important determinants of your
by others, we feel recognised and liking for your group members.
experience a sense of power. Suppose •  Similarity : Being exposed to someone
your school wins in an inter - over a period of time makes us assess
institutional debate competition, you our similarities and paves the way for
feel proud and think that you are better formation of groups. Why do we like
than others. people who are similar? Psychologists

• Self-esteem : Groups provide feelings of have given several explanations for this.
self-worth and establish a positive social One explanation is that people prefer
identity. Being a member of prestigious consistency and like relationships that
groups enhances one’s self-concept. are consistent. When two people are

123
Chapter 7 • Social Influence and Group Processes

Reprint 2025-26



similar, there is consistency and they group, the goal, and how it is to be
start liking each other. For example, achieved. People try to know each other
you like playing football and another and assess whether they will fit in.
person in your class also loves playing There is excitement as well as
football; there is a matching of your apprehensions. This stage is called the
interests. There are higher chances that forming stage.
you may become friends. Another • Often, after this stage, there is a stage
explanation given by psychologists is of intragroup conflict which is referred
that when we meet similar people, they to as storming. In this stage, there is
reinforce and validate our opinions and conflict among members about how the
values, we feel we are right and thus we target of the group is to be achieved,
start liking them. Suppose you are of who is to control the group and its
the opinion that too much watching of resources, and who is to perform what
television is not good, because it shows task. When this stage is complete, some
too much violence. You meet someone sort of hierarchy of leadership in the

who also has similar views. This group develops and a clear vision as to

validates your opinion, and you start how to achieve the group goal.

liking the person who was instrumental • The storming stage is followed by

in validating your opinion. another stage known as norming.

• Common motives and goals : When Group members by this time develop

people have common motives or goals, norms related to group behaviour. This

they get together and form a group leads to development of a positive group

which may facilitate their goal identity.

attainment. Suppose you want to teach • The fourth stage is performing. By this

children in a slum area who are unable time, the structure of the group has

to go to school. You cannot do this evolved and is accepted by group

alone because you have your own members. The group moves towards
achieving the group goal. For some

studies and homework. You, therefore,
groups, this may be the last stage of

form a group of like-minded friends and
group development.

start teaching these children. So you
• However, for some groups, for example,

have been able to achieve what you
in the case of an organising committee

could not have done alone.

Stages of Group Formation
Identifying Stages of Group Activity

Remember that, like everything else in life, Formation 7.1
groups develop. You do not become a
group member the moment you come Select 10 members from your class

together. Groups usually go through randomly and form a committee to
plan an open house. See how they go

different stages of formation, conflict, ahead. Give them full autonomy to do
stabilisation, performance, and dismissal. all the planning. Other members of the
Tuckman suggested that groups pass class observe them as they function.
through five developmental sequences. Do you see any of these stages

These are: forming, storming, norming, emerging? Which were those? What
was the order of stages? Which stages

performing and adjourning.
were skipped?

• When group members first meet, there Discuss in the class.
is a great deal of uncertainty about the

124
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



for a school function, there may be Four important elements of group
another stage known as adjourning structure are :
stage. In this stage, once the function • Roles are socially defined expectations
is over, the group may be disbanded. that individuals in a given situation are

expected to fulfil. Roles refer to the
However, it must be stated that all

typical behaviour that depicts a person
groups do not always proceed from one

in a given social context. You have the
stage to the next in such a systematic role of a son or a daughter and with this
manner. Sometimes several stages go on role, there are certain role expectations,
simultaneously, while in other instances i.e. including the behaviour expected of
groups may go back and forth through the someone in a particular role. As a
various stages or they may just skip some daughter or a son, you are expected to
of the stages. respect elders, listen to them, and be

During the process of group formation, responsible towards your studies.
groups also develop a structure. We should • Norms are expected standards of
remember that group structure develops behaviour and beliefs established,
as members interact. Over time this agreed upon, and enforced by group
interaction shows regularities in members. They may be considered as
distribution of task to be performed, a group’s ‘unspoken rules’. In your
responsibilities assigned to members, and family, there are norms that guide the
the prestige or relative status of members. behaviour of family members. These

Box
7.1 Groupthink

Generally teamwork in groups leads to beneficial results. However, Irving Janis has suggested
that cohesion can interfere with effective leadership and can lead to disastrous decisions.
Janis discovered a process known as “groupthink” in which a group allows its concerns for
unanimity. They, in fact, “override the motivation to realistically appraise courses of action”.
It results in the tendency of decision makers to make irrational and uncritical decisions.
Groupthink is characterised by the appearance of consensus or unanimous agreement
within a group. Each member believes that all members agree upon a particular decision
or a policy. No one expresses dissenting opinion because each person believes it would
undermine the cohesion of the group and s/he would be unpopular. Studies have shown
that such a group has an exaggerated sense of its own power to control events, and tends
to ignore or minimise cues from the real world that suggest danger to its plan. In order to
preserve the group’s internal harmony and collective well-being, it becomes increasingly
out-of-touch with reality. Groupthink is likely to occur in socially homogenous, cohesive
groups that are isolated from outsiders, that have no tradition of considering alternatives,
and that face a decision with high costs or failures. Examples of several group decisions at
the international level can be cited as illustrations of groupthink phenomenon. These
decisions turned out to be major fiascos. The Vietnam War is an example. From 1964 to
1967, President Lyndon Johnson and his advisors in the U.S. escalated the Vietnam War
thinking that this would bring North Vietnam to the peace table. The escalation decisions
were made despite warnings. The grossly miscalculated move resulted in the loss of 56,000
American and more than one million Vietnamese lives and created huge budget deficits.
Some ways to counteract or prevent groupthink are: (i) encouraging and rewarding critical
thinking and even disagreement among group members, (ii) encouraging groups to   present
alternative courses of action, (iii) inviting outside experts to evaluate the group’s decisions,
and (iv) encouraging members to seek feedback from trusted others.

125
Chapter 7 • Social Influence and Group Processes

Reprint 2025-26



norms represent shared ways of some are short-lived (e.g., a committee),
viewing the world. some remain together for many years (e.g.,

• Status refers to the relative social religious groups), some are highly
position given to group members by organised (e.g., army, police, etc.), and
others. This relative position or status others are informally organised (e.g.,
may be either ascribed (given may be spectators of a match). People may belong
because of one’s seniority) or achieved to different types of group. Major types of
(the person has achieved status groups are enumerated below :
because of expertise or hard work).  By • primary and secondary groups
being members of the group, we enjoy • formal and informal groups
the status associated with that group. • ingroup and outgroup.
All of us, therefore, strive to be
members of such groups which are Primary and Secondary Groups
high in status or are viewed favourably

A major difference between primary and
by others. Even within a group,
dif ferent members have dif ferent secondary groups is that primary groups

prestige and status. For example, the are pre-existing formations which are

captain of a cricket team has a higher usually given to the individual whereas

status compared to the other members, secondary groups are those which the

although all are equally important for individual joins by choice. Thus, family,

the team’s success. caste, and religion are primary groups

• Cohesiveness refers to togetherness, whereas membership of a political party is

binding, or mutual attraction among an example of a secondary group. In a

group members. As the group becomes primary group, there is a face-to-face

more cohesive, group members start to interaction, members have close physical

think, feel and act as a social unit, and proximity, and they share warm emotional

less like isolated individuals. Members bonds. Primary groups are central to
of a highly cohesive group have a individual’s functioning and have a very
greater desire to remain in the group in major role in developing values and ideals
comparison to those who belong to low of the individual during the early stages of
cohesive groups. Cohesiveness refers to development. In contrast, secondary
the team spirit or ‘we feeling’ or a sense groups are those where relationships
of belongingness to the group. It is among members are more impersonal,
difficult to leave a cohesive group or to indirect, and less frequent. In the primary
gain membership of a group which is group, boundaries are less permeable, i.e.
highly cohesive. Extreme cohesiveness members do not have the option to choose
however, may sometimes not be in a its membership as compared to secondary
group’s interest. Psychologists have groups where it is easy to leave and join
identified the phenomenon of another group.
groupthink (see Box 7.1) which is a
consequence of extreme cohesiveness. Formal and Informal Groups

These groups differ in the degree to which
TYPE OF GROUPS the functions of the group are stated

explicitly and formally. The functions of a
Groups differ in many respects; some have formal group are explicitly stated as in the
a large number of members (e.g., a case of an office organisation. The roles to
country), some are small (e.g., a family), be performed by group members are stated

126
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



in an explicit manner. The formal and differently and are often perceived negatively
informal groups differ on the basis of in comparison to the ingroup members.
structure. The formation of formal groups Perceptions of ingroup and outgroup affect
is based on some specific rules or laws and our social lives. These differences can be
members have definite roles. There are a easily understood by studying Tajfel’s
set of norms which help in establishing experiments given in Box 7.2.
order. A university is an example of a Although it is common to make these
formal group. On the other hand, the categorisations, it should be appreciated
formation of informal groups is not based that these categories are not real and are
on rules or laws and there is close created by us. In some cultures, plurality
relationship among members. is celebrated as has been the case in India.

We have a unique composite culture which
Ingroup and Outgroup is reflected not only in the lives we live, but

Just as individuals compare themselves also in our art, architecture, and music.

with others in terms of similarities and
differences with respect to what they have Ingroup and Outgroup Activity
and what others have, individuals also Distinctions 7.2

compare the group they belong to with
groups of which they are not a member. Think of any interinstitutional

competition held in the near past. Ask
The term ‘ingroup’ refers to one’s own your friends to write a paragraph
group, and ‘outgroup’ refers to another about your school and its students,
group. For ingroup members, we use the and about another school and
word ‘we’ while for outgroup members, the students of that school. Ask the class

word ‘they’ is used. By using the words and list the behaviour and

they and we, one is categorising people as characteristics of your schoolmates,
and students of the other school on

similar or different. It has been found that
the board. Observe the differences

persons in the ingroup are generally and discuss in the class. Do you also
supposed to be similar, are viewed see similarities? If yes, discuss them
favourably, and have desirable traits. too.

Members of the outgroup are viewed

Box
7.2 The Minimal Group Paradigm Experiments

Tajfel and his colleagues were interested in knowing the minimal conditions for intergroup
behaviour. ‘Minimal group paradigm’ was developed to answer this question. British school-
boys expressed their preference for paintings by two artists — Vassily Kandinsky and Paul
Klee. Children were told that it was an experiment on decision-making. They knew the
groups in which they were grouped (Kandinsky group and Klee group). The identity of other
group members was hidden using code numbers. The children then distributed money
between recipients only by code number and group membership.

Sample distribution matrix :
Ingroup member — 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Outgroup member — 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25

You will agree that these groups were created on a flimsy criterion (i.e. preference for
paintings by two artists) which had no past history or future. Yet, results showed that
children favoured their own group.

127
Chapter 7 • Social Influence and Group Processes

Reprint 2025-26



I as loudly as possible as they
NFLUENCE OF GROUP ON INDIVIDUAL

(experimenters) were interested in
BEHAVIOUR

knowing how much noise people make in
We have seen that groups are powerful social settings. They varied the group
as they are able to influence the size; individuals were either alone, or in
behaviour of individuals. What is the groups of two, four and six. The results
nature of this influence? What impact of the study showed that although the
does the presence of others have on our total amount of noise rose up, as size
performance? We will discuss two increased, the amount of noise produced
situations : (i) an individual performing by each participant dropped. In other
an activity alone in the presence of others words, each participant put in less effort
(social facilitation), and (ii) an individual as the group size increased. Why does
performing an activity along with the social loafing occur? The explanations
others as part of a larger group (social offered are:
loafing). • Group members feel less responsible

for the overall task being performed
Social Loafing and therefore exert less effort.

• Motivation of members decreases
Social facilitation research suggests that

because they realise that their
presence of others leads to arousal and

contributions will not be evaluated on
can motivate individuals to enhance their

individual basis.
performance if they are already good at

• The performance of the group is not
solving something. This enhancement to be compared with other groups.
occurs when a person’s efforts are • There is an improper coordination (or
individually evaluated. What would no coordination) among members.
happen if efforts of an individual in a • Belonging to the same group is not
group are pooled so that you look at the important for members. It is only an
performance of the group as a whole? Do aggregate of individuals.
you know what often happens? It has
been found that individuals work less Social loafing may be reduced by:

hard in a group than they do when • Making the efforts of each person

performing alone. This points to a identifiable.

phenomenon referred to as ‘social loafing’. • Increasing the pressure to work hard

Social loafing is a reduction in individual (making group members committed to

effort when working on a collective task, successful task performance).

i.e. one in which outputs are pooled with • Increasing the apparent importance or

those of other group members. An value of a task.

example of such a task is the game of • Making people feel that their

tug-of-war. It is not possible for you to individual contribution is important.

identify how much force each member of • Strengthening group cohesiveness
which increases the motivation for

the team has been exerting. Such
successful group outcome.

situations give opportunities to group
members to relax and become a free

Group Polarisation
rider. This phenomenon has been
demonstrated in many experiments by We all know that important decisions are
Latane and his associates who asked taken by groups and not by individuals
group of male students to clap or cheer alone. For example, a decision is to be

128
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



taken whether a school has to be this interaction, your views may become
established in a village. Such a decision stronger. This firm conviction is because
has to be a group decision. We have also of the following three reasons:
seen that when groups take decisions, • In the company of like-minded people,
there is a fear that the phenomenon of you are likely to hear newer
groupthink may sometimes occur (see arguments favouring your viewpoints.
Box 7.1). Groups show another tendency This will make you more favourable
referred to as ‘group polarisation’. It has towards capital punishment.
been found that groups are more likely • When you find others also favouring
to take extreme decisions than capital punishment, you feel that this
individuals alone. Suppose there is an view is validated by the public. This
employee who has been caught taking is a sort of bandwagon effect.
bribe or engaging in some other • When you find people having similar
unethical act. Her/his colleagues are views, you are likely to perceive them
asked to decide on what punishment s/ as ingroup. You start identifying with
he should be given. They may let her/ the group, begin showing conformity,
him go scot-free or decide to terminate and as a consequence your views
her/his services instead of imposing a become strengthened.
punishment which may be
commensurate with the unethical act s/

Assessing Polarisation Activity
he had engaged in. Whatever the initial 7.3
position in the group, this position Give the class a short, 5-item attitude
becomes much stronger as a result of scale developed by your teacher to
discussions in the group. This assess attitudes towards capital

strengthening of the group’s initial punishment. Based on their responses,

position as a result of group interaction divide the class into two groups, i.e.
those pro-capital punishment and

and discussion is referred to as group
those anti-capital punishment. Now

polarisation. This may sometimes have seat these groups into two different
dangerous repercussions as groups may rooms and ask them to discuss a recent
take extreme positions, i.e. from very case in which death sentence has been
weak to very strong decisions. given by the court. See how the

Why does group polarisation occur? discussion proceeds in the two groups.
After the discussion, re-administer the

Let us take an example whether capital
attitude scale to the group members.

punishment should be there. Suppose Examine if, in both groups, positions
you favour capital punishment for have hardened in comparison to their
heinous crimes, what would happen if initial position as a result of group
you were interacting with and discussing discussion.

this issue with like-minded people? After

Key Terms
Cohesiveness, Conflict, Goal achievement, Group, Group formation, Groupthink, Identity, Ingroup,
Interdependence, Norms, Proximity, Roles, Social influence, Social loafing, Status, Structure.

129
Chapter 7 • Social Influence and Group Processes

Reprint 2025-26



• Groups are different from other collections of people. Mutual interdependence, roles,
status, and expectations are the main characteristics of groups.

• Groups are organised systems of two or more individuals.
• People join groups because they provide security, status, self-esteem, satisfaction

of one’s psychological and social needs, goal achievement, and knowledge and
information.

• Proximity, similarity, and common motives and goals facilitate group formation.
• Generally, group work leads to beneficial results. However, sometimes in cohesive

and homogeneous groups, the phenomenon of groupthink may occur.
• Groups are of different types, i.e. primary and secondary, formal and informal,

and ingroup and outgroup.
• Groups influence individual behaviour. Social facilitation and social loafing are

two important influences of groups.

Review Questions

1. Compare and contrast formal and informal groups, and ingroups and outgroups.
2. Are you a member of a certain group? Discuss what motivated you to join that

group.
3. How does Tuckman’s stage model help you to understand the formation of groups?
4. How do groups influence our behaviour?
5. How can you reduce social loafing in groups? Think of any two incidents of social

loafing in school. How did you overcome it?

Project
1. Identify any Test series in cricket which India played recently. Collect the newspapers

Idea
of that period. Evaluate the reviews of the matches and comments made by Indian
and rival commentators. Do you see any difference between the comments?

Weblinks

http://www.mapnp.org/library/grp_skill/theory/theory.htm
http://www.socialpsychology.org/social.htm

130
Psychology

Reprint 2025-26



Pedagogical Hints
1. In the topic of nature and

formation of groups, students
should be made to understand the
importance of groups in real-life.
Here, it needs to be emphasised
that they should be careful in
choosing groups. Teachers can ask
a few students how they have
become members of different
groups, and what do they get from
membership in these groups.

2. For explaining social loafing,
simple experiments can be
conducted in the class by asking
students to perform some activities
in groups and then asking them
about their contributions in the
activities undertaken. Learning
experience for students should be
on ways to avoid social loafing.

131
Chapter 7 • Social Influence and Group Processes

Reprint 2025-26