Contemporary 

World politiCs
textbook in politiCal sCienCe for Class xii

Reprint 2025-26



12107 – Contemporary World politiCs
ISBN  81-7450-693-4

Textbook for Class XII

First Edition   
February 2007 Phalguna 1928

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Reprinted  No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 
January 2008, March 2009 or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 

January 2010, March 2013 photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the 
publisher.

January 2014, December 2014
 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of 

January 2016, February 2017
trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the 

January 2018, January 2019 publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in 

December 2019, March 2021 which it is published.

December 2021, February 2022  The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, 
Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any 
other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.

Revised Edition
October 2022, Aashwin 1944

OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION  

Reprinted DIVISION, NCERT

March 2024, Chaitra 1946 NCERT Campus
December 2024, Agrahayana 1946 Sri Aurobindo Marg

New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road 
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage

PD 42T BS
Bengaluru 560 085  Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan 

© National Council of Educational  Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446

Research and Training, 2007, 2022
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454

` CWC Complex
 105.00

Maligaon  
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869

About the cover

The stamps on the cover page are 
designed by the United Nations Publication Team

Postal Administration portraying Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan
various contemporary world issues. Division 

Chief Editor  : Bijnan Sutar

Chief Production : Jahan Lal
Officer (In charge)

Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar

Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT Manager

watermark Assistant Production : Deepak Kumar 
Officer

Published at the Publication Division 
by the Secretary, National Council of 
Educational Research and Training, Cover and Layout Illustrations
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 

Shweta Rao Irfaan
016 and printed at Raj Printers, A-9, 
Sector B-2, Tronica City, Loni, Ghaziabad 
(U.P.) 201102

Reprint 2025-26



iii

foreword

The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s life 
at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a 
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system 
and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks 
developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They 
also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries 
between different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly 
further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National 
Policy on Education (1986).

The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and 
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue 
imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that given space, time and 
freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on 
to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination 
is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored. 
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as 
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.

These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning. 
Flexibility in the daily timetable is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual 
calendar so that the required number of teaching days is actually devoted to teaching. 
The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this 
textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than 
a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem 
of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages 
with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. 
The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space 
to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and 
activities requiring hands-on experience.

The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates 
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this 
book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Social Sciences, 
Professor Hari Vasudevan, the Chief Advisors, Professor Yogendra Yadav and Professor 
Suhas Palshikar and the Advisor, Professor Kanti Bajpai for guiding the work of 
this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; 
we are grateful to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the 
institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon 
their resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members 
of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary 
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resources Development under the 

Reprint 2025-26



iv

Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their 
valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform and 
continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments 
and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.

 Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational 
20 November 2006 Research and Training

Reprint 2025-26



Rationalisation of Content  
in the Textbooks

In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on students. 
The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the content load 
and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. In this 
background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks 
across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across classes 
have been taken into consideration in this exercise.

Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:

• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same class

• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject

• Difficulty level

• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions from 

teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-learning

• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context

This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes given above.

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26



vii

prefac e

Contemporary World Politics is part of the NCERT’s effort to help students understand 
politics. Other books for students of Political Science in Classes XI and XII deal with 
various facets of politics — the Indian Constitution, politics in India, and political 
theory. Contemporary World Politics enlarges the scope of politics to the world stage.

The new Political Science syllabus has finally given space to world politics. This 
is a vital development. As India becomes more prominent in international politics 
and as events outside the country influence our lives and choices, we need to know 
more about the world outside. International affairs are discussed with great passion 
in India, but not always with sufficient understanding. We tend to rely on the daily 
newspaper, television, and casual conversation for our knowledge of how the world 
works. We hope this book will help students comprehend what is happening outside 
and India’s relations with it.

Before we go any further, it is necessary to say something about why the book 
is titled ‘world politics’ rather than the more traditional ‘international politics’ or 
‘international relations’. In this world, the relationship between governments of 
different countries, or what we call international politics or international relations, is of 
course crucial. In addition, though, there are vital connections between governments, 
non-government institutions, and ordinary people. These are often referred to as 
transnational relations. To understand the world, it is not possible any longer to 
understand only the links between governments. It is necessary to understand what 
happens across boundaries also — and governments are not the only agents of what 
happens.  

In addition, world politics includes politics within other countries, understood in 
comparative perspective. For instance, the chapter on events in the “second world” 
of the communist countries after the Cold War deals with internal developments in 
this region. The South Asia chapter presents the state of democracy amongst India’s 
neighbours. This is the field of comparative politics.

The book is concerned with world politics as it is today, more or less.  It does 
not deal with world politics through the 19th or 20th centuries. The politics of those 
eras is dealt with in the History textbooks. We deal with the 20th century only to the 
extent that it is the background to present events and trends.

How should you use this book? Our hope is that this book will serve as an 
introduction to world politics. Teachers and students will use the book as a springboard 
to find out more about contemporary world politics. Each chapter will give you a certain 
amount of information. It will also, though, give you some useful concepts with which 
to understand the world: the Cold War; international organisations; national security 
and human security; environmental security; globalisation; and so on.

Each chapter begins with an overview to quickly give you an idea of what to expect. 
Each chapter also has maps, tables, graphics, boxes, cartoons, and other illustrations 
to enliven your reading and to get you to reflect on world politics by provoking, 
challenging, or amusing you. The characters — Unni and Munni, introduced in earlier 
books, reappear. They ask their innocent, often mischievous, frequently probing 
questions. The chapters have suggestions on group activity (“Let’s Do It Together”)—
collecting materials together, solving an international problem, making you negotiate 
as if you were a diplomat. Then there are the “plus boxes” which provide information 

Reprint 2025-26



viii

not so much for tests and examination questions but rather to fill out knowledge, 
to summarise information that would burden the text, and, sometimes, to urge you 
to think further about the subject.  The exercises at the end of each chapter should 
help review materials that you have read and take you beyond what has been said 
in the chapter.

You will notice also that the book is filled with maps. It is difficult if not impossible 
to understand world politics without a sense of where various places are located, 
who lives next door to whom, where boundaries, rivers, and other political and 
geographical features are in relation to each other. We have, therefore, been quite 
liberal in providing maps. These maps are to help orient you, to visualise the political 
and geographical spaces that you read about. They are not intended to be things you 
have to draw and memorise for tests!

This brings us to a crucial point about how to use the book. We have made a 
conscious effort not to load you down with information—with names, dates, events. 
We have tried to keep these to a minimum. The idea is not for you to become an expert 
on world politics but instead to begin to grapple with the complexity and urgency of 
this new world around us. At the same time, should you wish to know more about 
world politics, you can consult the various sources mentioned separately under, “If 
you want to read more…”. 

If the book succeeds in stimulating you, in making you ask even more questions 
than we have posed for you, and in making you impatient with what you have read 
here, then we have succeeded! We sincerely hope that you will like this book and find 
it engaging and useful.

We are grateful to Professor Krishna Kumar, Director, NCERT, for his support and 
guidance in the preparation of this book. He encouraged us in making this book as 
student-friendly as possible. He also patiently waited for the final draft of the book.  
 Contemporary World Politics would not have been possible without the valuable 
time and academic expertise of the members of the Textbook Development Committee. 
Each of the members gave us their precious time and set aside prior commitments 
at various junctures. Professor Sanjay Chaturvedi and Dr. Siddharth Mallavarapu 
deserve our special thanks for their help in selecting maps and in editing the text. We 
are grateful for the devotion and sincerity of Dr. M. V. S. V. Prasad, the coordinator of 
this textbook from the NCERT, as also Mr. Alex M. George and Mr. Pankaj Pushkar 
who worked day and night to ensure the quality of the text, the authenticity of the 
contents, and above all, the readability of this book. Ms. Padmavathi worked on all 
the exercises. The designer of this book, Ms. Shweta Rao, gave the book the attractive 
look and feel that it has. Without their unstinting and creative help, we could not 
have produced the book in its present form.

Kanti Bajpai           Yogendra Yadav, Suhas Palshikar
Advisor               Chief Advisors

Reprint 2025-26



ix

Textbook Development Committee

Chairperson, advisory Committee for textbooks at the senior seCondary level
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta, Kolkata

Chief advisors
Yogendra Yadav, Senior Fellow, Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS), 
Delhi

Suhas Palshikar, Professor, Department of Politics and Public Administration, 
University of Pune, Pune

advisor
Kanti P. Bajpai, Headmaster, The Doon School, Dehradun

members
Alex M. George, Independent Researcher, Eruvatty, District Kannur, Kerala

Anuradha M. Chenoy, Professor, Centre for Russian and Central Asian Studies, SIS, 
JNU, New Delhi

Madhu Bhalla, Professor, Department of East Asian Studies, University of Delhi, Delhi

Navnita Chadha Behera, Reader, Department of Political Science, University of Delhi, 
Delhi

Padmavathi, B.S., Faculty, Social Sciences, International Academy for Creative 
Teaching (iACT), Bangalore

Pankaj Pushkar, Senior Lecturer, Directorate of Higher Education (Uttarakhand), 
Haldwani

Sabyasachi Basu Ray Chaudhury, Reader, Department of Political Science, Rabindra 
Bharati University, Kolkata

Samir Das, Reader, Department of Political Science, University of Calcutta, Kolkata

Sanjay Chaturvedi, Reader, Centre for Study of Geopolitics, Department of Political 
Science, Panjab University, Chandigarh

Sanjay Dubey, Reader, DESSH, NCERT

Shibashis Chatterjee, Lecturer, Department of International Relations, Jadavpur 
University, Kolkata

Siddharth Mallavarapu, Assistant Professor, Centre for International Politics, 
Organisation and Disarmament, SIS, JNU, New Delhi

Varun Sahni, Professor, Centre for International Politics, Organisation and 
Disarmament, SIS, JNU, New Delhi

member-Coordinator
Malla V. S. V. Prasad, Lecturer, Department of Education in Social Sciences and 
Humanities (DESSH), NCERT, New Delhi

Reprint 2025-26



x

Ac knowledgements

The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) acknowledges all 
those who contributed – directly and indirectly – to the development of this textbook.

We offer thanks to Professor Savita Sinha, Head, DESSH for her support. We gratefully 
acknowledge the efforts of the administrative staff of DESSH.

We want to record our sincere appreciation of the generous institutional support 
provided by the Lokniti programme of the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies 
(CSDS). We would like to thank Professor Peter R. De Souza, Director, Lokniti, in 
particular.

The Council gratefully acknowledges the contribution of the following individuals and 
institutions: Mr. Robert W. Gray, Chief, United Nations Postal Administration, New 
York for granting approval to use UN stamps; Professor K. C. Suri for valuable inputs; 
Cagle Cartoons Inc. for providing copyrights of the cartoons of Andy Singer, Angel 
Boligan, Ares, Cam Cardow, Christo Komarnitski, Deng Coy Miel, Harry Harrison, 
Mike Lane, Milt Priggee, Pat Bagley, Petar Pismestrovic and Tab; Mr. Kutty (Laughing 
with Kutty), The Hindu, and Pakistan Tribune for the cartoons; cartoonist Irfaan 
Khan for the drawings; M/s. Cartographic Designs for providing two maps (India 
and its neighbours and the world map); the Parliament Library, the United Nations 
Information Centre, New Delhi and Gobar Times (Down to Earth supplements) for 
providing materials; and wikipedia and flickr.com (downloaded before 31 Dec 2006) 
for providing images.

The production of the book benefited greatly from the efforts of the Publications 
Department. Our special thanks to Purnendu Kumar Barik, Copy Editor, and 
Neelam Walecha, DTP Operator.

The Council acknowledges the valuable inputs for analysing syllabi, textbooks and 
the content proposed to be rationalised for this edition by Kavita Jain, PGT, Political 
Science, G.D. Goenka Public School, Model Town, New Delhi; Maneesha Pandey, 
Associate Professor, Department of Political Science, Hindu College, Delhi University; 
Shankar Saran, Professor, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi; Vanthangpui Khobung, 
Assistant Professor, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi; and Sunita Kathuria, PGT, Political 
Science, MCL Saraswati Bal Mandir, New Delhi.

Request for Feedback

How did you like this textbook? What was your experience in reading or using this? What were the difficulties you 
faced? What changes would you like to see in the next version of this book?
Write to us on all these and any other matter related to this textbook. You could be a teacher, a parent, a student 
or just a general reader. We value any and every feedback.
Please write to:

Coordinator (Political Science)

DESS, NCERT, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016

Reprint 2025-26



xi

Contents

Foreword                  iii

Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks        v

Preface                   vii

Chapter 1
The End of Bipolarity               1

Chapter 2
Contemporary Centres of Power            15

Chapter 3
Contemporary South Asia              29

Chapter 4
International Organisations             45

Chapter 5
Security in the Contemporary World          63

Chapter 6
Environment and Natural Resources          81

Chapter 7
Globalisation                  99

Reprint 2025-26



If You Want to Read More ...

Where can you read more on contemporary world politics? There are hundreds of 
thousands of sources, but here are a few suggestions. We focus here on English 
language sources. These are by no means the only good sources, but they are easier 
for Indian students to access.

Wikipedia (on the net) often has interesting entries on many of the subjects, 
countries, people, and events referred to in the book. Encyclopaedias such as the 
Encyclopaedia Britannica are rich sources of information. There are many more 
advanced introductory books on world politics. Some useful and fairly contemporary 
ones include The Globalization of World Politics: An Introduction to International 
Relations edited by John Baylis, Steve Smith and Patricia Owens (Oxford University 
Press, 2004), The Global Future: A Brief Introduction to World Politics by Charles W. 
Kegley and Gregory A. Raymond (Wadsworth Publishing, 2007), United States and 
the Great Powers: World Politics in the Twenty-First Century by Barry Buzan (Polity 
Press, 2004), International Relations by Joshua S. Goldstein and Jon C. Pevehouse 
(Longman, 2005) and World Politics by Peter Calvocoressi (Longman, 2001).

Among the magazines you could read regularly are Frontline, India Today, Outlook 
and The Week, all Indian publications. Also in India, there are more academic journals 
such as China Report, Economic and Political Weekly, India International Centre 
Quarterly, India Quarterly, International Studies, Seminar, South Asian Survey, Strategic 
Analysis and World Affairs. Outside India, there are a huge number of journals but 
the most popular include the following US and British journals: Atlantic Monthly, The 
Economist, The National Interest, Newsweek and Time. The American journals, Foreign 
Affairs and Foreign Policy will give you an idea how leading US thinkers regard the 
world. Among the academic journals, internationally, are Alternatives, Arms Control 
Today, Asian Security, Asian Survey,  Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, China Quarterly, 
Comparative Politics, European Journal of International Relations, Global Governance, 
Harvard International Review, India Review, International Affairs, International Journal, 
International Organization, International Security, Millennium, Orbis, Pacific Affairs, 
Review of International Studies, Russian Review, Survival, Security Dialogue, Security 
Studies, Slavic Review, World Policy Journal, World Politics and YaleGlobal Online.

Of course, you should get into the habit of reading the daily newspaper and 
keeping up with what is going on in the world. The television news channels also 
report regularly on world events: do watch the world unfold before your eyes!

Reprint 2025-26



Chapter 1

The End  of Bipola rity

Overview

The Berlin Wall, which had been 
built at the height of the Cold 
War and was its greatest symbol, 
was toppled by the people in 
1989. This dramatic event was 
followed by an equally dramatic 
and historic chain of events that 
led to the collapse of the ‘second 
world’ and the end of the Cold 
War. Germany, divided after the 
Second World War, was unified. 
One after another, the eight East 
European countries that were 
part of the Soviet bloc replaced 
their communist governments in 
response to mass demonstrations. 
The Soviet Union stood by as the 
Cold War began to end, not by 
military means but as a result The Berlin Wa ll 

symbolised  the d ivision 
of mass actions by ordinary men between the c ap ita list 
and women. Eventually the Soviet and  the c ommunist 

Union itself disintegrated. In this world . Built in 1961 

chapter, we discuss the meaning, to separa te East Berlin from West Berlin, this more than 
150 kilometre long wall stood for 28 years and was finally 

the causes and the consequences 
broken by the peop le on 9 November 1989. This marked  the 

of the disintegration of the ‘second unification of the two parts of Germany and the beginning of 
world’. We also discuss what the end  of the c ommunist b loc . The p ic tures here dep ic t: 

happened to that part of the world 1. Peop le making a  tiny hole in the wa ll       
2. A sec tion of the wa ll opened  to a llow free movement

after the collapse of communist 
3. The Berlin Wa ll as it stood  before 1989 

regimes and how India relates to Cred it: 1. and  2. Frederik Ramm,  
these countries now. www.remote.org / frederik/ c ulture/ berlin

3. www.c s.utah.edu

Reprint 2025-26



2 Contempora ry World  Politic s

W machinery production, and a 
hat Was the soviet 

transport sector that connected 
system? its remotest areas with efficiency. 

It had a domestic consumer 
LEADERS OF THE The Union of Soviet Socialist 

industry that produced everything 
SOVIET UNION Republics (USSR)  came into being 

after the socialist revolution in from pins to cars, though their 

Russia in 1917. The revolution was quality did not match that of the 

inspired by the ideals of socialism, Western capitalist countries. The 

as opposed to capitalism, and the Soviet state ensured a minimum 

need for an egalitarian society. standard of living for all citizens, 

This was perhaps the biggest and the government subsidised 

attempt in human history to basic necessities including 
abolish the institution of private health, education, childcare and 

other welfare schemes. State 
Vladimir Lenin property and consciously design 
(1870-1924) a society based on principles of ownership was the dominant 
Founder of the equality. In doing so, the makers of form of ownership: land and 
Bolshevik the Soviet system gave primacy to productive assets were owned 
Communist pa rty; the state and the institution of the and controlled by the Soviet state. 
leader of the party. The Soviet political system 
Russian Revolution The Soviet system, however, 

centred around the communist 
of 1917 and  the became very bureaucratic and 
founder-head  of party, and no other political 

authoritarian, making life very 
the USSR during  party or opposition was allowed. 
the most difficult The economy was planned and difficult for its citizens. Lack of 

period  following controlled by the state. democracy and the absence of 

the revolution freedom of speech stifled people 
(1917-1924); a  After the Second World War, who often expressed their dissent 
practitioner of the east European countries that in jokes and cartoons. Most of 
Marxism and  the Soviet army had liberated the institutions of the Soviet 
a source of from the fascist forces came state needed reform: the one-
insp ira tion for under the control of the USSR. 
communists all party system represented by 

The political and the economic 
over the world . the Communist Party of the 

systems of all these countries Soviet Union had tight control 
were modelled after the USSR. 

over all institutions and was 
This group of countries was called 

unaccountable to the people. 
the Second World or the ‘socialist 

The party refused to recognise 
bloc’. The Warsaw Pact, a military 

the urge of people in the fifteen 
alliance, held them together. The 

different republics that formed 
USSR was the leader of the bloc.

the Soviet Union to manage 
The Soviet Union became their own affairs including their 

a great power after the Second cultural affairs. Although, on 
World War. The Soviet economy paper, Russia was only one of 
was then more developed than the the fifteen republics that together 
rest of the world except for the US. constituted the USSR, in reality 
It had a complex communications Russia dominated everything, 
network, vast energy resources and people from other regions felt 
including oil, iron and steel, neglected and often suppressed.

Reprint 2025-26

##1##

The End  of Bipola rity 3

In the arms race, the Soviet Gorbachev, did not intervene 
Union managed to match the US when the disturbances occurred, 
from time to time, but at great and the communist regimes 
cost. The Soviet Union lagged collapsed one after another. 

LEADERS OF THE 
behind the West in technology, 

These developments were 
infrastructure (e.g., transport, SOVIET UNION

accompanied by a rapidly 
power), and most importantly, in escalating crisis within the USSR 
fulfilling the political or economic that hastened its disintegration. 
aspirations of citizens. The Soviet Gorbachev initiated the policies 
invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 of economic and political reform 
weakened the system even further. and democratisation within 
Though wages continued to grow, the country. The reforms were 
productivity and technology fell opposed by leaders within the 
considerably behind that of the Communist Party. Joseph Stalin 

West. This led to shortages in all (1879-1953)

consumer goods. Food imports A coup took place in 1991 that Successor to Lenin 
was encouraged by Communist and  led  the Soviet 

increased every year. The Soviet 
Party hardliners. The people had Union during  its 

economy was faltering in the late consolidation 
1970s and became stagnant. tasted freedom by then and did 

(1924-53); 
not want the old-style rule of the began rap id  
Communist Party. Boris Yeltsin industria lisa tion 

Gorbachev and the emerged as a national hero in and forcible 
opposing this coup. The Russian collectivisation 

disinteGration
Republic, where Yeltsin won a of agriculture; 

Mikhail Gorbachev, who had credited with 
popular election, began to shake Soviet victory 

become General Secretary of off centralised control. Power in the Second 
the Communist Party of the began to shift from the Soviet World  War;  held  
Soviet Union in 1985, sought centre to the republics, especially responsib le for 
to reform this system. Reforms in the more Europeanised part the Grea t Terror 

were necessary to keep the USSR of the 1930s, 
of the Soviet Union, which saw 

abreast of the information and authorita rian 
themselves as sovereign states. functioning and 

technological revolutions taking The Central Asian republics elimina tion of 
place in the West. However, did not ask for independence riva ls within the 
Gorbachev’s decision to normalise and wanted to remain with the party. 

relations with the West and Soviet Federation. In December 
democratise and reform the 1991, under the leadership of 
Soviet Union had some other Yeltsin, Russia, Ukraine and 
effects that neither he nor anyone Belarus, three major republics 
else intended or anticipated. The of the USSR, declared that the 
people in the East European Soviet Union was disbanded. The 
countries which were part of the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Soviet bloc started to protest Union was banned. Capitalism 
against their own governments and democracy were adopted 
and Soviet control. Unlike in the as the bases for the post-Soviet 
past, the Soviet Union, under republics.

Reprint 2025-26



4 Contempora ry World  Politic s

A Communist Party bureaucrat drives down from Moscow to a collective 
fa rm to reg ister a  pota to ha rvest.

“Comrade farmer, how has the harvest been this year?” the official asks.
LEADERS OF THE “Oh, by the grace of God, we had mountains of potatoes,” answers the 
SOVIET UNION fa rmer.

“But there is no God,” counters the official.
“ Huh” , says the fa rmer, “ And  there a re no mounta ins of pota toes either.”  

The declarat ion on the there may be more general 
disintegration of the USSR and the lessons to be drawn from this 
formation of the Commonwealth of very important case.
Independent States (CIS) came as 

There is  no doubt that 
a surprise to the other republics, 

Nikita Khrushc hev the internal weaknesses of 
especially to the Central Asian 

(1894-1971) Soviet political and economic 
Leader of the ones. The exclusion of these 

institutions, which failed to meet 
Soviet Union republics was an issue that was 

the aspirations of the people, were 
(1953-64); quickly solved by making them 
denounced responsible for the collapse of 

founding members of the CIS. 
Sta lin’ s leadership  the system. Economic stagnation 

Russia was now accepted as 
style and  for many years led to severe 
introduced the successor state of the Soviet 

consumer shortages and a large 
some reforms in Union. It inherited the Soviet seat 

in the UN Security Council. Russia section of Soviet society began to 
1956; suggested  
“peaceful accepted all the international doubt and question the system 
coexistence” treaties and commitments of the and to do so openly.
with the West; 

Soviet Union. It took over as the Why did the system become 
involved  in 

only nuclear state of the post-
suppressing so weak and why did the economy 
popula r rebellion Soviet space and carried out some stagnate?  The answer is partially 
in Hungary and  in nuclear disarmament measures clear.  The Soviet  economy 
the Cuban missile with the US. The old Soviet Union used much of its resources in 
crisis. was thus dead and buried. maintaining a nuclear and military 

arsenal and the development of its 

W satellite states in Eastern Europe 
hy did the soviet Union 

and within the Soviet system (the 
DisinteGrate? five Central Asian Republics in 
How did the second most particular). This led to a huge 
powerful country in the world economic burden that the system 
suddenly disintegrate? This is a could not cope with. At the same 
question worth asking not just to time, ordinary citizens became 
understand the Soviet Union and more knowledgeable about the 

I am amazed ! How 

could so many the end of communism but also economic advance of the West. 
sensitive peop le because it is not the first and may They could see the disparities 
a ll over the world  not be the last political system to between their system and the 
admire a  system like collapse. While there are unique systems of the West. After years 
this? features of the Soviet collapse, of being told that the Soviet 

Reprint 2025-26



The End  of Bipola rity 5

system was better than Western impossible to control.  There were 
capitalism, the reality of its sections of Soviet society which 
backwardness came as a political felt that Gorbachev should have 
and psychological shock. moved much faster and were 

disappointed and impatient with LEADERS OF THE 
The Soviet Union had become 

his methods. They did not benefit SOVIET UNION
stagnant in an administrative 

in the way they had hoped, 
and political sense as well. The 

or they benefited too slowly. 
Communist Party that had ruled 

Others, especially members of the 
the Soviet Union for over 70 

Communist Party and those who 
years was not accountable to 

were served by the system, took 
the people. Ordinary people 

exactly the opposite view. They 
were alienated by slow and 

felt that their power and privileges 
stifling administration, rampant 

were eroding and Gorbachev was 
corruption, the inability of the Leonid Brezhnev 
system to correct mistakes it had moving too quickly. In this ‘tug 

(1906-82) 
made, the unwillingness to allow of war’, Gorbachev lost support Leader of the 
more openness in government, on all sides and divided public Soviet Union (1964-

and the centralisation of authority opinion.  Even those who were 82); p roposed  
Asian Collective 

in a vast land. Worse still, the with him became disillusioned as 

party bureaucrats gained more they felt that he did not adequately Security system; 

privileges than ordinary citizens. defend his own policies. associated with 
the détente phase 

People did not identify with the All this might not have led to in rela tions with 
system and with the rulers, and the collapse of the Soviet Union the US; involved  

the government increasingly lost but for another development that in suppressing a  

popular backing. popula r rebellion 
surprised most observers and in Czechoslovakia 

Gorbachev’s reforms promised indeed many insiders. The rise and  in invad ing 
to deal with these problems. of nationalism and the desire Afghanistan.

Gorbachev promised to reform the for sovereignty within various 

economy, catch up with the West, republics including Russia and 

and loosen the administrative the Baltic Republics (Estonia, 

system. You may wonder why the Latvia and Lithuania), Ukraine, 

Soviet Union collapsed in spite of Georgia, and others proved to 

Gorbachev’s accurate diagnosis be the final and most immediate 

of the problem and his attempt cause for the disintegration of 

to implement reforms. Here is the USSR. Here again there are 

where the answers become more differing views.
controversial, and we have to One view is that nationalist 
depend on future historians to 

urges and feelings were very much 
guide us better. 

at work throughout the history of 
The most basic answer seems the Soviet Union and that whether 

to be that when Gorbachev carried or not the reforms had occurred 
out his reforms and loosened the there would have been an internal 
system, he set in motion forces and struggle within the Soviet Union. 
expectations that few could have This is a ‘what-if’ of history, but 
predicted and became virtually surely it is not an unreasonable 

Reprint 2025-26



6 Contempora ry World  Politic s

view given the size and diversity of Ironically, during the Cold War 
the Soviet Union and its growing many thought that nationalist 
internal problems. Others think unrest would be strongest in the 
that Gorbachev’s reforms speeded Central Asian republics given their 

LEADERS OF THE up and increased nationalist ethnic and religious differences 
SOVIET UNION dissatisfaction to the point that with the rest of the Soviet Union 

the government and rulers could and their economic backwardness. 
not control it. However, as things turned out, 

TI MELI NE OF DI SI NTEGRATI ON 

OF THE SOVI ET UNI ON 

1985 Marc h: Mikhail Gorbachev elected as the General Secretary of the  
Mikhail Communist Party of the Soviet Union; appoints Boris Yeltsin as the head  of the 

Gorbac hev   Communist Party in Moscow; initiates a series of reforms in the Soviet Union
(Born 1931) 
Last leader 1988 June: Independence movement begins in Lithuania; later spreads to 
of the Soviet Estonia  and  La tvia

Union (1985-
91); introduced 1989 Oc tober: Soviet Union declares that the Warsaw Pact members are free 
economic to decide their own futures; Berlin Wall falls in November
and political 
reform policies 1990 February: Gorbachev strips the Soviet Communist Party of its 72-year-long 
of perestroika  monopoly on power by calling on the Soviet parliament (Duma) to permit 
(restructuring) multi-party politics
and  g lasnost 
(openness); 1990 Marc h: Lithuania becomes the first of the 15 Soviet republics to declare 
stopped  the its independence
arms race with 
the US; withd rew 1990 June: Russian parliament declares its independence from the Soviet Union
Soviet troops from 
Afghanistan and  1991 June: Yeltsin, no longer in the Communist Party, becomes the President 
eastern Europe; of Russia

helped  in the 
unification of 1991 August: The Communist Party hardliners stage an abortive coup against 
Germany; ended  Gorbachev 
the Cold  War; 
b lamed  for the 1991 September: Three Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania become 
d isintegra tion of UN members (later join NATO in March 2004)
the Soviet Union. 

1991 Dec ember: Russia, Belarus and Ukraine decide to annul the 1922 Treaty 
on the Crea tion of the USSR and  estab lish the Commonwea lth of Independent 
States (CIS); Armenia, Azerbaijan, Moldova, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, 
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan join the CIS (Georgia joins later in 1993); Russia 
takes over the USSR seat in the United Nations

1991 Dec ember 25: Gorbachev resigns as the President of the Soviet Union; the 
end  of the Soviet Union

Reprint 2025-26



The End  of Bipola rity 7

nationalist dissatisfaction with the changed. The end of the Cold War 
Soviet Union was strongest in the left open only two possibilities: 
more “European” and prosperous either the remaining superpower 
part – in Russia and the Baltic would dominate and create a 
areas as well as Ukraine and unipolar system, or different LEADERS OF THE 

Georgia. Ordinary people here countries or groups of countries SOVIET UNION

felt alienated from the Central could become important players 
Asians and from each other and in the international system, 
concluded also that they were thereby bringing in a multipolar 
paying too high an economic price system where no one power could 
to keep the more backward areas dominate. As it turned out, the 
within the Soviet Union. US became the sole superpower. 

Backed by the power and prestige of 
the US, the capitalist economy was 

conseqUences of now the dominant economic system 
Boris Yeltsin 

d internationally. Institutions like 
isinteGration (1931-2007) 

the World Bank and International The first elected 
The collapse of the second world of Monetary Fund became powerful President of 

the Soviet Union and the socialist advisors to all these countries Russia  (1991-

systems in eastern Europe had since they gave them loans for their 1999); rose to 
power in the 

profound consequences for world transitions to capitalism. Politically, 
Communist 

politics. Let us note here three the notion of liberal democracy 
Party and  was 

broad kinds of enduring changes emerged as the best way to organise made the Mayor 

that resulted from it. Each of political life. of Moscow by 
these had a number of effects that Gorbachev; later 

Third, the end of the Soviet bloc joined the critics 
we cannot list here. meant the emergence of many new of Gorbachev 

countries. All these countries had 
First of all, it meant the end and  left the 

their own independent aspirations Communist Party; 
of Cold War confrontations. The 

and choices. Some of them, led  the p rotests 
ideological dispute over whether 

especially the Baltic and east aga inst the Soviet 
the socialist system would beat European states, wanted to join reg ime in 1991; 
the capitalist system was not an the European Union and become p layed  a  key 

issue any more. Since this dispute role in d issolving  
part of the North Atlantic Treaty 

had engaged the military of the the Soviet Union; 
Organisation (NATO). The Central 

b lamed  for 
two blocs, had triggered a massive Asian countries wanted to take hardships suffered  
arms race and accumulation of advantage of their geographical by Russians in 
nuclear weapons, and had led to location and continue their close their transition 
the existence of military blocs, ties with Russia and also to from communism 
the end of the confrontation establish ties with the West, to capitalism. 
demanded an end to this arms the US, China and others. Thus, 

race and a possible new peace. the international system saw 
many new players emerge, each 

Second, power relations in with its own identity, interests, 
world politics changed and, and economic and political 
therefore, the relative influence difficulties. It is to these issues 
of ideas and institutions also that we now turn.

Reprint 2025-26



8 Contempora ry World  Politic s

shock therapy in   Each of these countries was 
required to make a total shift 

post-commUnist reGimes to a capitalist economy, which 

The collapse of communism was meant rooting out completely 

followed in most of these countries any structures evolved during the 

by a painful process of transition Soviet period. Above all, it meant 

from an authoritarian socialist that private ownership was to be 

system to a democratic capitalist the dominant pattern of ownership 

system. The model of transition of property. Privatisation of state 
I heard  someone 

in Russia, Central Asia and east assets and corporate ownership 
say “ The end  of the 

Europe that was influenced by patterns were to be immediately 
Soviet Union does 

not mean the end  the World Bank and the IMF came brought in. Collective farms were 
of socialism.” Is that to be known as ‘shock therapy’. to be replaced by private farming 
possib le? Shock therapy varied in intensity and capitalism in agriculture. 

and speed amongst the former This transition ruled out any 
second world countries, but its alternate or ‘third way’, other 
direction and features were quite than state-controlled socialism 
similar. or capitalism.

Map Of Central, eastern eurOpe and the COMMOnwealth Of independent states

Loc a te the 
Centra l Asian 
Repub lic s on Sourc e: https:/ / www.unic ef.org / hac 2012/ images/ HAC2012_CEE-CIS_map_REVISED.g if

the map. Note: The boundaries and  names shown and  the designa tions used  on this map do not imp ly 
official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations.

Reprint 2025-26



The End  of Bipola rity 9

Shock therapy also involved were put up for sale to private 
a drastic change in the external individuals and companies. 
orientation of these economies. Since the restructuring was 
Development was now envisaged carried out through market 
through more trade, and thus a forces and not by government-
sudden and complete switch to free directed industrial policies, it 

trade was considered essential. led to the virtual disappearance 

The free trade regime and foreign of entire industries. This was 

direct investment (FDI) were to be called ‘the largest garage sale in 

the main engines of change. This history’, as valuable industries 

also involved openness to foreign were undervalued and sold at 

investment, financial opening up throwaway prices. Though all 

or deregulation, and currency citizens were given vouchers to 

convertibility. participate in the sales, most 
citizens sold their vouchers in 

Finally, the transition also the black market because they 
involved a break up of the needed the money. 
existing trade alliances among 
the countries of the Soviet bloc. The value of the ruble, the 

Each state from this bloc was now Russian currency, declined 

linked directly to the West and not dramatically. The rate of inflation 

to each other in the region. These was so high that people lost 

states were thus to be gradually all their savings. The collective 

absorbed into the Western farm system disintegrated leaving 
people without food security, and 

economic system. The Western 
Russia started to import food.  The 

capitalist states now became 
real GDP of Russia in 1999 was 

the leaders and thus guided and 
below what it was in 1989. The old 

controled the development of the 
trading structure broke down with 

region through various agencies 
no alternative in its place.

and organisations. 
The old system of social welfare 

was systematically destroyed. 
conseqUences of shock The withdrawal of government 

therapy subsidies pushed large sections 
of the people into poverty. The 

The shock therapy administered middle classes were pushed to 
in the 1990s did not lead the the periphery of society, and 
people into the promised utopia the academic and intellectual 
of mass consumption. Generally, manpower disintegrated or 
it brought ruin to the economies migrated. A mafia emerged in 
and disaster upon the people of most of these countries and I can see the shock. 
the entire region. In Russia, the started controlling many economic But where is the 

large state-controlled industrial activities. Privatisation led to new therapy? Why do 

complex almost collapsed, as disparities. Post-Soviet states, we talk in such 
euphemisms? 

about 90 per cent of its industries especially Russia, were divided 

Reprint 2025-26



10 Contempora ry World  Politic s

between rich and poor regions. tensions and conflicts 
Unlike the earl ier system, 

Most of  the former Soviet 
there was now great economic 

Republics are prone to conflicts, 
inequality between people. 

and many have had civil wars 
T h e  c o n s t r u c t i o n  o f and insurgencies.  Complicating 

As a  result of democratic institutions was the picture is the growing 
‘shock therapy’ 

not given the same attention involvement of outside powers.
about ha lf of 
Russia ’ s 1,500 and priority as the demands In Russia, two republics, 
banks and  other of economic transformation. Chechnya  and  Dages tan , 
finacial institutions The constitutions of all these have had violent secessionist 
went bankrup t. countries were drafted in a hurry movements. Moscow’s method of 
This image is tha t and most, including Russia, had dealing with the Chechen rebels 
of Inkombank, 
Russia’s second a strong executive president with and indiscriminate military 

la rgest bank, tha t the widest possible powers that bombings have led to many 
went bankrup t in rendered elected parliaments human rights violations but 
1998. As a  result, relatively weak. In Central Asia, failed to deter the aspirations for 
the money of the presidents had great powers, independence.
10,000 corporate 

and several of them became very 
and  p riva te In Central Asia, Tajikistan 
shareholders was authoritarian. For example, the 

witnessed a civil war that went on 
lost, a long with presidents of Turkmenistan and for ten years till 2001. The region 
the money kep t Uzbekistan appointed themselves as a whole has many sectarian 
in the bank by to power first for ten years and 
customers. conflicts. In Azerbaijan’s province 

then extended it for another ten of Nagorno-Karabakh, some 
years. They allowed no dissent or local Armenians want to secede 
opposition. A judicial culture and and join Armenia. In Georgia, 
independence of the judiciary the demand for independence 
was yet to be established in most has come from two provinces, 
of these countries. resulting in a civil war. There are 

Most of these economies, movements against the existing 

especia l ly  Russia,  started regimes in Ukraine, Kyrgyzstan 

reviving in 2000, ten years and Georgia. Countries and 

after their independence. The provinces are fighting over 

reason for the revival for most river waters. All this has led to 

of their economies was the instability, making life difficult 

export of natural resources like for the ordinary citizen.

What is the difference oil, natural gas and minerals. The Central Asian Republics 
between na tiona lism Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Russia, are areas with vast hydrocarbon 
and secessionism? Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan resources, which have brought 
If you succeed, you are major oil and gas producers. them economic benefit. Central 
are celebrated as a Other countries have gained Asia has also become a zone of 
na tiona list hero, and  

because of the oil pipelines that competition between outside 
if you fa il you a re 

condemned for crimes cross their territories for which powers and oil companies. The 
of secessionism. they get rent. Some amount of region is next to Russia, China, 

manufacturing has restarted. Afghanistan, and Pakistan, and 

Reprint 2025-26



The End  of Bipola rity 11

close to West Asia. After 11 embedded in a history of trust 
Make a  list of 

September 2001, the US wanted and common interests and are 
the simila rities 

military bases in the region matched by popular perceptions. 
between 

and paid the governments of all Indian heroes from Raj Kapoor to 
Ind ia  and  the 

Central Asian states to hire bases Amitabh Bachchan are household 
USSR in their 

and to allow airplanes to fly over names in Russia and many post- political and 
their territory during the wars in Soviet countries. One can hear economic 
Afghanistan and Iraq. However, Hindi film songs all over the 

ideolog ies.
Russia perceives these states as region, and India is part of the 
its ‘Near Abroad’ and believes that popular memory.
they should be under Russian 

Russia and India share a vision 
influence. China has interests 

of a multipolar world order. What 
here because of the oil resources, 

they mean by a multipolar world 
and the Chinese have begun to 
settle around the borders and 

BOLLYW OOD STI RS UZBEK 
conduct trade.

PASSI ONS
I n  e a s t e r n  E u r o p e , 

Czechoslovakia split peacefully Seven years after the Soviet Union collapsed, the Uzbek 
into two, with the Czechs and passion for Indian films continues. Within months of the 
the Slovaks forming independent release of the latest film in India, pirate copies were already 
countries. But the most severe on sale in the Uzbek capita l, Tashkent. 
conflict took place in the Balkan 

Mohammed Sharif Pa t runs a shop selling Indian films near 
republics of Yugoslavia. After 

one of Tashkent’ s b iggest markets. He is an Afghan who 
1991, it broke apart with several 

b rings vid eos from the Pakistani frontier town Pesha wa r. 
provinces like Croatia, Slovenia “There are many people who love Indian films here. I’d say 
and Bosnia and Herzegovina a t least 70% of the peop le in Tashkent buy them. We sell 
declaring independence. Ethnic about 100 videos a day. I’ve just had to put in an order for 
Serbs opposed this, and a a  thousand  more,”  he says. “ The Uzbeks a re Centra l Asians, 

massacre of non-Serb Bosnians they are part of Asia. They have a common culture. That’s 
followed. The NATO intervention why they like Indian films.” 
and the bombing of Yugoslavia Despite the sha re d  histo ry, fo r m a ny Ind ia ns liv ing  in 
followed the inter-ethnic civil war. Uzbekistan, the passion the Uzbeks have for their films and film 

stars has come as a bit of a surprise. “Wherever we go and 
meet local dignitaries - even ministers or cabinet ministers - 

india and post-commUnist during our conversation it is always mentioned,” says Ashok 
Shamer from the Ind ian embassy in Tashkent. “ This shows 

coUntries that Indian films, culture, songs and especially Raj Kapoor 
have been household names here. Most of them can sing 

India has maintained good 
some Hind i songs, they may not know the meaning but their 

relations with all the post- pronunciation is correct and they know the music,” he says. 
communist countries. But the “I have found out that almost all my neighbours can sing and 
strongest relations are still those p lay Hind i songs. This was rea lly a  b ig  surp rise to me when I 
between Russia and India. India’s came to Uzbekistan.”  

relations with Russia are an 
A report by the BBC’s Centra l Asia  Correspondent Louise Hida lgo

important aspect of India’s foreign 
policy. Indo-Russian relations are 

Reprint 2025-26



12 Contempora ry World  Politic s

order is the co-existence of several powers in the 
FLASHBACK:  I NDI A 

international system, collective security (in which an 
AND THE  USSR attack on any country is regarded as a threat to all 

countries and requires a collective response), greater 

During the Cold War era, India and the regionalism, negotiated settlements of international 

USSR enjoyed a special relationship conflicts, an independent foreign policy for all countries, 

which led critics to say that India was and decision making through bodies like the UN that 

part of the Soviet camp. It was a multi- should be strengthened, democratised, and empowered. 
d imensiona l rela tionship : More than 80 bilateral agreements have been signed 

between India and Russia as part of the Indo-Russian 
Ec onomic : The Soviet Union assisted  Strategic Agreement of 2001. 
India’s public sector companies 
at a time when such assistance India stands to benefit from its relationship 

was difficult to get. It gave aid and with Russia on issues like Kashmir, energy supplies, 

technical assistance for steel plants sharing information on international terrorism, 
like Bhila i, Boka ro, Visa kha p a tna m, 
and machinery plants like Bharat 
Heavy Electricals Ltd., etc. The Soviet 
Union accepted Indian currency for 
trade when Ind ia  was short of foreign 
exchange. 

Politic a l: The Soviet Union supported  
India’s positions on the Kashmir issue in STEPS
the UN. It also supported India during  Select any five Cold War allies each of the Soviet 
its major conflicts, especially during Union and  the US.
the war with Pakistan in 1971. Ind ia  
too supported Soviet foreign policy in  Divide the class accordingly (10 groups). Allot 
some crucial but indirect ways. a country to each group. Assign the group to 

collect information on the political, social and 
Milita ry: India received most of its economic profile of these countries during the 
m ilita ry ha rd w a re  from  the  Sovie t Cold  War days. 
Unio n a t  a  t im e  w he n fe w  o the r 
countries were willing to part with  They should also prepare a profile of that country 
military technologies. The Soviet Union after the collapse of communism and say what 
e nte re d  into  va rio us a g re e m e nts difference, if any, the disintegration of the 
allowing India to jointly produce second world made to that country.
milita ry equipment.

 Each group is to present its findings to the entire 
Culture: Hindi films and Indian culture class. Ensure that students talk about how 
were popula r in the Soviet Union. A people of these countries felt about themselves 
la rge number of Ind ian writers and  as citizens.
artists visited  the USSR. Ideas for the Teac her

 You could link the students’ findings to the working of the 
democratic system and communist system and highlight 
the pros and cons of both these systems. 

 You could encourage the students to discuss if there is an 
alternative to both communism and capitalism.

Reprint 2025-26



The End  of Bipola rity 13

access to Central Asia, and imports from Russia and the 
balancing its relations with republics of Kazakhstan and 
China. Russia stands to benefit Turkmenistan. Cooperation 
from this relationship because with these republics includes 
India is the second largest arms partnership and investment in 
market for Russia. The Indian oilfields.  Russia is important 
military gets most of its hardware for India’s nuclear energy plans 
from Russia. Since India is an and assisted India’s space 
oil-importing nation, Russia industry by giving, for example, 
is important to India and has the cryogenic rocket when India 
repeatedly come to the assistance needed it. Russia and India have 
of India during its oil crises. India collaborated on various scientific 
is seeking to increase its energy projects. 

1.  Which among the following statements that describe the nature  
of Soviet economy is wrong?

a. Socialism was the dominant ideology
b. State ownership/control existed over the factors of production
c. People enjoyed economic freedom
d. Every aspect of the economy was planned and controlled by 

the Sta te

2.  Arrange the following in chronological order:
a . Soviet invasion of Afghanistan

b . Fa ll of the Berlin Wa ll

c. Disintegration of the Soviet Union
d . Russian Revolution

3.  Which among the following is NOT an outcome of the disintegration 
of the USSR?

a. End of the ideological war between the US and USSR
b . Birth of CIS

c. Change in the balance of power in the world order
d . Crises in the Midd le East 

4.  Match the following:
 i. Mikhail Gorbachev  a.  Successor of USSR
 ii. Shock Therapy    b.  Military pact  
 iii. Russia      c.  Introduced reforms 
 iv. Boris Yeltsin    d. Economic model
 v. Warsaw     e.  President of Russia

Reprint 2025-26

E  x  e  r  c  i  s  e  s



14 Contempora ry World  Politic s

 5.  Fill in the b lanks.

a.  The Soviet political system was based on ___________________ 
ideology. 

b.  _________________ was the military alliance started by the USSR.
c.  ____________________ party dominated the Soviet Union’s 

political system.
d.  ______________________ initiated the reforms in the USSR in 1985.
e.  The fall of the ____________________ symbolised the end of the 

Cold  War.

 6.  Mention any three features that distinguish the Soviet economy 
from that of a capitalist country like the US.

 7.  What were the factors that forced Gorbachev to initiate the reforms 
in the USSR?

 8.  What were the major consequences of the disintegration of the 
Soviet Union for countries like India?

 9.  What was Shock Therapy? Was this the best way to make a transition 
from communism to capitalism?

10.  Write an essay for or aga inst the following p roposition: “ With the 
disintegration of the second world, India should change its foreign 
policy and focus more on friendship with the US rather than with 
trad itiona l friends like Russia ” .

Reprint 2025-26

E   x   e   r   c   i   s   e   s


##2##
Chapter 2

Contempora ry  
Centres of Power

Overview

After the end of the bipolar 
structure of world politics in 
the early 1990s, it became 
clear that alternative centres of 
political and economic power 
could limit America’s dominance. 
Thus, in Europe, the European 
Union (EU) and, in Asia, the 
Association of South East Asian 
Nations (ASEAN), have emerged 
as forces to reckon with. While 
evolving regional solutions to 
their historical enmities and 
weaknesses, both the EU and the 
ASEAN have developed alternative 
institutions and conventions 
that build a more peaceful and 
cooperative regional order and 
have transformed the countries 
in the region into prosperous 
economies. The economic rise 
of China has made a dramatic The two images here rep resent two phases of the history of 

impact on world politics. In this China . The red  poster – “ The Soc ia list Road  is the Broadest 

chapter, we take a look at some of All”  – rep resents the ideology tha t guided  China  during  its 
ea rly phase a fter the Revolution. The photograph below is tha t 

of these emerging alternative 
of the c ity of Shangha i, the symbol of China ’s new ec onomic  

centres of power and assess their power.
possible role in the future. 

Reprint 2025-26



16 Contempora ry World  Politic s

EuropEan union (OEEC) was established in 1948 to 
channel aid to the west European 

As the Second World War came to states. It became a forum where 
an end, many of Europe’s leaders the western European states 
grappled with the ‘Question began to cooperate on trade and 
of Europe’. Should Europe be economic issues. The Council of 
allowed to revert to its old rivalries Europe, established in 1949, was 
or be reconstructed on principles another step forward in political 
and institutions that would cooperation. The process of 
contribute to a positive conception economic integration of European 
of international relations? The capitalist countries proceeded 
Second World War shattered many step by step (see Timeline of 
of the assumptions and structures 

European Integration) leading to 
on which the European states had 

the formation of the European 
based their relations. In 1945, the 

Economic Community in 1957. 
European states confronted the 

This process acquired a political 
ruin of their economies and the 

dimension with the creation 
destruction of the assumptions 

of the European Parliament. 
and structures on which Europe 

The collapse of the Soviet bloc 
had been founded.

put Europe on a fast track and 
European integration after resulted in the establishment 

1945 was aided by the Cold of the European Union in 1992. 
War. America extended massive The foundation was thus laid for 
financial help for reviving Europe’s a common foreign and security 
economy under what was called policy, cooperation on justice and 
the ‘Marshall Plan’. The US also home affairs, and the creation of 
created a new collective security a single currency. 
structure under NATO. Under the 
Marshall Plan, the Organisation for The European Union has 

European Economic Cooperation evolved over t ime from an 
e c o n o m i c  u n i o n  t o  a n 
increasingly political one. The 
EU has started to act more as a 
nation state. While the attempts 
to have a Constitution for the 
EU have failed, it has its own 
flag, anthem, founding date, and 
currency. It also has some form 

The European Union Flag of a common foreign and security 

The c irc le of gold  sta rs stands for solida rity and  harmony between policy in its dealings with other 
the peop les of Europe. It has twelve sta rs, as the number twelve is nations.  The European Union 
trad itiona lly the symbol of perfec tion, c omp leteness and  unity. has tried to expand areas of 
Sourc e: http :/ / europa .eu/ abc / symbols/ emb lem/ index_en.htm cooperation while acquiring new 

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry Centres of Power 17

EuropEan union Map

Older Members

New Members Finland

Sweden
Estonia

Latvia
Denmark

Lithuania

Ireland Netherlands
United 

Kingdom Poland

Belgium Germany
Czech 
Republic

Luxembourg Slovakia
Austria

Hungary
France

Croatia Romania
Italy Slovenia

Bulgaria

Spain

Greece

Malta

Cyprus

members, especially from the Union’s GDP is projected to be 
erstwhile Soviet bloc. The process approximately $19.35 trillion 
has not proved easy, for people in the year 2024. Its currency, 
in many countries are not very the euro, can pose a threat to 

enthusiastic in giving the EU the dominance of the US dollar. 

powers that were exercised by Its share of world trade is much 

the government of their country. larger than that of the United 
Oh, now I know wha t a  

There are also reservations about States allowing it to be more Sc hengen visa  means! 

assertive in trade disputes with Under the Sc hengen 
including some new countries 

the US and China. Its economic agreement, you have to 
within the EU.

power gives it influence over its get a  visa  from just one of 

the EU c ountries and  tha t 
The EU has  economic , closest neighbours as well as in 

a llows you entry in most 
political and diplomatic, and Asia and Africa. It also functions as of the other European 

military influence. The European an important bloc in international Union c ountries.

Reprint 2025-26

Portugal



18 Contempora ry World  Politic s

of the EU, France, holds permanent 
TI MELI NE OF EUROPEAN seat on the UN Security Council. 
I NTEGRATI ON The EU includes several non-

permanent members of the 
1951 Ap ril: Six w est Europ ea n c ountries, Fra nc e , West 
Germany, Ita ly, Belg ium, the Netherlands and  Luxembourg UNSC. This has enabled the EU 
sign the Trea ty of Paris estab lishing the European Coa l and  to influence some US policies 
Steel Community (ECSC). such as the current US position 
1957 Marc h 25: These six c ountries sign the Trea ties of Rome on Iran’s nuclear programme. 
estab lishing the European Ec onomic  Community (EEC) and  Its use of diplomacy, economic 
the European Atomic  Energy Community (Eura tom). investments, and negotiations 
1973 January: Denmark, Ireland  and  the United  Kingdom rather than coercion and military 
jo in the European Ec onomic  Community (EEC). force has been effective as in the 
1979 June: First d irec t elec tions to the European Parliament case of its dialogue with China on 

human rights and environmental 
1981 January: Greec e jo ins the EEC.

degradation.
1985 June: The Sc heng en Ag reement a b o lishes b ord er 
c ontrols among the EEC members. Militarily, the EU’s combined 

1986 January: Spa in and  Portuga l jo in the EEC. armed forces are the second 
largest in the world. Its total 

1990 Oc tober: Unification of Germany.
spending on defence is second 

1992 Feb rua ry  7: The  Trea ty o f Ma a stric ht w a s sig ned  after the US. One EU member 
estab lishing the European Union (EU).

state, France, also has nuclear 
1993 January: European Ec onomic  Community (EEC) was arsenals of  approximately 
renamed the European Community (EC). 335 nuclear warheads. It is 
1995 January: Austria , Finland  and  Sweden join the EU. also the world’s second most 

2002 January: Euro, the new c urrenc y, was introduc ed  in important source of space and 
the 12 EU members. communications technology. 

2004 May: Ten new members, Cyprus, the Czec h Repub lic , As a supranational organi-
Estonia , Hungary, La tvia , Lithuania , Ma lta , Poland , Slovakia  sation, the EU is able to intervene 
and  Slovenia  jo in the EU.

in economic, political and social 
2007 January: Bulga ria  and  Romania  jo in the EU. Slovenia  areas. But in many areas its 
adop ts the Euro.

member states have their own 
2009 Dec ember: The Lisbon Trea ty c ame into forc e. foreign relations and defence 

2012 : The EU is awarded  the Nobel Peac e Prize. policies that are often at odds 
with each other. Thus, Britain’s 

2013: Croa tia  bec omes the 28th member of the EU.
Prime Minister Tony Blair was 

2016: Referendum in Brita in, 51.9 per c ent voters dec ide tha t 
America’s partner in the Iraq 

Brita in exit (Brexit) from the EU.
invasion, and many of the EU’s 
newer members made up the 

economic organisations such as 
US-led ‘coalition of the willing’ 

the World Trade Organisation 
whereas Germany and France 

(WTO). 
opposed American policy. There 

The EU also has political and is also a deep-seated ‘Euro-
diplomatic influence. One member skeptic ism’ in some parts 

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry Centres of Power 19

The c a rtoon appeared  in 2003 when the European Union’s initia tive to d ra ft a  
c ommon constitution fa iled . Why does the c a rtoonist use the image of the ship  
Titanic  to rep resent EU?

of  Europe about the EU’s region of Asia? Before and during 
integrationist agenda. Thus, for the Second World War, this region 
example, Britain’s former prime of Asia suffered the economic and 
minister, Margaret Thatcher, political consequences of repeated 
kept the UK out of the European colonialisms, both European and 
Market. Denmark and Sweden Japanese. At the end of the war, 
have resisted the Maastricht it confronted problems of nation-
Treaty and the adoption of the building, the ravages of poverty 
euro, the common European and economic backwardness and 
currency. This limits the ability of the pressure to align with one 
the EU to act in matters of foreign great power or another during 
relations and defence. the Cold War. This was a recipe 

for conflict, which the countries 
of Southeast Asia could ill afford. 

association of south 
Efforts at Asian and Third World 

East asian nations unity, such as the Bandung Imag ine wha t would  

(asEan) Conference and the Non-Aligned happen if they have 

Movement, were ineffective in a  European Union 

footba ll team!
Take a look at the political map of establishing the conventions 
the world. Which countries would for informal cooperation and 
you say fall in the southeastern interaction. Hence, the Southeast 

Reprint 2025-26

© Ares, Cag le Cartoons Inc .



20 Contempora ry World  Politic s

Map Of east asia and pacific Cambodia joined ASEAN 
taking its strength to ten.

Unlike the EU there is 
little desire in ASEAN for 
supranational structures 
and institutions. ASEAN 
countries have celebrated 
what has become known as 
the ‘ASEAN Way’, a form of 
interaction that is informal, 
non-confrontationist and 
cooperative. The respect 
for national sovereignty is 
critical to the functioning 
of ASEAN.

With some of the fastest 
growing economies in the 
world, ASEAN broadened 
i ts  object ives beyond 
the economic and social 

Source: http://www.unicef.org/eapro/EAP_map_final.gif spheres. In 2003, ASEAN 

Note: Maps on this site do not reflect a position by UNICEF on the legal status of any moved along the path of the 
c ountry or territory or the delimita tion of any frontiers. EU by agreeing to establish 

an ASEAN Community 

Asian alternative by establishing comprising three pillars, 

the Association of South East namely, the ASEAN Security 

Asian Nations (ASEAN). Community, the ASEAN Economic 
Community and the ASEAN Socio-

ASEAN was established in 
Cultural Community.

Loc a te 1967 by five countries of this 

the ASEAN region — Indonesia, Malaysia, 

members on the Phil ippines, Singapore 

the map. Find  and Thailand — by signing 

the loc a tion the Bangkok Declaration. The 

of the ASEAN objectives of ASEAN were primarily 

Sec reta ria t. to accelerate economic growth 
and through that ‘social progress 
and cultural development’. A 
secondary objective was to 
promote regional peace and The ASEAN Flag

stability based on the rule of law In the ASEAN logo, the ten sta lks of 

and the principles of the United paddy (ric e) rep resent the ten Southeast 
Asian c ountries bound  together in 

Nations Charter. Over the years, 
friendship  and  solida rity. The c irc le 

Brunei Darussalam, Vietnam, symbolises the unity of ASEAN.
Lao PDR, Myanmar (Burma) and Sourc e : www.aseansec .org

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry Centres of Power 21

T h e  A S E A N  s e c u r i t y organisation. Its Vision 2020 has 
community was based on the defined an outward-looking role 
conviction that outstanding for ASEAN in the international 
territorial disputes should not community. This builds on the 
escalate into armed confrontation. existing ASEAN policy to encourage 
By 2003, ASEAN had several negotiation over conflicts in the 

Isn’ t Ind ia  a  pa rt of 
agreements in place by which region. Thus, ASEAN has mediated 

Southeast Asia? The 
member states promised to uphold the end of the Cambodian conflict, 

north-eastern sta tes 
peace, neutrality, cooperation, the East Timor crisis, and meets are so c lose to the 

non-interference, and respect annually to discuss East Asian ASEAN c ountries.

for national differences and cooperation. 
sovereign rights. The ASEAN The current economic strength 
Regional Forum (ARF), which of ASEAN, especially its economic 
was established in 1994, is the relevance as a trading and 
organisation that carries out investment partner to the growing 
coordination of security and Asian economies such as India and 
foreign policy. Who 

China, makes this an attractive 
are the 

A S E A N  w a s  a n d  s t i l l proposition. During the Cold War 
members 

remains principally an economic years Indian foreign policy did not 
of the 

association. While the ASEAN pay adequate attention to ASEAN. 
ASEAN 

region as a whole is a much But in recent years, India has tried 
Regiona l 

smaller economy compared to to make amends. It signed trade 
Forum 

the US, the EU, and Japan, its agreements with three ASEAN 
(ARF)?

economy is growing much faster members, Malaysia, Singapore and 

than all these. This accounts for 
the growth in its influence both 
in the region and beyond. The 
objectives of the ASEAN Economic 
Community are to create a 
common market and production 
base within ASEAN states and 
to aid social and economic 
development in the region. The 
Economic Community would also 
like to improve the existing ASEAN 
Dispute Settlement Mechanism to 
resolve economic disputes. ASEAN 
has focused on creating a Free 
Trade Area (FTA) for investment, 
labour, and services. The US and 
China have already moved fast to 
negotiate FTAs with ASEAN. Keshav, The Hindu

Ind ia ’ s ‘ Look East’  Polic y sinc e the early 1990s and  ‘Ac t East’  Polic y 
ASEAN is rapidly growing sinc e 2014 have led  to grea ter ec onomic  interac tion with the East 

into a very important regional Asian na tions (ASEAN, China , Japan and  South Korea).

Reprint 2025-26



22 Contempora ry World  Politic s

Thailand. The ASEAN-India regional affairs. The strength of 
FTA came into effect in 2010. its economy, together with other 
ASEAN’s strength, however, lies factors such as population, land 
in its policies of interaction and mass, resources, regional location 
consultation with member states, and political influence, adds to its 
with dialogue partners, and with power in significant ways.

Why d id  ASEAN other non-regional organisations. 
After the inception of the 

suc c eed  whereas It is the only regional association 
SAARC d id  not? People’s Republic of China in 

in Asia that provides a political 
1949, following the communist 

forum where Asian countries and 
revolution under the leadership 

the major powers can discuss of Mao, its economy was based on 
political and security concerns. the Soviet model. The economically 

backward communist China chose 
to sever its links with the capitalist 
world. It had little choice but to 
fall back on its own resources 
and, for a brief period, on Soviet 
aid and advice. The model was 
to create a state-owned heavy 
industries sector from the capital 
accumulated from agriculture. As 
it was short of foreign exchange 

Leaders release posta l stamps to c ommemora te silver jub ilee of Ind ia  
and  ASEAN partnership  in New Delhi on 25 January 2018 that it needed in order to buy 

technology and goods on the 

The Rise of The Chinese world market, China decided to 
substitute imports by domestic 

eConomy goods.

Let us now turn to the third major This model allowed China 
alternative centre of power and to use its resources to establish 
our immediate neighbour, China. the foundations of an industrial 
The cartoon on the following economy on a scale that did not 
page sums up the current mood exist before. Employment and 
all over the world about the rise social welfare was assured to all 
of China as an economic power. citizens, and China moved ahead 
China’s economic success since of most developing countries 
1978 has been linked to its rise in educating its citizens and 
as a great power. China has been ensuring better health for them. 
the fastest growing economy since The economy also grew at a 
the reforms first began there. It is respectable rate of 5-6 per cent. 
projected to overtake the US as But an annual growth of 2-3 
the world’s largest economy by per cent in population meant 
2040. Its economic integration that economic growth was 
into the region makes it the driver insufficient to meet the needs of a 
of East Asian growth, thereby growing population. Agricultural 
giving it enormous influence in production was not sufficient to 

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry Centres of Power 23

generate a surplus for industry. In 
Chapter 1, we discussed the crisis 
of the state controlled economy 
in the USSR. A similar crisis was 
to face China too: its industrial 
production was not growing fast 
enough, international trade was 
minimal and per capita income 
was very low. 

The Chinese leadership took 
major policy decisions in the 
1970s. China ended its political 
and economic isolation with 
the establishment of relations 
with the United States in 1972. 
Premier Zhou Enlai proposed the 
‘four modernisations’ (agriculture, 
industry, science and technology 
and military) in 1973. By 1978, 
the then leader Deng Xiaoping 

 
announced the ‘open door’ policy The Grea t Wa ll and  Dragon a re two symbols most c ommonly 
and economic reforms in China. assoc ia ted  with China . This c a rtoon uses both these to dep ic t 

The policy was to generate higher China ’s ec onomic  rise. Who do you think is the little man in this 
c a rtoon? Can he stop  the d ragon?

productivity by investments of 
capital and technology from 
abroad. Privatisation of agriculture led to 

a remarkable rise in agricultural 
China followed its own path 

production and rural incomes. 
in introducing a market economy. 

High personal savings in the rural 
The Chinese did not go for ‘shock 

economy lead to an exponential 
therapy’ but opened their economy 

growth in rural industry. The 
step by step. The privatisation of 

Chinese economy, including 
agriculture in 1982 was followed by 

both industry and agriculture, 
the privatisation of industry in 1998. 

grew at a faster rate. The new 
Trade barriers were eliminated only 

trading laws and the creation 
in Special Economic Zones (SEZs) 

of Special Economic Zones led 
where foreign investors could 

to a phenomenal rise in foreign 
set up enterprises. In China, the 

trade. China has become the most 
state played and continues to 

important destination for foreign 
play a central role in setting up a 

direct investment (FDI) anywhere 
market economy. A tota l of 6 SEZs in 

in the world. It has large foreign 
China  and  more than 

The new economic policies exchange reserves that now allow 
200 approved  SEZs in 

helped the Chinese economy it to make big investment in other Ind ia ! Is this good  for 

to break from stagnat ion. countries. China’s accession to the Ind ia?

Reprint 2025-26

© Deng Coy Miel, Cag le Cartoons Inc .



24 Contempora ry World  Politic s

WTO in 2001 has been a further 
step in its opening to the outside 
world. The country plans to 
deepen its integration into the 
world economy and shape the 
future world economic order.

While the Chinese economy 
has improved dramatically, not 
everyone in China has received 
the benefits of the reforms. 
Unemployment has risen in 
China with nearly 100 million 
people looking for jobs. Female 
employment and conditions of 
work are as bad as in Europe of 
the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centur i es .  Env i r onmenta l 
degradation and corruption 
have increased besides a rise 
in economic inequality between 
rural and urban residents and 
coastal and inland provinces.

China  then and  now 
However, regionally and 

globally, China has become an 
economic power to reckon with. 
The integration of China’s economy 
and the inter-dependencies that 
this has created has enabled China 
to have considerable influence 
with its trade partners. Hence, its 
outstanding issues with Japan, 
the US, ASEAN, and Russia 
have been tempered by economic 
considerations. It hopes to resolve 
its differences with Taiwan, which 
it regards as a renegade province, 
by integrating it closely into its 
economy. Fears of China’s rise 

Chinese b ic yc le have also been mitigated by its 
Like the opening images for this chapter, the first cartoon contributions to the stability of the 
c omments on the c hange in China ’s orienta tion. The sec ond  ASEAN economies after the 1997 
c artoon uses the symbol of the b ic yc le — China  is the la rgest user financial crisis. Its more outward 
of b ic yc les in the world  — to c omment on a  dua lity in today’s 
China . What is this dua lity? Can we c a ll this a  c ontrad ic tion? looking investment and aid 

Reprint 2025-26

© Ares, Cag le Cartoons Inc . © Mike Lane, Cagle Cartoons Inc .



Contempora ry Centres of Power 25

policies in Latin America and was popular. However, Chinese 
Africa are increasingly projecting aggression on the Indian border 
it as a global player on the side of has marred that hope. Soon after 
developing economies. independence, both states were 

involved in differences arising 

i from the Chinese takeover of Tibet 
ndia – China RelaTions

in 1950 and the final settlement of 
India and China were great the Sino-Indian border. China and 
powers in Asia before the advent India were involved in a border 
of Western imperialism. China conflict in 1962 over competing 
had considerable influence and territorial claims principally in 
control on the periphery of its Arunachal Pradesh and in the 
borders based on its unique Aksai Chin region of Ladakh.
tributary system. At different 

The conflict of 1962, in which 
times in China’s long history of 

India suffered military reverses, 
dynastic rule, Mongolia, Korea, 

had long-term implications 
parts of Indo-China, and Tibet for  India–China re lat ions. 
accepted China’s authority. 

Diplomatic relations between the 
Various kingdoms and empires 

two countries were downgraded 
in India also extended their until 1976. Thereafter, relations 
influence beyond their borders. between the two countries began 
In both cases this influence was to improve slowly. After the change 
political, economic and cultural. in China’s political leadership 
However, the regions where India from the mid to late 1970s, 
and China exercised influence China’s policy became more 
rarely ever overlapped. Thus, pragmatic and less ideological. 
there was limited political and So it was prepared to put off 
cultural interaction between the settlement of contentious 
the two. The result was that issues while improving relations 
neither country was very familiar with India. A series of talks to 
with the other. In the twentieth resolve the border issue were also 
century, when both nations initiated in 1981.
confronted each other, they had 

Since the end of the Cold 
some difficulty evolving a foreign 

War, there have been significant 
policy to deal with each other.

changes in India–
After India regained its China relations. Their Chinese President 

independence from Britain, and relations now have a Xi Jinp ing pa id  a  visit 
China expelled the foreign powers, strategic as well as an to Ind ia  in 2019. Prime 

there was hope that both would economic dimension. Minister Narendra  Mod i 

come together to shape the future Both view themselves visited  China  in 2018. 

of the developing world and of Asia Find  out about the 
as rising powers in 

agreements signed  
particularly. For a brief while, the global politics, and 

during  their visits.
slogan of ‘Hindi-Chini bhai-bhai’ both would like to play 

Reprint 2025-26



26 Contempora ry World  Politic s

countries have agreed to cooperate 
with each other in areas that could 
otherwise create conflict between 
the two, such as bidding for energy 
deals abroad. At the global level, 

STEPS
India and China have adopted 

 Divide the c lassroom into three groups. similar policies in international 
 Assign eac h group  one organisa tion to work on a  economic institutions like the 

fact file on the EU, ASEAN and SAARC. World Trade Organisation. 
 Students have to prepare a fact file that contains 

information on the ob jec tives, func tions and  rec ent India’s nuclear tests in 1998, 
a c t ivit ies o f these  o rg a nisa t ions. Pic tures o f the was justified on the grounds of a 
c onferenc es /  summit meetings c an be c ollec ted . threat from China, did not stop 

	Each group is to present its fact file before the class. greater interaction. It is true that 
China was seen as contributing to 

Ideas for the Teac her
the build up of Pakistan’s nuclear 

 The teac her is to foc us on the func tions of these organisa tions. programme. China’s military 
 Draw the a ttention of students to the ac hievements of reg iona l relations with Bangladesh and 

organisa tions. Myanmar were viewed as hostile 
	Link the role of reg iona l ec onomic  organisa tions to the over a ll to Indian interests in South Asia. 

development of the member c ountries. 
However, none of these issues is 

	Sensit ise  stud ents to  the  g row ing  imp orta nc e  o f reg iona l 
likely to lead to conflict between 

ec onomic  organisa tions as an a lterna tive app roac h to the 
peac e and  sec urity of the world . the two. One sign of this is that 

the talks to resolve the boundary 
a major role in the Asian economy question have continued without 
and politics. interruption and military-to-

military cooperation is increasing. 
Rajiv Gandhi’s visit to China 

Indian and Chinese leaders and 
in December 1988 provided the 

officials visit Beijing and New 
impetus for an improvement in 

Delhi with greater frequency, 
India–China relations. Since then 

and both sides are now becoming 
both governments have taken 

more familiar with each other. 
measures to contain conflict and 

Increasing transportation and 
maintain ‘peace and tranquility’ on communication links, common 
the border. They have also signed economic interests and global 
agreements on cultural exchanges concerns should help establish 
and cooperation in science and a more positive  and sound 
technology, and opened four relationship between the two  most 
border posts for trade. With  India– populous countries of the world. 
China trade growing at 30 per Recently the relation between 
cent per year since 1999, a more the two countries has taken 
positive perspective on relations a downslide. Border disputes, 
with China has emerged. Bilateral China-Pakistan economic corridor 

Some peop le say 
trade between India and China and China’s support to Pakistan 

Chinese p roduc ts a re 

going to flood our has increased from $338 million in UN against India’s move to 
market? But where in 1992 to more than $84 billion counter terrorism are some of the 
are they? in 2017. More recently, both factors for it. 

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry Centres of Power 27

Japan
You m ig ht ha ve hea rd  a b out fa mous Ja p a nese b ra nd s suc h a s 
Sony, Panasonic , Canon, Suzuki, Honda , Toyota , Mazda . They have 
a  reputa tion for making high-tec hnology p roduc ts. Japan has very 
few na tura l resourc es and  imports most of its raw materia ls. Even then 
it p rogressed  rap id ly a fter the end  of the Sec ond  World  War. Japan 
became a member of the Organisation for Economic  Cooperation and  
Development (OECD) in 1964. In 2017, it is the third  la rgest ec onomy 
in the world . It is the only Asian member of the G-7. It is the eleventh 
most populous na tion in the world . 

Ja p a n is the only na tion tha t suffered  the d estruc tion c a used  b y 
nuc lea r bombs. It is the sec ond  la rgest c ontributor to  the regula r 
budget of the UN, c ontributing  a lmost 10 per c ent of the tota l. Japan 
has a  sec urity a llianc e with the US sinc e 1951. As per Artic le 9 of the 
Japanese Constitution, “ the Japanese people forever renounce war as 
a  sovereign right of the na tion and  the threa t or use of forc e as means 
of settling internationa l d isputes.”  Although Japan’s milita ry expend iture 
is only one per c ent of its GDP, it is the seventh la rgest in the world . ASIMO, the world ’ s most advanc ed  

Keep ing a ll this in mind , do you think Japan c an effec tively func tion humanoid  robot, wa lking  with a  
person while hold ing hand

as an a lterna tive c entre of power?

Also find out about major agreements signed during high-level bilateral Cred it: http :/ / asimo.honda .c om

visits between the two na tions in the rec ent past.

South Korea
The Korean peninsula  was d ivided  into South Korea  (Repub lic  of Korea) and  North Korea  (Democ ra tic  
Peop le’ s Repub lic  of Korea) a t the end  of the Sec ond  World  War a long the 38th Para llel. The Korean War 
during 1950-53 and dynamics of the Cold War era further intensified the rivalries between the two sides. 
Both the Koreas finally became Members of the UN on 17 September 1991.
Meanwhile, South Korea  emerged  as a  c entre of power 
in Asia . Be tw een the  1960s a nd  the  1980s, it  ra p id ly 
developed  into an ec onomic  power, whic h is termed  
a s “ Mira c le  on the Ha n River” . Signa lling  its a ll-round  
d e ve lo p m e nt , So uth Ko re a  b e c a m e  a  M e m b e r o f 
the OECD in 1996. In 2017, its ec onomy is the eleventh 
la rgest in the world  a nd  its m ilita ry exp end iture is the 
tenth la rgest. 

Accord ing to the Human Development Report 2016, the HDI Skyline of Seoul c ity near the Han River
rank of South Korea is 18. The major fac tors responsib le for its Cred it: http :/ / eng lish.seoul.go.kr
high human development inc lude “ successful land reforms, 
rura l development, extensive human resourc es development and  rap id  equitab le ec onomic  growth.”  
Other fac tors a re export orienta tion, strong  red istribution polic ies, pub lic  infrastruc ture development, 
effec tive institutions and  governanc e.

The South Korean b rands suc h as Samsung, LG and  Hyunda i have bec ome renowned  in Ind ia . Numerous 
agreements between Ind ia  and  South Korea  signify their g rowing c ommerc ia l and  c ultura l ties. Find  out 
about ma jor agreements signed  in the rec ent past.

Reprint 2025-26



28 Contempora ry World  Politic s

1.  Arrange the following in c hronolog ic a l order.
a . China ’s ac c ession to WTO   b . Estab lishment of the EEC
c . Estab lishment of the EU    d . Birth of ARF

2.  The ‘ASEAN Way’  
a. Reflects the life style of ASEAN members
b . A form of interac tion among ASEAN members tha t is informa l 

and  c oopera tive
c . The defenc e polic y followed  by the ASEAN members
d . The road  tha t c onnec ts a ll the ASEAN members

3.  Whic h of the following na tions adop ted  an ‘open door’  polic y?
a . China     b . South Korea    c . Japan   d . USA

4.  Fill in the b lanks:
a.  The border conflict between China and India in 1962 was 

princ ipa lly over ______________ and  __________________ reg ion.

b .  ARF was estab lished  in the year ______________________ . 

c .  China  entered  into b ila tera l rela tions with __________ (a  ma jor 
c ountry) in 1972.

d.  ________________ Plan influenced the establishment of the 
Organisa tion for European Ec onomic  Coopera tion in 1948.

e.  ___________ is the organisa tion of ASEAN that dea ls with security.

  5.  What a re the ob jec tives of estab lishing reg iona l organisa tions?

  6.  How  d oes g eog ra p hic a l p roxim ity influenc e  the  fo rma tion o f 
reg iona l organisa tions?

  7.  What a re the c omponents of the ASEAN Vision 2020?

  8.  Name the p illa rs and  the ob jec tives of the ASEAN Community.

  9.  In wha t ways does the p resent Chinese ec onomy d iffers from its 
c ommand  ec onomy?

10.  How d id  the European c ountries resolve their post-Sec ond  World  
War problem? Briefly outline the attempts that led to the formation 
of the European Union.

11.  Wha t ma kes the  Europ ea n Union a  hig hly influentia l reg iona l 
organisa tion?

12.  The emerg ing ec onomies of China  and  Ind ia  have grea t potentia l 
to c ha llenge the unipola r world . Do you agree with the sta tement? 
Substantia te your a rguments.

13.  The Peac e and  p rosperity of c ountries lay in the estab lishment 
and  strengthening of reg iona l ec onomic  organisa tions. Justify this 
sta tement. 

14.  Identify the contentious issues between China  and Ind ia . How c ould  
these be resolved  for g rea ter c oopera tion? Give your suggestions.

Reprint 2025-26

E   x   e   r   c   i   s   e   s

##3##

Chapter 3

Contempora ry South Asia

Overview

Let us shift our gaze from the larger 
global developments in the post-
Cold War era to developments in 
our own region, South Asia. When 
India and Pakistan joined the club 
of nuclear powers, this region 
suddenly became the focus of global 
attention. The focus was, of course, 
on the various kinds of conflict 
in this region: there are pending 
border and water sharing disputes 
between the states of the region. 
Besides, there are conflicts arising 
out of insurgency, ethnic strife and 
resource sharing. This makes the 
region very turbulent. At the same 
time, many people in South Asia 
recognise the fact that this region 
can develop and prosper if the 
states of the region cooperate with 
each other. In this chapter, we try 
to understand the nature of conflict 
and cooperation among different 
countries of the region. Since much 
of this is rooted in or conditioned 
by the domestic politics of these 
countries, we first introduce the 
region and the domestic politics 

Sourc e: Subhas Ra i’ s adap ta tion of  ‘ Liberty Lead ing the Peop le’ , 
of some of the big countries in the painted by Eugene Delac roix in 1830. Courtesy of Himal Southasian, 
region. (January 2007) The Southasia  Trust, Nepa l 

Reprint 2025-26



30 Contempora ry World  Politic s

What is south asia? The various countries in South 
Asia do not have the same kind of 

We are all familiar with the political systems. Despite many 
gripping tension during an problems and limitations, Sri 
India-Pakistan cricket match. 

Identify some Lanka and India have successfully 

fea tures We have also seen the goodwill operated a democratic system 

c ommon to and hospitality shown to visiting since their independence from 
a ll the South Indian and Pakistani fans by their the British. You will study more 
Asian c ountries hosts when they come to watch a about the evolution of democracy 
but d ifferent cricket match. This is symbolic of in India in the textbook that 
from c ountries the larger pattern of South Asian deals with politics in India since 
in West Asia  or affairs. Ours is a region where independence. It is, of course, 
Southeast Asia . rivalry and goodwill, hope and possible to point out many 

despair, mutual suspicion and limitations of India’s democracy; 
trust coexist. but we have to remember the 

Let us begin by asking an fact that India has remained 
elementary question: what is a democracy throughout its 
South Asia? The expression existence as an independent 
‘South Asia’ usually includes the country. The same is true of Sri 
following countries: Bangladesh, Lanka. 
Bhutan, India, the Maldives, 

Pakistan and Bangladesh 
Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. The 

h a v e  e x p e r i e n c e d  b o t h 
mighty Himalayas in the north and 

civilian and military rulers, 
the vast Indian Ocean, the Arabian 

with Bangladesh remaining a 
Sea and the Bay of Bengal in the 
south, west and east respectively democracy in the post-Cold War 

provide a natural insularity to the period. Pakistan began the post-

region, which is largely responsible Cold War period with successive 

for the linguistic, social and democratic governments under 

cultural distinctiveness of the sub- Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz 

continent. The boundaries of the Shari f  respect ively.  But i t 

region are not as clear in the east suffered a military coup in 

and the west, as they are in the 1999. It has been run by a 

north and the south. Afghanistan civilian government again since 

and Myanmar are often included 2008. Till 2006, Nepal was a 
in discussions of the region as constitutional monarchy with 
a whole. China is an important the danger of the king taking 
player but is not considered to be a over executive powers. In 2008, 
part of the region. In this chapter, the monarchy was abolished and 
we shall use South Asia to mean Nepal emerged as a democratic 
the seven countries mentioned republic. From the experience of 

Is there a fixed above. Thus defined, South Asia Bangladesh and Nepal, we can 
definition of these 

stands for diversity in every sense say that democracy is becoming 
reg ions? Who 

dec ides tha t? and yet constitutes one geo- an accepted norm in the entire 
political space. region of South Asia. 

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry South Asia 31

Similar changes are taking place in the 
two smallest countries of the region. Bhutan 
became a constitutional monarchy in 2008. 
Under the leadership of the king, it emerged 
as a multi-party democracy. The Maldives, 
the other island nation, was a Sultanate till 
1968 when it was transformed into a republic 
with a presidential form of government. In 
June 2005, the parliament of the Maldives 
voted unanimously to introduce a multi-party 
system. The Maldivian Democratic Party (MDP) 
dominates the political affairs of the island. The 
MDP won the 2018 Elections.

Despite the mixed record of the democratic 
experience, the people in all these countries 
share the aspiration for democracy. A recent 
survey of the attitudes of the people in the 
five big countries of the region showed that 
there is widespread support for democracy 
in all these countries. Ordinary citizens, rich 
as well as poor and belonging to different 
religions, view the idea of democracy positively 
and support the institutions of representative 
democracy. They prefer democracy over any 
other form of government and think that 
democracy is suitable for their country. These are 
significant findings, for it was earlier believed Both these graphs a re based  on interviews with more 

than 19,000 ordinary citizens in the five countries of 
that democracy could flourish and find 

South Asia . Sourc e: SDSA Team, Sta te of Democ rac y 
support only in prosperous countries of the world. in South Asia , New Delhi: Oxford  University Press, 2007

SDG 4.6 SDG 4.1 SDG 8.1 SDG 3.2 SDG 3.3 SDG 1.1 
SDG 3 Adult literacy Gross GDP per  Infant mortality TB cases  Population living below 

Life expectancy rate (% ages enrolment ratio capita (2011 rate (per 1,000 (per 100,000 income poverty line (%)  
at birth (years) 15 and older) (Secondary) PPP $) live births)  people)  PPP $1.90 a day HDI 

Countries 2017 2006-2016 2012-2017 2017 2016 2016 2006-2016 Rank

World 72.2 82.1 79 15,439 29.9 140.0 – –

Developing  70.7 81.1 75 10,199 32.7 164.5 – – 
countries

South Asia 69.3 68.7 71 6,485 37.8 206.3 – –

Bangladesh 72.8 72.8 69 3,524 28.2 221.0 14.8 136

India 68.8 69.3 75 6,427 34.6 211.0 21.2 130

Nepal 70.6 59.6 71 2,433 28.4 154.0 15.0 149

Pakistan 66.6 57.0 46 5,035 64.2 268.0 6.1 150

Sri Lanka 75.5 91.2 98 11,669 8.0 65.0 – 76

Sourc e:  United  Na tions Development Programme, Human Development Report, 2018

Reprint 2025-26



32 Contempora ry World  Politic s

In that sense the South Asian 
TI MELI NE OF SOUTH ASI A experience of democracy has 

SI NCE 1 9 4 7 expanded the global imagination 
of democracy.

1947: Ind ia  and  Pakistan emerge as independent na tions 
a fter the end  of British rule Let us look at the experience 
1948: Sri Lanka (then Ceylon) ga ins independence; Indo-Pak of democracy in each of the four 
conflict over Kashmir big countries of the region other 
1954-55: Pakistan jo ins the Cold  War milita ry b loc s, SEATO than India.   
and  CENTO

1960: Ind ia  and  Pakistan sign the Indus Waters Trea ty

1962: Border conflict between India and China the Military and 
1965: Indo-Pak War; UN Ind ia -Pakistan Observa tion Mission 

1966: Ind ia  and  Pakistan sign the Tashkent Agreement; deMocracy in Pakistan

Six-point proposal of Sheikh Mujib-ur Rahman for greater 
After Pakistan framed its first 

autonomy to East Pakistan
constitution, General Ayub Khan 

1971 Marc h: Proc lamation of Independenc e by leaders of 
took over the administration 

Bangladesh
of the country and soon got 

August : Indo-Soviet Trea ty of Friendship  signed  for 20 years
himself elected. He had to give 

Dec ember : Indo-Pak War, Libera tion of Bang ladesh 
up office when there was popular 

1972 July: Ind ia  and  Pakistan sign the Simla  Agreement
dissatisfaction against his rule. 

1974 May: Ind ia  c onduc ts nuc lea r test
This gave way to a military 

1976: Pakistan and  Bang ladesh estab lish d ip lomatic  ties
takeover once again under General 

1985 December: South Asian leaders sign the SAARC Charter 
at the first summit in Dhaka Yahya Khan. During Yahya’s 

military rule, Pakistan faced the 
1987: Indo-Sri Lanka Accord; Indian Peace Keeping Force 
(IPKF) operation in Sri Lanka (1987-90) Bangladesh crisis, and after a 

1988: Ind ia  send s troop s to  the Ma ld ives to  fo il a  c oup  war with India in 1971, East 
a ttempt by merc enaries Pakistan broke away to emerge 

Ind ia  and Pakistan sign the agreement not to a ttack nuc lear as an independent country called 
insta lla tions and  fac ilities of eac h other Bangladesh. After this, an elected 
1988-91:  Democ rac y restora tion in Pakistan, Bang ladesh government under the leadership 
and  Nepa l of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto came to 
1996 Dec ember: Ind ia  and  Bang ladesh sign the Farakka  power in Pakistan from 1971 to 
Trea ty for sharing  of the Ganga  Waters 1977. The Bhutto government 
1998 May: Ind ia  and  Pakistan c onduc t nuc lea r tests was removed by General Zia-
Dec ember: India and Sri Lanka sign the Free Trade Agreement ul-Haq in 1977. General Zia 
(FTA) faced a pro-democracy movement 
1999 February: Ind ian PM Va jpayee undertakes bus journey from 1982 onwards and an 
to Lahore to sign a  Peac e Dec la ra tion

elected democratic government 
June-July: Kargil conflict between India and Pakistan

was established once again in 
2001 July: Va jpayee - Musharra f Agra  Summit unsuc c essful 1988 under the leadership of 
2004 January: SAFTA signed at the 12th SAARC Summit in Benazir Bhutto. In the period 
Islamabad

that followed, Pakistani politics 
2007: Afghanistan jo ins SAARC

centred around the competition 
2014 November: The 18th SAARC Summit in Kathmandu, 

between her party, the Pakistan 
Nepa l

People’s Party, and the Muslim 

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry South Asia 33

League. This phase of elective 
democracy lasted ti l l  1999 
when the army stepped in again 
and General Pervez Musharraf 
removed Prime Minister Nawaz 
Shar i f .  In  2001 ,  Genera l 
Musharraf got himself elected as 
the President. Pakistan continued 
to be ruled by the army, though 
the army rulers have held some 
elections to give their rule a 
democratic image. Since 2008, 
democratically elected leaders 
have been ruling Pakistan.

S e v e r a l  f a c t o r s  h a v e 
contributed to Pakistan’s failure 
in building a stable democracy. 
The social dominance of the Surendra , The Hindu

military, clergy, and landowning This c a rtoon c omments on the dua l role of Pakistan’s ruler Pervez 

aristocracy has led to the frequent Musharra f as the President of the c ountry and  as the a rmy Genera l. 
Read  the equa tions c a refully and  write down the message of this 

overthrow of elected governments c artoon.
and the establishment of military 
government. Pakistan’s conflict countries have encouraged the 
with India has made the pro- military’s authoritarian rule in the 
military groups more powerful. past, for their own reasons. Given 
These groups have often said that their fear of the threat of what they 
political parties and democracy 

call ‘global Islamic terrorism’ and 
in Pakistan are flawed, that 

the apprehension that Pakistan’s 
Pakistan’s security would be 

nuclear arsenal might fall into the 
harmed by selfish-minded parties 

hands of these terrorist groups, 
and chaotic democracy, and 

the military regime in Pakistan 
that the army’s stay in power 
is, therefore, justified. While has been seen as the protector 

democracy has not been fully of Western interests in West Asia 

successful in Pakistan, there and South Asia.

has been a strong pro-democracy 
sentiment in the country. Pakistan 
has a courageous and relatively deMocracy in Bangladesh

free press and a strong human Bangladesh was a part of Pakistan 
rights movement. from 1947 to 1971. It consisted 

T h e  l a c k  o f  g e n u i n e of the partitioned areas of Bengal If Germany c an be 

reunited, why can’t 
in ter nat iona l  suppor t  f o r and Assam from British India. The 

the peop le of Ind ia  
democratic rule in Pakistan has people of this region resented the 

and  Pakistan a t least 
further encouraged the military domination of western Pakistan travel more easily 
to continue its dominance. The and the imposition of the Urdu to each other’s 
United States and other Western language.  Soon after the partition, c ountry?

Reprint 2025-26



34 Contempora ry World  Politic s

they began protests against the arrested. Under the military 
unfair treatment meted out to rule of General Yahya Khan, the 
the Bengali culture and language. Pakistani army tried to suppress 
They  a l so  demanded  f a i r the mass movement of the Bengali 
representation in administration 

people. Thousands were killed by 
and a fair share in political power. 

the Pakistan army. This led to a 
Sheikh Mujib-ur Rahman led 
the popular struggle against large scale migration into India, 

West Pakistani domination. He creating a huge refugee problem 

demanded autonomy for the for India. The government of India 
eastern region. In the 1970 supported the demand of the 
elections in the then Pakistan, people of East Pakistan for their 
the Awami League led by Sheikh independence and helped them 
Mujib won all the seats in East financially and militarily. This 
Pakistan and secured a majority 

resulted in a war between India 
in the proposed constituent 

and Pakistan in December 1971 
assembly for the whole of 
Pakistan. But the government that ended in the surrender of the 

dominated by the West Pakistani Pakistani forces in East Pakistan 

leadership refused to convene and the formation of Bangladesh 
the assembly. Sheikh Mujib was as an independent country. 

A mural in Dhaka University to remember Noor Hossain who was killed by the police during pro-democracy protests  
aga inst Genera l Ershad  in 1987. Pa inted  on his bac k: “ Let Democ rac y be Freed”  . Photo c red it: Shahidul Alam/  Drik

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry South Asia 35

Bangladesh draf ted i ts responsive system of government. Let’s know 
constitution declaring faith in But the king, with the help of the more about 
secularism, democracy and army, retained full control over Bangladesh’s 
socialism. However, in 1975 the government and restricted the Grameen Bank. 
Sheikh Mujib got the constitution expansion of democracy in Nepal. Can we make 
amended to shift from the use of the idea  

The king accepted the demand 
parliamentary to presidential to reduc e 

for a new democratic constitution 
form of government. He also poverty in 

in 1990, in the wake of a strong pro-
abolished all parties except his Ind ia?

democracy movement. However, 
own, the Awami League. This led 

democratic governments had a 
to conflicts and tensions. In a 

short and troubled career. During 
dramatic and tragic development, 

the nineties, the Maoists of Nepal 
he was assassinated in a military 

were successful in spreading 
uprising in August 1975. The new 

their influence in many parts of 
military ruler, Ziaur Rahman, 

Nepal. They believed in armed 
formed his own Bangladesh 

insurrection against the monarch 
National Party and won elections 

and the ruling elite. This led to 
in 1979. He was assassinated 

a violent conflict between the 
and another military takeover 

Maoist guerrillas and the armed 
followed under the leadership 

forces of the king.  For some time, 
of Lt Gen H. M. Ershad. The 

there was a triangular conflict 
people of Bangladesh soon rose 

among the monarchist forces, 
in support of the demand for 

the democrats and the Maoists. 
democracy. Students were in 

In 2002, the king abolished the 
the forefront. Ershad was forced parliament and dismissed the 
to allow political activity on a government, thus ending even the 
limited scale. He was later elected limited democracy that existed in 
as President for five years. Mass Nepal. 
public protests made Ershad 
step down in 1990. Elections In April 2006, there were 

were held in 1991. Since then massive, country wide, pro-

representative democracy based democ racy  p r o t e s t s .  The 

on multi-party elections has been struggling pro-democracy forces 

working in Bangladesh. achieved their first major victory 
when the king was forced to restore 
the House of Representatives 

Monarchy and that had been dissolved in April 
2002. The largely non-violent 

deMocracy in nePal movement was led by the Seven 
Party Alliance (SPA), the Maoists 

Nepal was a Hindu kingdom in 
and social activists. 

the past and then a constitutional 
monarchy in the modern period N e p a l ’ s  t r a n s i t i o n  t o 
for many years. Throughout democracy is almost complete. 
this period, political parties and Nepal has undergone a unique 
the common people of Nepal moment in its history because it 
have wanted a more open and formed a constituent assembly to 

Reprint 2025-26



36 Contempora ry World  Politic s

draft the constitution for Nepal. since its independence in 1948. 
Some sections in Nepal thought But it faced a serious challenge, 
that a nominal monarchy was not from the military or monarchy 
necessary for Nepal to retain its but rather from ethnic conflict 
link with the past. The Maoist leading to the demand for 
groups agreed to suspend 

secession by one of the regions. 
armed struggle. They wanted 
the constitution to include the After its independence, politics 

Nepa l sounds rea lly 

exciting. I wish I was radical programmes of social and in Sri Lanka (it was then known as 
in Nepa l! economic restructuring. All the Ceylon) was dominated by forces 

parties in the SPA did not agree that represented the interest of the 
with this programme. The Maoists majority Sinhala community. They 
and some other political groups were hostile to a large number of 
were also deeply suspicious of 

Tamils who had migrated from 
the Indian government and its 

India to Sri Lanka and settled 
role in the future of Nepal. In 
2008, Nepal became a democratic there. This migration continued 

republic after abolishing the even after independence. The 

monarchy. In 2015, it adopted a Sinhala nationalists thought 

new constitution. that Sri Lanka should not give 
‘concessions’ to the Tamils because 
Sri Lanka belongs to the Sinhala 

ethnic conflict and people only.  The neglect of Tamil 

d concerns led to militant Tamil 
eMocracy in sri lanka  

nationalism. From 1983 onwards, 
We have already seen that Sri the militant organisation, the 
Lanka has retained democracy Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam 

Democ rac y ac tivist, Durga  Thapa , 
pa rtic ipa ting  in a  p ro-democ rac y ra lly in 
Ka thmandu in 1990. The sec ond  p ic ture 
shows the same person in 2006, this time 

c elebra ting  the suc c ess of the sec ond  
democ rac y movement. 

Photo c red it: Min Ba jrac harya

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry South Asia 37

(LTTE) was fighting an armed 
struggle with the army of Sri Lanka 
in pursuit of their demand for a 
‘Tamil Elam’ or separate country 
for the Tamilians of Sri Lanka. At 
one point of time, the northeastern 
part of Sri Lanka was controlled 
by LTTE.

The Sri Lankan problem 
involves people of Indian origin, 
and there was considerable 
pressure from the Tamil people 
in India to the effect that the 
Indian government should protect 
the interests of the Tamils in Sri 
Lanka. The government of India  Keshav, The Hindu

has from time to time tried to The c a rtoon dep ic ts the d ilemma of the Sri Lankan leadership  in 

negotiate with the Sri Lankan trying  to ba lanc e Sinha la  ha rd liners or the Lion and  Tamil militants or 
the Tiger while negotia ting  peac e. 

government on the Tamil question. 
But in 1987, the government of LTTE was vanquished in 2009.
India for the first time got directly 
involved in the Sri Lankan Tamil In spite of the confl ict, 

question. India signed an accord Sr i  Lanka  has  r eg i s te red 

with Sri Lanka and sent troops considerable economic growth 

to  stabilise relations between the and recorded high levels of 

Sri Lankan government and the human development. Sri Lanka 

Tamils. Eventually, the Indian was one of the first developing 

Army got into a fight with the countries to successfully control 

LTTE. The presence of Indian the rate of growth of population, 

troops was also not liked much the first country in the region to 
by the Sri Lankans. They saw liberalise the economy, and it has 
this as an attempt by India to had the highest per capita gross 
interfere in the internal affairs domestic product (GDP) for many 
of Sri Lanka. In 1989, the Indian years right through the civil war. 
Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) pulled Despite the ravages of internal 
out of Sri Lanka without attaining conflict, it has maintained a 
its objective. democratic political system.

The  Sr i  Lankan  c r i s i s 
continued to be violent. However, india-Pakistan conflicts

international actors, particularly Let us now move from domestic 

the Scandinavian countries such politics and take a look at some of 
as Norway and Iceland tried to the areas of conflict in the inter-
bring the warring groups back to national relations in this region. 
negotiations. Finally, the armed The post-Cold War era has not 
conflict came to an end, as the meant the end of conflicts and 

Reprint 2025-26



38 Contempora ry World  Politic s

Kashmir and the Indian province 
of Jammu and Kashmir divided 
by the Line of Control. In 1971, 
India won a decisive war against 
Pakistan but the Kashmir issue 
remained unsettled. 

India’s conflict with Pakistan 
is also over strategic issues 
like the control of the Siachen 
glacier and over acquisition of 
arms. The arms race between 
the two countries assumed a 
new character with both states 
acquiring nuclear weapons and 
missiles to deliver such arms 
against each other in the 1990s. 
In 1998, India conducted nuclear 
explosion in Pokhran. Pakistan 
responded within a few days by 

 Keshav, The Hindu
carrying out nuclear tests in the 

A view of the c urrent phase of the  Indo-Pak negotia tions. Chagai Hills. Since then India 
and Pakistan seem to have built 

tensions in this region. We have a military relationship in which 

already noted the conflicts around the possibility of a direct and full-

internal democracy or ethnic scale war has declined. 

differences. But there are also But both the governments 
some very crucial conflicts of an continue to be suspicious of each 
international nature. Given the other. The Indian government has 
position of India in this region, blamed the Pakistan government 
most of these conflicts involve for using a strategy of low-key 
India. violence by helping the Kashmiri 

The most salient and over- militants with arms, training, 

whelming of these conflicts is, of money and protection to carry out 

course, the one between India and terrorist strikes against India. The 
Pakistan. Soon after the partition, Indian government also believes 
the two countries got embroiled in that Pakistan had aided the pro-
a conflict over the fate of Kashmir. Khalistani militants with arms 
The Pakistani government claimed and ammunitions during the 
that Kashmir belonged to it. Wars period 1985-1995. Its spy agency, 

Discussion on Kashmir 
between India and Pakistan in Inter Services Intelligence (ISI), is 

sounds like a  p roperty 
1947-48 and 1965 failed to settle alleged to be involved in various 

dispute between the 
rulers of Ind ia  and  the matter. The 1947-48 war anti-India campaigns in India’s 

Pakistan! What do the resulted in the division of the northeast, operating secretly 
Kashmiris feel about it? province into Pakistan-occupied through Bangladesh and Nepal. 

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry South Asia 39

The government of Pakistan, unhappy with Bangladesh’s 
in turn, blames the Indian denial of illegal immigration to 
government and its security India, its support for anti-Indian 
agencies for fomenting trouble Islamic fundamentalist groups, 

in the provinces of Sindh and Bangladesh’s refusal to allow 

Balochistan. Indian troops to move through 
its territory to northeastern 

India and Pakistan also have India, and its decision not 
had problems over the sharing to export natural gas to India 
of river waters. Until 1960, they or allow Myanmar to do so Why is it tha t 

were locked in a fierce argument every one of our 
through Bangladeshi territory. 

neighbours has a  
over the use of the rivers of Bangladeshi governments have problem with India? 
the Indus basin. Eventually, in felt that the Indian government Is there something 
1960, with the help of the World behaves like a regional bully wrong with our 
Bank, India and Pakistan signed over the sharing of river waters, foreign polic y? Or is it 

the Indus Waters Treaty which encouraging rebellion in the just our size?

has survived to this day in spite Chittagong Hill Tracts, trying to 
of various military conflicts in extract its natural gas and being 
which the two countries have unfair in trade. The two countries 
been involved. There are still could not resolve their boundary 
some minor differences about dispute for a long while.
the interpretation of the Indus Despite their differences, India 
Waters Treaty and the use of the and Bangladesh do cooperate on 
river waters. The two countries many issues. Economic relations 
are not in agreement over the have improved considerably in 
demarcation line in Sir Creek in the last 20 years. Bangladesh 
the Rann of Kutch.  The dispute is a part of India’s Look East 
seems minor, but there is an (Act East since 2014) policy that 
underlying worry that how the wants to link up with Southeast 
dispute is settled may have an Asia via Myanmar. On disaster 
impact on the control of sea management and environmental 
resources in the area adjoining issues, the two states have 
Sir Creek. India and Pakistan cooperated regularly. In 2015, 
are holding negotiations on all they exchanged certain enclaves. 
these issues. Efforts are on to broaden the 

areas of cooperation further 
by identifying common threats 

india and its Other and being more sensitive to each 

N other’s needs.
eighBours 

Nepal and India enjoy a very 
The governments of India and special relationship that has very 
Bangladesh have had differences few parallels in the world. A treaty 
over several issues including between the two countries allows 
the sharing of the Ganga and the citizens of the two countries 
Brahmaputra river waters. The to travel to and work in the 
Indian government has been other country without visas and 

Reprint 2025-26



40 Contempora ry World  Politic s

passports. Despite this special 
relationship, the governments 
of the two countries have had 
trade-related disputes in the 
past. The Indian government has 
often expressed displeasure at 

STEPS the warm relationship between 
Nepal and China and at the 

 Divide the c lassroom into eight groups (as many as Nepal government’s inaction 
the number of c ountries).  The number of students against anti-Indian elements. 
in each group may vary, reflecting the size of the Indian security agencies see the 
c ountries of South Asia . Maoist movement in Nepal as a 

 Name eac h group  a fter a  c ountry and  hand  over growing security threat, given 
a brief country profile to respective groups.  Besides the rise of Naxalite groups in 
the basic  information, inc lude a  short note on the various Indian states from Bihar 
contentious issues/ d isputes  among the South Asian in the north to Andhra Pradesh 
countries. The issues could  be those d iscussed in this in the south. Many leaders and 
c hapter or an issue of relevanc e but not d isc ussed  citizens in Nepal think that the 

in the c hap ter. Indian government interferes in 
its internal affairs, has designs 

 Allow students to select an issue of their choice. The on its river waters and hydro-
d ispute c ould  be b ila tera l or multila tera l (the issue electricity, and prevents Nepal, a 
c ould  be rela ted  to Ind ia , g iven the geographic  landlocked country, from getting 
pec ulia rity of the reg ion). easier access to the sea through 

	Assign each group to find out what initiatives the Indian territory. Nevertheless, 
governments involved have taken and the reasons Indo-Nepal relations are fairly 

stable and peaceful. Despite 
for their fa ilures in resolving  the d isputes.

differences, trade, scientific 
	Students should  assume the role of rep resenting  cooperation, common natural 

their respective countries and share their findings. resources, electricity generation 
Ideas for the Teac her a n d  i n t e r l o c k i n g  w a t e r 

management grids hold the two 
 Pa ir up the countries sharing the common issue/ d ispute. It could  

be two groups in the case of a bilateral issue or more in case countries together. There is a 
of a multilateral issue (examples of bilateral issues include the hope that the consolidation of 
Jammu and Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan, the democracy in Nepal will lead to 
migrant problem between India and Bangladesh; multilateral improvements in the ties between 
issues inc lude the c rea tion of a  free trade zone or tac kling  
terrorism). the two countries.

 Group s should  neg o tia te  on the  p rop osa ls a nd  c ounte r- The  d i f f i cu l t i es  in  the 
proposals within a time limit. The teacher is to take note of the r e la t i onsh ip  be tween  the 
outc ome of the negotia tions. The foc us should  be on the a reas 
of agreement and  d isagreement. governments of India and Sri Lanka 

are mostly over ethnic conflict in 
	Link the outcome of the negotiations with the prevailing situation 

among the countries of South Asia. Talk about the difficulties the island nation. Indian leaders 
invo lved  in neg o tia t ing  on a  p o lit ic a l issue b a sed  on the and citizens find it impossible 
observa tion made. Conc lude by d isc ussing the importanc e of to remain neutral when Tamils 
accommodating each other’s interest for the sake of peaceful 
coexistence. are politically unhappy and are 

being killed. After the military 
intervention in 1987, the Indian 

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry South Asia 41

government now prefers a policy the region. The smaller countries 
of disengagement vis-à-vis Sri fear that India wants to be a 
Lanka’s  internal troubles. regionally-dominant power.
Ind ia  s igned a  f r ee  t rade 

Not all conflicts in South 
agreement with Sri Lanka, which 
strengthened relations between Asia are between India and its 

two countries. India’s help in neighbours. Nepal and Bhutan, as 

post-tsunami reconstruction in well as Bangladesh and Myanmar, 

Sri Lanka has also brought the have had disagreements in 
the past over the migration of If the c hap ter, on 

two countries closer.
ethnic Nepalese into Bhutan and US was called ‘US 

India enjoys a very special Hegemony’ why 
the Rohingyas from Myanmar 

relationship with Bhutan too and is this c hap ter not 
into India and Bangladesh, 

does not have any major conflict called ‘Indian 
respectively. Bangladesh and 

with the Bhutanese government. Hegemony’?
Nepal have had some differences 

The  e f f o r t s  made  by  the 
over the future of the Himalayan 

Bhutanese monarch to weed out 
river waters. The major conflicts 

the guerrillas and militants from 
northeastern India that operate and differences, though, are 

in his country have been helpful between India and the others, 

to India. India is involved in big partly because of the geography 

hydroelectric projects in Bhutan of the region, in which India is 

and remains the Himalayan located centrally and is therefore 

kingdom’s biggest source of the only country that borders the 
development aid. India’s ties with others.
the Maldives remain warm and 
cordial. In November 1988, when 
some Tamil mercenaries from Sri 
Lanka attacked the Maldives, the 
Indian air force and navy reacted 
quickly to the Maldives’ request 
to help stop the invasion. India 
has also contributed towards the 
island’s economic development, 
tourism and fisheries.

You may have noticed that 
India has various problems 
with its smaller neighbours in 
the region. Given its size and 
power, they are bound to be 
suspicious of India’s intentions. 
The Indian government, on the 
other hand, often feels exploited 
by its neighbours. It does not like Surendra , The Hindu

the political instability in these 
countries, fearing it can help What does this c a rtoon tell you about the role of Ind ia  and  Pakistan 

in the p roc ess of reg iona l c oopera tion in South Asia?
outside powers to gain influence in 

Reprint 2025-26



42 Contempora ry World  Politic s

Peace and CooPeration  

Do the states of South Asia cooperate with 
each other? Or do they only keep fighting with 
each other? In spite of the many conflicts, the 
states of South Asia recognise the importance 
of cooperation and friendly relationship, among 
themselves. The South Asian Association for 
Regional Cooperation (SAARC) is a major regional 
initiative by the South Asian states to evolve 
cooperation through multilateral means. It 
began in 1985. Unfortunately, due to persisting 
political differences, SAARC has not had much 

Keshav, The Hindu
success. SAARC members signed the South 
Asian Free Trade (SAFTA) agreement which 
promised the formation of a free trade zone for 
the whole of South Asia.

A new chapter of peace and cooperation 
might evolve in South Asia if all the countries in 
the region allow free trade across the borders. 
This is the spirit behind the idea of SAFTA. 
The Agreement was signed in 2004 and came 
into effect on 1 January 2006. SAFTA aims at 
lowering trade tariffs. But some of our neighbours 
fear that SAFTA is a way for India to ‘invade’ 

Pakistan Tribune their markets and to influence their societies 

The two c a rtoons, one from Ind ia  and  the other and politics through commercial ventures and 
from Pakistan, interp ret the role of two key a commercial presence in their countries. India 
p layers who a re a lso interested  in the reg ion. thinks that there are real economic benefits for 
Do you notic e any c ommona lity between their all from SAFTA and that a region that trades 
perspec tives? 

more freely will be able to cooperate better on 
political issues. Some in India think that SAFTA 
is not worth the trouble since India already has 
bilateral agreements with Bhutan, Nepal and 
Sri Lanka. 

Although India-Pakistan relations seem to be 
a story of endemic conflict and violence, there 
have been a series of efforts to manage tensions 

Every assoc ia tion 
and build peace. The two countries have agreed to 

seems to have 

emerged  for trade! undertake confidence building measures to reduce 
Is trade more the risk of war. Social activists and prominent 
important than personalities have collaborated to create an 
peop le-to-peop le atmosphere of friendship among the people of 
rela tions? both countries. Leaders have met at summits to 

understand each other better and to find solutions 

Reprint 2025-26



Contempora ry South Asia 43

to the major problems between American involvement in South 
the two neighbours. A number of Asia has rapidly increased after 
bus routes have been opened up the Cold War. The US has had 
between the two countries. Trade good relations with both India 
between India and Pakistan had and Pakistan since the end of the 
increased and Visas had been Cold War and increasingly works 
more easily granted. However, in as a moderator in India-Pakistan 
recent times, the situation has relations. Economic reforms and 
changed. liberal economic policies in both 

countries have greatly increased 
No region exists in a vacuum. 

the depth of American participation 
It is influenced by outside powers 

in the region. The large South Asian 
and events no matter how much 

diasporas in the US and the huge 
it may try to insulate itself from 

size of the population and markets 
non-regional powers. China and 

of the region also give America 
the United States remain key 

an added stake in the future of 
players in South Asian politics. 

regional security and peace.
Sino-Indian relations have 
improved significantly in the last However, whether South Asia 
ten years, but China’s strategic will continue to be known as a 
partnership with Pakistan conflict prone zone or will evolve into 
remains a major irritant. The a regional bloc with some common 
demands of development and cultural features and trade interests 
globalisation have brought the will depend more on the people and 
two Asian giants closer, and their the governments of the region than 
economic ties have multiplied any other outside power.
rapidly since 1991. 

1.  Identify the c ountry:

a .  The strugg le among p ro-monarc hy, p ro-democ rac y g roups 
and  extremists c rea ted  an a tmosphere of politic a l instab ility:

b .  A land loc ked  c ountry with multi-pa rty c ompetition:

c.  The first country to liberalise its economy in the South Asian 
reg ion:

d.  In the conflict between the military and pro-democracy groups, 
the milita ry has p reva iled  over democ rac y:

e.  Centrally located and shares borders with most of the South 
Asian c ountries:

f.  Earlier the island had the Sultan as the head of state. Now, it’s 
a  repub lic : 

g.  Small savings and credit cooperatives in the rural areas have 
helped  in reduc ing poverty:

h.  A land loc ked  c ountry with a  monarc hy: 

Reprint 2025-26

Exercises



44 Contempora ry World  Politic s

  2.  Which among the following statements about South Asia is wrong?
a) All the c ountries in South Asia  a re democ ra tic .

b) Bangladesh and India have signed an agreement on river-water 
sharing .

c) SAFTA was signed at the 12th SAARC Summit in Islamabad.
d) The US and China play an influential role in South Asian politics.

  3.  What are some of the commonalities and differences between 
Bangladesh and Pakistan in their democratic experiences?

  4.  List three c ha llenges to democ rac y in Nepa l.

  5.  Name the principal players in the ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka. How do 
you assess the prospects of the resolution of this conflict?

  6.  Mention some of the recent agreements between India and Pakistan. 
Can we be sure that the two countries are well on their way to a 
friend ly rela tionship?

  7.  Mention two areas each of cooperation and disagreement between 
Ind ia  and  Bang ladesh.

  8.  How are the external powers influencing bilateral relations in South 
Asia? Take any one example to illustrate your point.

  9.  Write a short note on the role and the limitations of SAARC as a 
forum for fac ilita ting  ec onomic  c oopera tion among the South Asian 
c ountries. 

10.  India’s neighbours often think that the Indian government tries to 
domina te and  interfere in the domestic  a ffa irs of the smaller c ountries 
of the reg ion. Is this a  c orrec t impression?

Reprint 2025-26

E   x   e   r   c   i   s   e   s

##4##

Chapter 4

Interna tiona l Organisa tions

Overview

In this chapter we shall discuss the 
role of international organisations 
after the collapse of the Soviet 
Union. We shall examine how, 
in this emerging world, there 
were calls for the restructuring 
of international organisations to 
cope with various new challenges 
including the rise of US power. 
The potential reform of the United 
Nations Security Council is an 
interesting case of the reform 
process and its difficulties. We 
then turn to India’s involvement 
in the UN and its view of Security 
Council reforms. The chapter 
closes by asking if the UN can play This is the United  Na tions’  logo. The emb lem has a  world  map 

any role in dealing with a world with olive b ranc hes a round  it, signifying  world  peac e. 
Cred it : www.un.org

dominated by one superpower. 
In this chapter we also look 
at some other trans-national 
organisations that are playing a 
crucial role. 

Reprint 2025-26



46 Contempora ry World  Politic s

W  “Talking shop? Yes, there are 
hy InternatIonal 

a lot of speeches and meetings 
organIsatIons? at the U.N., especially during the 

Read the two cartoons on this annual sessions of the General 

page. Both the cartoons comment Assembly. But as Churchill put it, 

on the ineffectiveness of the jaw-jaw is better than war-war. 

United Nations Organisation, Isn’t it better to have one place 

usually referred to as the UN, in where all… countries in the world 

the Lebanon crisis in 2006. Both can get together, bore each other 

the cartoons represent the kind of sometimes with their words rather 

opinions that we often hear about than bore holes into each other on 

the UN. the battlefield?” — Shashi Tharoor, 
the former UN Under-Secretary-

On the other hand, we also 
General for Communications and 

find that the UN is generally 
Public Information.

regarded as the most important 
international organisation in These two quotes suggest 

today’s world. In the eyes of many s o m e t h i n g  i m p o r t a n t . 

people all over the world, it is International organisations are 

indispensable and represents the not the answer to everything, but 

great hope of humanity for peace they are important. International 

and progress. Why do we then organisations help with matters 
need organisations like the UN? of war and peace. They also help 
Let us hear two insiders: countries cooperate to make 

That’ s wha t they 
better living conditions for us all.

say about the  “The United Nations was 
parliament too —  not created to take humanity to Countries have conflicts and 
a  ta lking  shop . Does 

heaven, but to save it from hell.” differences with each other. That 
it mean tha t we need  

— Dag Hammarskjold, the UN’s does not necessarily mean they 
ta lking  shops?

second Secretary-General. must go to war to deal with their 

During June 2006, Israel a ttac ked  Lebanon, saying tha t it was nec essary to c ontrol the militant group  c a lled  Hezbollah. 
La rge numbers of c ivilians were killed  and  many pub lic  build ings and  even residentia l a reas c ame under Israeli 
bombardment. The UN passed  a  resolution on this only in August and  the Israel a rmy withd rew from the reg ion only in 
Oc tober. Both these c a rtoons c omment on the role of the UN and  its Sec reta ry-Genera l in this ep isode.

Reprint 2025-26

© Harry Harrison, Cagle Cartoons Inc .

© Petar Pismestrovic , Cagle Cartoons Inc .



Interna tiona l Organisa tions 47

antagonisms. They can, instead, 
discuss contentious issues and IMF
find peaceful solutions; indeed, Th e  In t e rn a t io n a l M o n e t a ry 

even though this is rarely noticed, Fund  (IMF) is a n inte rna t io na l 

most conflicts and differences organisa tion tha t oversees those 
financial institutions and regula-

are resolved without going to 
tions tha t ac t a t the interna tiona l 

war. The role of an international leve l. The IMF ha s 190 memb er 
organisation can be important countries (as on 19 Febuary 2024) but 
in this context. An international they do not enjoy an equal say. The G-7 members 
organisation is not a super-state US (16.52%), Japan (6.15%), Germany (5.32%), 

with authority over its members. Fra nc e (4.03%), UK (4.03%), Ita ly (3.02%) a nd  

It is created by and responds to Ca na d a  (2.22%) ha ve  41.29% o f the  vo tes. 
China  (6.09%), Ind ia  (2.64%), Russia  (2.59%) 

states. It comes into being when 
Brazil (2.22%) and  Saud i Arab ia  (2.02%) a re the 

states agree to its creation. Once other ma jor members.
created, it can help member states 
resolve their problems peacefully.

International organisations actually cooperating are two 
are helpful in another way. different things. Nations can 
Nations can usually see that recognise the need to cooperate 
there are some things they must but cannot always agree on how 
do together. There are issues that best to do so, how to share the 
are so challenging that they can costs of cooperating, how to 
only be dealt with when everyone make sure that the benefits of 
works together. Disease is an cooperating are justly divided, 
example. Some diseases can only and how to ensure that others do 
be eradicated if everyone in the not break their end of the bargain 
world cooperates in inoculating or and cheat on an agreement. An 
vaccinating their populations. Or international organisation can 
take global warming and its effects. help produce information and 
As temperatures rise because ideas about how to cooperate. 
of the increase in greenhouse It  can  provide  mechanisms, 
gases in the atmosphere, there rules  and  a  bureaucracy, 
is a danger that sea levels will to help members have more 
also rise, thereby submerging confidence that costs will be 
many coastal areas of the world shared properly, that the benefits 
including huge cities. Of course, 
each country can try to find its 
own solution to the effects of Make a  list of issues or 
global warming. But in the end a prob lems (other than 
more effective approach is to stop the ones mentioned  in 
the warming itself. This requires the text) tha t c annot 
at least all of the major industrial be hand led  by any one 
powers to cooperate. c ountry and  require an 

Unfortunately, recognising interna tiona l organisa tion. 

the need for cooperation and 

Reprint 2025-26

IMF



48 Contempora ry World  Politic s

government? We shall try to 
FOUNDI NG OF THE UNI TED NATI ONS answer this question at the end 

of the chapter.
1941 August: Sig ning  o f the  Atla ntic  Cha rter b y the  US 
Presid ent Franklin D. Roosevelt and  British PM Winston S. 
Churc hill

evolutIon of the un
1942 January: 26 Allied nations fighting against the Axis 

The First World War encouraged 
Powers meet in Washington, D.C., to support the Atlantic  
Charter and  sign the ‘Dec la ra tion by United  Na tions’  the world to  invest  in an 

international organisation to 
1943 Dec ember: Tehra n Conferenc e Dec la ra tion o f the deal with conflict. Many believed 
Three Powers (US, Brita in and  Soviet Union)

that such an organisation would 

1945 Fe b rua ry : Ya lta  C o nfe re nc e  o f the  ‘ Big  Thre e ’  help the world to avoid war. As a 
(Roosevelt, Churchill and Sta lin) dec ides to organise a  United  result, the League of Nations was 
Nations c onferenc e on the p roposed  world  organisa tion born. However, despite its initial 

success, it could not prevent the 
April-May: The 2-month long United Nations Conference on 

Second World War (1939-45). 
Interna tiona l Organisa tion a t San Franc isc o 

Many more people died and were 
1945 June 26: Signing of the UN Charter by 50 nations (Poland  wounded in this war than ever 
signed  on Oc tober 15; so the UN has 51 orig ina l found ing before.
members)

The UN was founded as 
1945 Oc tober 24: the UN was founded  (henc e Oc tober 24 a successor to the League of 
is c eleb ra ted  as UN Day)

Nations. It was established in 

1945 Oc tober 30: Ind ia  jo ins the UN 1945 immediately after the 
S e c o n d  Wo r l d  Wa r.  T h e 

will be fairly divided, and that once 
a member joins an agreement 
it will honour the terms and 
conditions of the agreement.

With the end of the Cold War, 
we can see that the UN may 
have a slightly different role. 
As the United States and its 
allies emerged victorious, there 
was concern amongst many 
governments and peoples that 

The US Office of War Information 
the Western countries led by c rea ted  the above poster during  
the US would be so powerful the Second World War as per the 
that there would be no check Dec la ra tion by United  Na tions of 1942. 

against their wishes and desires. The poster features the flags of all 
na tions tha t were part of the Allied  

Can the UN serve to promote Forces. It reflects the belligerent origins 
dialogue and discussion with the of the UN.
US in particular, and could it 
limit the power of the American 

Reprint 2025-26



Interna tiona l Organisa tions 49

Adapted  from http :/ / www.newint.org / issue375/ p ic s/ un-map-b ig .g if

For more deta ils about the UN System, visit www.un.org

Reprint 2025-26



50 Contempora ry World  Politic s

organisation was set up through (1995-2002) and the UN High 
Searc h for a t 

the signing of the United Nations Commissioner for Refugees 
least one news 

Charter by 51 states. It tried to (2005-2015).
item about 

achieve what the League could 
the ac tivities The UN consists of many 

not between the two world wars. 
of eac h of the d i f f e r en t  s t ruc tu r e s  and 

The UN’s objective is to prevent 
UN agenc ies agencies. War and peace and 

international conflict and to 
mentioned  on differences between member 

facilitate cooperation among 
this page. states are discussed in the 

states. It was founded with the General Assembly as well as 
hope that it would act to stop the the Security Council. Social and 
conflicts between states escalating economic issues are dealt with 
into war and, if war broke out, by many agencies including 
to limit the extent of hostilities. the World Health Organisation 
Furthermore, since conflicts (WHO), the United Nations 
often arose from the lack of Development Programme (UNDP), 
social and economic development, the United Nations Human Rights 
the UN was intended to bring Commision (UNHRC), the United 
countries together to improve the Nations High Commission for 
prospects of social and economic Refugees (UNHCR), the United 
development all over the world. Na t i ons  Ch i l d r en ’ s  Fund 

By 2011, the UN had 193 (UNICEF), and the United Nations 

member states. These includeed Educational, Scientific, and 

almost all independent states. Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), 

In the UN General Assembly, all among others.

members have one vote each. In 
the UN Security Council, there reform of the un after 
are five permanent members. 
These are: the United States, the Cold War

Russia, the United Kingdom, Reform and improvement are 
France and China. These states fundamental to any organisation 
were selected as permanent to serve the needs of a changing 
members as they were the most environment. The UN is no 
powerful immediately after the exception. In recent years, there 
Second World War and because have been demands for reform of 

Cold  War or no they constituted the victors in the world body. However, there is 
Cold  War, one 

the War.
reform is needed  little clarity and consensus on the 
above a ll. Only The UN’s most visible public nature of reform.
democ ra tic  leaders figure, and the representative Two basic kinds of reforms 
should  be a llowed  head, is the Secretary-General. face the UN: reform of the 
to rep resent their The present Secretary-General organisation’s structures and 
c ountries in the UN. 

is António Guterres. He is the processes; and a review of 
How c an they a llow 

ninth Secretary-General of the the issues that fall within the 
d ic ta tors to speak 

in the name of the UN. He took over as the Secretary- jurisdiction of the organisation. 
peop le of their General on 1 January 2017. He Almost everyone is agreed that 
c ountry? was the Prime Minister of Portugal both aspects of reform are 

Reprint 2025-26



Interna tiona l Organisa tions 51

necessary. What they cannot 
agree on is precisely what is to UN SECRETARI ES- GENERAL

be done, how it is to be done, and 
Trygve Lie (1946-1952) Norway; lawyer and  foreign 

when it is to be done. minister; worked for ceasefire between India and 
Pa kista n on Ka shmir; c rit ic ised  fo r his fa ilure  to 

On the reform of structures 
quic kly end  the Korean war; Soviet Union opposed  

and processes, the biggest sec ond  term for him; resigned  from the post.
discussion has been on the Dag Hammarskjöld (1953-1961) Sweden; Economist 

functioning of the Security and  lawyer; worked  for resolving  the Suez Cana l 
d ispute and  the dec olonisa tion of Afric a ; awarded  

Council. Related to this has Nobel Peace Prize posthumously in 1961 for his 
been the demand for an increase efforts to settle the Congo c risis; Soviet Union and  
in the UN Security Council’s Franc e c ritic ised  his role in Afric a .

permament and non-permanent U Thant (1961-1971) Burma (Myanmar); teacher and  
diplomat; worked for resolving the Cuban Missile 

membership so that the realities Crisis and ending the Congo crisis; established the 
of contemporary world politics are UN Peac ekeep ing Forc e in Cyprus; c ritic ised  the US 
better reflected in the structure during  the Vietnam War.

of the organisation. In particular, Kurt Wa ld he im  (1972-1981) Aust ria ; d ip lo m a t 

there are proposals to increase and  foreign minister; made efforts to resolve the 
problems of Namibia and Lebanon; oversaw the 

membership from Asia, Africa and relief operation in Bangladesh; China blocked his 
South America.  Beyond this, the bid for a third term.
US and other Western countries Javier Perez de Cuellar (1982-1991) Peru; lawyer and  

want improvements in the UN’s d ip lomat; worked for peace in Cyprus, Afghanistan 
and El Salvador; mediated between Britain and 

budgetary procedures and its Argentina  a fter the Fa lklands War; negotia ted  for 
administration. the independence of Namibia.

Boutros Boutros-Ghali (1992-1996) Egypt; d ip lomat, 
On the issues to be given jurist, foreign minister; issued a  report, An Agenda  

greater priority or to be brought for Peace; conduc ted a  successful UN opera tion in 

within the jurisdiciton of the UN, Mozambique; blamed for the UN failures in Bosnia, 
Somalia and Rwanda; due to serious d isagreements, 

some countries and experts want the US blocked a second term for him.
the organisation to play a greater Kofi A. Annan (1997-2006) Gha na ; UN o ffic ia l; 
or more effective role in peace and created the Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis 
security missions, while others and Malaria; declared the US-led invasion of Iraq 

as an illegal act; established the Peacebuilding 
want its role to be confined to 

Commission and  the Human Rights Counc il in 2005; 
development and humanitarian awarded the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize.
work  (hea l th ,  educa t i on , Ban Ki-moon (2007-2016) Republic of Korea (South 
environment, population control, Korea); d ip lomat and  foreign minister; the sec ond  

Asian to hold  the post; highlighted  c limate change; 
human rights, gender and social focused on the Millennium Development Goals 
justice). and Sustainable Development Goals; worked for 

the creation of UN Women; emphasised conflict 
Let us look at both sets of resolution and  nuc lea r d isa rmament.

reforms, with an emphasis on António Manuel de Oliveira  Guterres (2017-   ) 
reform of the structures and Portuga l; former Prime Minister of Portuga l from 1995 

processes. to 2002; was the United  Nations High Commissioner 
for Refugees during  2005–2015; President of the 

The UN was established Socialist International from 1999 to 2005. He is serving 
as the ninth Secretary–General of the United Nations.

in 1945 immediately after the 
Photo Cred it: www.un.org

Second World War. The way it 

Reprint 2025-26



52 Contempora ry World  Politic s

terrorism, nuclear proliferation, 
climate change, environmental 
degradation, epidemics).

In this situation, in 1989, as 
the Cold War was ending, the 
question facing the world was: 
is the UN doing enough? Is it 
equipped to do what is required? 
What should it be doing? And 
how? What reforms are necessary 

Ban Ki-moon, UN Sec reta ry-Genera l, launc hes UN @ 70 to c eleb ra te 
to make it work better? For the 

the 70th Anniversa ry in New Delhi in 2015     (UN Photo/ Mark Garten)
past decade and a half, member 
states have been trying to find 

was organised and the way it 
satisfactory and practical answers 

functioned reflected the realities 
to these questions.

of world politics after the Second 
World War. After the Cold War, 
those realities are different. Here reform of StruCtures and 
are some of the changes that have 
occurred: ProCesses

 The  Sov i e t  Un i on  has While the case for reform has 

collapsed. widespread support, getting 
agreement on what to do is 

 The US is the strongest power.
difficult. Let us examine the 

 The relationship between debate over reform of the UN 
Russia, the successor to the Security Council. In 1992, the 
Soviet Union, and the US is UN General Assembly adopted 
much more cooperative. a resolution. The resolution 

 China is fast emerging as a reflected three main complaints:

great power, and India also is  The Security Council no longer 
growing rapidly. represents contemporary 

 The economies of Asia are political realities. 

growing at an unprecedented  Its decisions reflect only 
rate. Western values and interests 

 Many new countries have and are dominated by a few 

joined the UN (as they became powers.

independent from the Soviet  It lacks equitable representation.
Union or former communist 

In view of these growing 
states in eastern Europe).

demands for the restructuring of 
 A whole new set of challenges the UN, on 1 January 1997, the 

confronts the world (genocide, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan 
civil war, ethnic conflict, initiated an inquiry into how the 

Reprint 2025-26



Interna tiona l Organisa tions 53

UN should be reformed. How, for 
instance, should new Security World Bank
Council members be chosen? The  Wo rld  Ba nk w a s c rea ted  

In the years since then, the d uring  the  Sec ond  World  Wa r 
in 1944. Its ac tivities a re foc used  

following are just some of the 
on the develop ing  c ountries. It 

criteria that have been proposed 
works for human development 

for new permanent and non- (educ a tion, hea lth), agric ulture 
permanent members of the and rura l development (irrigation, rura l services), 
Security Council. A new member, environmenta l p rotec tion (pollution reduc tion, 
it has been suggested, should be: e sta b lish ing  a nd  e n fo rc ing  re g u la t io ns) , 

infra st ruc ture  (ro a d s, urb a n re g e ne ra t io n, 
 A major economic power electricity) and governance (anti-corruption, 
 A major military power

development of lega l institutions). It p rovides 
 A substantial contributor to loans and grants to the member-countries. In 

the UN budget this way, it exercises enormous influence on 
 A big nation in terms of its the ec onomic  polic ies of develop ing c ountries. 

population It is often c ritic ised  for setting  the ec onomic  

 A  nat ion that  respects a g e nd a  o f the  p o o re r na t io ns, a t ta c hing 

democracy and human rights stringent c ond itions to its loans and  forc ing  free 

 A  coun t r y  tha t  wou ld market reforms.

make the Council  more 
representative of the world’s 
diversity in terms of geography, 
economic systems, and culture Clearly, each of these criteria 

Major contributors to the  has some validity. Governments 

UN regular budget for 2019 saw advantages in some criteria 
and disadvantages in others 

 No. Member State %

 1 USA 22.0 depending on their interests and 
 2 China 12.0 aspirations. Even if they had no 
 3 Japan 8.5 desire to be members themselves, 
 4 Germany 6.0 countries could see that the 
 5 UK 4.5
 6 France 4.4 criteria were problematic. How 

 7 Italy  3.3 big an economic or military power 
 8 Brazil 2.9 did you have to be to qualify for 
 9 Canada   2.7 Security Council membership? 
 10 Russia 2.4

What level of budget contribution 
 11 Republic of Korea  2.2
 12 Australia  2.2 would enable a state to buy its 
 13 Spain 2.1 way into the Council? Was a big 
 14 Turkey 1.3 population an asset or a liability 
 15 Netherlands 1.3 for a country trying to play a 
 16 Mexico  1.2

bigger role in the world? If respect 
 17 Saudi Arabia 1.1
 18 Switzerland 1.1 for democracy and human rights 
 19 Argentina  0.9 was the criteria, countries with 
 20 Sweden 0.9 excellent records would be in line 
 21 India 0.8 to be members; but would they 
Source: www.un.org be effective as Council members?

Reprint 2025-26

WORLD BANK



54 Contempora ry World  Politic s

to members of the developing 
world? Even here, there are 
difficulties. The developing world 
consists of countries at many 
different levels of development. 
What about culture? Should 

STEPS different cultures or ‘civilisations’ 

 Divide the class into six groups. Each group is be given representation in a more 

to fo llow one of the six c riteria  (or more if there balanced way? How does one 

are more suggestions) listed  here for permanent divide the world by civilisations or 

membership  of the UN Sec urity Counc il. cultures given that nations have 

 Each group is to make its own list of the so many cultural streams within 
their borders?

permanent members based on its g iven c riterion 
(e .g . the g roup  working  on the ‘ p op ula tion’  A related issue was to change 
criterion will find out the which are five most the nature of  membership 
populous c ountries).  altogether. Some insisted, for 

 Each group can make a presentation of their instance, that the veto power 

re c o m m e nd e d  list  a nd  re a so ns w hy the ir of the five permanent members 

c riterion should  be ac c ep ted . be abolished. Many perceived 
the veto to be in conflict with 

Ideas for the Teac her
the concept of democracy and 

 Allow the students to op t for the group  whose c riterion they sovereign equality in the UN and 
themselves favour.

thought that the veto was no 
 Com p a re  a ll the  lists a nd  see  how  m a ny na m es a re longer right or relevant.

c ommon and  how often Ind ia  fea tures.

 Keep some time for an open ended  d isc ussion on whic h In the Security Council, there 
c riterion should  be adop ted . are five permanent members and 

ten non-permanent members. 
The Charter gave the permanent 
members a privileged position 

Fur thermore ,  how was to bring about stability in the 
the matter of representation world after the Second World 
to be resolved? Did equitable War. The main privileges of the 
representation in geographical five permanent members are 
terms mean that there should be permanency and the veto power. 
one seat each from Asia, Africa, and The non-permanent members 
Latin America and the Caribbean? serve for only two years at a time 
Should the representation, on the and give way after that period 
other hand, be by regions or sub- to newly elected members. A 
regions (rather than continents)? country cannot be re-elected 
Why should the issue of equitable immediately after completing 
representation be decided by a term of two years. The non-
geography? Why not by levels of permanent members are elected 
economic development? Why not, in a manner so that they represent 
in other words, give more seats all continents of the world.

Reprint 2025-26



Interna tiona l Organisa tions 55

Most importantly, the non- JurIsdICtIon of the un
permanent members do not have 
the veto power. What is the veto The question of membership is a 
power? In taking decisions, the serious one. In addition, though, 
Security Council proceeds by there are more substantial 
voting. All members have one vote. issues before the world. As the 
However, the permanent members That’ s very unfa ir!  It’ s 

UN completed 60 years of its 
ac tua lly the weaker 

can vote in a negative manner so existence, the heads of all the 
c ountries who need  

that even if all other permanent member-states met in September a  veto, not those 
and non-permanent members 2005 to celebrate the anniversary who a lready have so 
vote for a particular decision, any and review the situation. The muc h power. 

permanent member’s negative leaders in this meeting decided 
vote can stall the decision. This that the following steps should 
negative vote is the veto. be taken to make the UN more 

While there has been a move to relevant in the changing context.
abolish or modify the veto system, 

 Creation of a Peacebuilding 
there is also a realisation that the 

Commission
permanent members are unlikely 
to agree to such a reform. Also,  Acceptance of the responsibility 
the world may not be ready for of the international community 
such a radical step even though in case of failures of national 
the Cold War is over. Without the governments to protect their 
veto, there is the danger as in 1945 own citizens from atrocities
that the great powers would lose 

 Establishment of a Human 
interest in the world body, that 

Rights Council (operational 
they would do what they pleased 

since 19 June 2006) Find  out 
outside it, and that without their 

about the 
support and involvement the body  Agreements to achieve the 

Susta inab le 
would be ineffective. Millennium Development 

Development 
Goals (MDGs)

Goals (SDGs).
 Condemnation of terrorism in 

all its forms and manifestations

 Creation of a Democracy Fund

 An agreement to wind up the 
Trusteeship Council

It is not hard to see that 
these are equally contentious 
issues for the UN. What should 
a Peacebuilding Commission do? 
There are any number of conflicts all 
over the world. Which ones should 
it intervene in? Is it possible or 

Sourc e: www.un.org
even desirable for it to intervene in 

Reprint 2025-26



56 Contempora ry World  Politic s

each and every conflict? Similarly, 
what is the responsibility of 
the international community in 
dealing with atrocities? What are 
human rights and who should 
determine the level of human 
rights violations and the course 
of action to be taken when they 
are violated? Given that so many 
countries are still part of the 
developing world, how realistic is it 
for the UN to achieve an ambitious 
set of goals such as those listed 
in the Sustainable Development 

The humanita rian c risis in Darfur, Sudan sinc e 2003 has a ttrac ted  Goals? Can there be agreement 
empty p romises by the Interna tiona l Community. How do you on a definition of terrorism? How 
think the UN can intervene in situations like this? Would that shall the UN use funds to promote 
require a  c hange in its jurisd ic tion?

democracy? And so on.

Sourc e: www.un.org

Reprint 2025-26

© Pat Bag ley, Cag le Cartoons Inc .



Interna tiona l Organisa tions 57

IndIa and the Un RefoRms
WTO

Ind ia  has  suppor t ed  the The  World  Tra d e  Org a nisa t ion 

restructuring of the UN on ( W TO )  is a n  in t e rn a t io n a l 

several grounds. It believes that a organisa tion whic h sets the rules 
for g loba l trade. This organisa tion 

strengthened and revitalised UN 
was set up in 1995 as the successor 

is desirable in a changing world. to  the  Genera l Ag reement on 
India also supports an enhanced Tra d e  a nd  Ta riffs (GATT) c rea ted  a fte r the 
role for the UN in promoting Second World  War. It has 164 members (as on 29 

development and cooperation July 2016). All dec isions a re taken unanimously  
but the ma jor ec onomic  powers suc h as the 

among states. India believes that 
US, EU and  Japan have managed  to use the 

development should be central 
WTO to frame rules of trade to advanc e their 

to the UN’s agenda as it is a vital own interests. The develop ing c ountries often 
precondition for the maintenance c ompla in of non-transparent p roc edures and  

of international peace and security. being pushed  a round  by b ig  powers. 

One of India’s major concerns 
has been the composition of the 
Security Council, which has India supports an increase in 
remained largely static while the the number of both permanent 
UN General Assembly member- and non-permanent members. 
ship has expanded considerably. Its representatives have argued 
India considers that this has that the activities of the Security 
harmed the representative Council have greatly expanded in 
character  o f  the  Secur i ty the past few years. The success 
Council. It also argues that an of the Security Council’s actions 
expanded Council, with more depends upon the political support 
representation, will enjoy greater of the international community. 
support in the world community. Any plan for restructuring of 

the Security Council should, 
We should keep in mind 

therefore, be broad-based. For 
that the membership of the UN 

example, the Security Council 
Security Council was expanded 

should have more developing 
from 11 to 15 in 1965. But, there 

countries in it.
was no change in the number 
of permanent members. Since Not surprisingly, India itself 
then, the size of the Council has also wishes to be a permanent 
remained stationary. The fact member in a restructured UN. 
remains that the overwhelming India is the most populous 
majority of the UN General country in the world comprising 
Assembly members now are almost one-fifth of the world 
developing countries. Therefore, population. Moreover, India Do we want to 

oppose the bossism 
India argues that they should is also the world’s largest 

of the big five or 
also have a role in shaping the democracy. India has participated do we want to jo in 
decisions in the Security Council in virtually all of the initiatives them and  bec ome 

which affect them. of the UN. Its role in the UN’s another boss?

Reprint 2025-26

WTO



58 Contempora ry World  Politic s

that its difficulties with Pakistan 

IAEA will make India ineffective as a 

The International Atomic Energy permanent member. Yet others 
Agency (IAEA) was established feel that if India is included, then 
in 1957. It came into being to other emerging powers will have to 
im p lem ent US Presid ent Dw ig ht be accommodated such as Brazil, 
Eisenhower’s “Atoms for Peace” 

Germany, Japan, perhaps even 
proposa l. It seeks to p romote the peac eful use of 
nuc lea r energy and  to p revent its use for milita ry South Africa, whom they oppose. 

purposes. IAEA teams regularly inspect nuclear There are those who feel that 
fac ilities a ll over the world  to ensure tha t c ivilian Africa and South America must be 
reac tors a re not being used  for milita ry purposes. represented in any expansion of 

the permanent membership since 
those are the only continents 

peacekeeping efforts is a long and not to have representation in the 
present structure.  Given these 

substantial one. The country’s 
concerns, it may not be very easy 

economic emergence on the 
for India or anyone else to become 

world stage is another factor that 
a permanent member of the UN 

perhaps justifies India’s claim to 
in the near future.

a permanent seat in the Security 
Council. India has also made 
regular financial contributions the un In a unIpolar 
to the UN and never faltered 
on its payments. India is aware World

that permanent membership of Among the concerns about the 
the Security Council also has reform and restructuring of the 
symbolic importance. It signifies UN has been the hope of some 
a country’s growing importance in countries that changes could help 
world affairs. This greater status the UN cope better with a unipolar 
is an advantage to a country in word in which the US was the 
the conduct of its foreign policy: most powerful country without any 
the reputation for being powerful serious rivals. Can the UN serve as 
makes you more influential. a balance against US dominance? 

Despite India’s wish to be a Can it help maintain a dialogue 

permanent veto-wielding member between the rest of the world and 

of the UN, some countries question the US and prevent America from 

its inclusion. Neighbouring doing whatever it wants?

Pakistan, with which India has US power cannot be easily 
troubled relations, is not the only checked. First of all, with the 
country that is reluctant to see disappearance of the Soviet 
India become a permanent veto Union, the US stands as the 

What happens if the 
member of the Security Council. only superpower. Its military and 

UN invites someone 
Some countries, for instance, are 

to New York but the economic power allow it to ignore 

US does not issue concerned about India’s nuclear the UN or any other international 
visa? weapons capabilities. Others think organisation. 

Reprint 2025-26

IAEA



Interna tiona l Organisa tions 59

Secondly, within the UN, the 
influence of the US is considerable. 
As the single largest contributor 
to the UN, the US has unmatched 
financial power. The fact that 
the UN is physically located 
within the US territory gives 
Washington additional sources of 
influence. The US also has many 
nationals in the UN bureaucracy. 
In addition, with its veto power 
the US can stop any moves that 
it finds annoying or damaging to 
its interests or the interests of 
its friends and allies. The power 
of the US and its veto within the 
organisation also ensure that 
Washington has a considerable 
degree of say in the choice of the 
Secretary General of the UN. The 
US can and does use this power to 
“split” the rest of the world and to 
reduce opposition to its policies.

The UN is not therefore a great 
balance to the US. Nevertheless, 
in a unipolar world in which © Mike Lane, Cag le Cartoons Inc .

the US is dominant, the UN can 
and has served to bring the US 
and the rest of the world into 
discussions over various issues. 
US leaders, in spite of their Amnesty 
frequent criticism of the UN, do International
see the organisation as serving Amnesty Interna tiona l is an NGO 

a purpose in bringing together that campaigns for the protec tion 
of human rights a ll over the world . 

over 190 nations in dealing with 
It  p romotes resp ec t fo r a ll the 

conflict and social and economic huma n rig hts in the  Unive rsa l Dec la ra t ion o f 
development. As for the rest of the Human Rights. It believes tha t human rights a re 

world, the UN provides an arena interdependent and  ind ivisib le. It p repares and  

in which it is possible to modify pub lishes reports on human rights. Governments 
a re not a lways happy with these reports sinc e 

US attitudes and policies. While 
a  ma jor foc us of Amnesty is the misc onduc t of 

the rest of the world is rarely g ove rnm ent a utho rit ies. Neve rthe less, these 
united against Washington, and reports p lay an important role in researc h and  

while it is virtually impossible advoc ac y on human rights.

to “balance” US power, the UN 

Reprint 2025-26

AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL



60 Contempora ry World  Politic s

be worse off. Given the growing 

Human Rights Watc h connections and links between 
Human Rights Wa tc h is another societies and issues—what we 
inte rna t io na l NGO invo lved  in often call ‘interdependence’—it is 
re se a rc h  a n d  a d v o c a c y  o n 

hard to imagine how more than 
hum a n rig hts. It  is the  la rg e st 
in t e rn a t io n a l h u m a n  rig h t s seven billion people would live 

organisa tion in the US. It d raws the together without an organisation 
g loba l med ia ’ s a ttention to human rights abuses. such as the UN. Technology 
It helped  in build ing  interna tiona l c oa litions like promises to increase planetary 
the c ampa igns to ban landmines, to stop  the use interdependence, and therefore 
of c hild  sold iers and  to estab lish the Interna tiona l 

the importance of the UN will 
Crimina l Court.

only increase. Peoples and 
governments will have to find 

does provide a space within ways of supporting and using 
which arguments against specific the UN and other international 
US attitudes and policies are organisations in ways that 
heard and compromises and are consistent with their own 
concessions can be shaped.

interests and the interests of the 
The UN is an imperfect body, international community more 

but without it the world would broadly.

1.  Mark c orrec t or wrong aga inst eac h of the following sta tements 
about the veto power.

a . Only the permanent members of the Sec urity Counc il possess 
the veto power.

b . It’ s a  kind  of nega tive power.

c. The Secretary-General uses this power when not satisfied with 
any dec ision. 

d . One veto c an sta ll a  Sec urity Counc il resolution. 

2.  Mark c orrec t or wrong aga inst eac h of the following sta tements 
about the way the UN func tions.

a . All sec urity a nd  pea c e re la ted  issues a re d ea lt w ith in the 
Sec urity Counc il.

b . Humanita rian polic ies a re imp lemented  by the ma in organs 
and  spec ia lised  agenc ies sp read  ac ross the g lobe.

c. Having consensus among the five permanent members on 
sec urity issues is vita l for its imp lementa tion.

d . The members of the Genera l Assembly a re automatic a lly the 
members of a ll other p rinc ipa l organs and spec ia lised  agenc ies 
of the UN.

Reprint 2025-26

HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

E x e r c i s e s



Interna tiona l Organisa tions 61

3.  Whic h among the following would  g ive more weightage to Ind ia ’ s 
p roposa l for permanent membership  in the Sec urity Counc il?

a . Nuc lea r c apab ility

b . It has been a  member of the UN sinc e its inc ep tion

c . It is loc a ted  in Asia

d . Ind ia ’ s growing ec onomic  power and  stab le politic a l system

4.  The UN agenc y c onc erned  with the sa fety and  peac eful use of 
nuc lea r tec hnology is:

a . The UN Committee on Disa rmament

b. International Atomic Energy Agency
c . UN Interna tiona l Sa feguard  Committee

d . None of the above

5.  WTO is serving as the successor to which of the following organisations  

a . Genera l Agreement on Trade and  Tariffs

b . Genera l Arrangement on Trade and  Tariffs

c . World  Hea lth Organisa tion

d . UN Development Programme

6.  Fill in the b lanks.

a .  The p rime ob jec tive of the UN is ___________________________

b .  The highest func tionary of the UN is c a lled_________________

c.  The UN Security Council has _____ permanent and _____non- 
permanent members.

d.  ______________________ is the present UN Secretary-General.
7. Match the principal organs and agencies of the UN with their 

func tions:

1.  Economic and Social Council 
2.  Interna tiona l Court of Justic e

3.  International Atomic Energy Agency
4.  Sec urity Counc il

5.  UN High Commission for Refugees

6.  World  Trade Organisa tion

7.  International Monetary Fund
8.  Genera l Assembly

9.  World  Hea lth Organisa tion

10.  Sec reta ria t

Reprint 2025-26

E  x  e  r  c  i  s  e  s



62 Contempora ry World  Politic s

a. Oversees the global financial system
b . Preserva tion of interna tiona l peac e and  sec urity

c . Looks into  the ec onomic  a nd  soc ia l welfa re  o f the memb er 
c ountries

d . Sa fety and  peac eful use of nuc lea r tec hnology

e. Resolves d isputes between and  among member c ountries 

f. Provides shelter and  med ic a l help  during  emergenc ies

g. Deba tes and  d isc usses g loba l issues

h. Administra tion and  c oord ina tion of UN a ffa irs

i. Provid ing  good  hea lth for a ll  

j. Fac ilita tes free trade among member c ountries

  8.  What a re the func tions of the Sec urity Counc il?

  9.  As a  c itizen of Ind ia , how would  you support Ind ia ’s cand ida ture for the 
permanent membership  of the Sec urity Counc il? Justify your p roposa l.

10.  Crit ic a lly eva lua te  the  d iffic ult ies invo lved  in imp lementing  the 
suggested  reforms to rec onstruc t the UN.

11.  Though the UN has fa iled  in p reventing  wars and  rela ted  miseries, 
na tions p refer its c ontinua tion. What makes the UN an ind ispensab le 
organisa tion?

12.  ‘Reforming the UN means restruc turing of the Sec urity Counc il’ . Do you 
agree with this sta tement? Give a rguments for or aga inst this position.

Reprint 2025-26

E   x   e   r   c   i   s   e   s


##5##
Chapter 5

Sec urity in the 
Contempora ry World

Overview

In reading about world politics, we 
frequently encounter the terms 
‘security’ or ‘national security’.  Do 
we know what these terms mean? 
Often, they are used to stop debate 
and discussion. We hear that an 
issue is a security issue and that 
it is vital for the well-being of the 
country. The implication is that 
it is too important or secret to be 
debated and discussed openly. 
We see movies in which everything 
surrounding ‘national security’ is 
shadowy and dangerous.  Security 
seems to be something that is 
not the business of the ordinary 
citizen. In a democracy, surely this 
cannot be the case. As citizens of 
a democracy, we need to know 
more about the term security. 
What exactly is it?  And what are 
India’s security concerns? This 
chapter debates these questions. 
It introduces two different ways of 
looking at security and highlights 

The concern about human security was reflected in the 
the importance of keeping in mind 

1994 UNDP’s Human Development Report, which contends, 
different contexts or situations “the concept of security has for too long been interpreted 
which determine our view of narrowly… It has been more related to nation states than 
security. people… Forgotten were the legitimate concerns of ordinary 

people who sought security in their daily lives.” The images 
above show various forms of security threats.

Reprint 2025-26



64 Contempora ry World  Politic s

What is security? those things that threaten ‘core 
values’ should be regarded as 

At its most basic, security implies being of interest in discussions 
freedom from threats. Human of security. Whose core values 
existence and the life of a country though? The core values of the 
are full of threats.  Does that country as a whole? The core 
mean that every single threat values of ordinary women and men 
counts as a security threat? Every in the street?  Do governments, on 

Who dec ides about time a person steps out of his or behalf of citizens, always have the 
my sec urity? Some her house, there is some degree same notion of core values as the 
leaders and  experts? of threat to their existence and ordinary citizen?
Can’ t I dec ide wha t 

way of life. Our world would be 
is my sec urity? Furthermore, when we speak 

saturated with security issues if 
of threats to core values, how 

we took such a broad view of what 
intense should the threats be? 

is threatening.
Surely there are big and small 

Those who study security, threats to virtually every value we 
therefore, generally say that only hold dear.  Can all those threats 

be brought into the understanding 
of security? Every time another 
country does something or fails 
to do something, this may damage 
the core values of one’s country. 
Every time a person is robbed 
in the streets, the security of 
ordinary people as they live their 
daily lives is harmed. Yet, we 
would be paralysed if we took 
such an extensive view of security: 
everywhere we looked, the world 
would be full of dangers.

So we are brought to a 
conclusion:  security relates only 
to extremely dangerous threats—
threats that could so endanger 
core values that those values 
would be damaged beyond repair 
if we did not do something to deal 
with the situation.

Having said that, we must 
admit that security remains a 
slippery idea.  For instance, have 

Taming Peac e societies always had the same 
Have you heard of ‘peacekeeping force’? Do you think this is conception of security?  It would 
paradoxical term?

be surprising if they did because 

Reprint 2025-26

© Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.



Sec urity in the Contempora ry World 65

so many things change in the 
world around us.  And, at any 
given time in world history, do all 
societies have the same conception 
of security? Again, it would be 
amazing if six hundred and fifty 
crore people, organised in nearly 
200 countries, had the same 
conception of security! Let us begin 
by putting the various notions 
of security under two groups: 
traditional and non-traditional 
conceptions of security.  

traditional notions: 

external

Ec onomy of war
Most of the time, when we read 

© Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
and hear about security we are 
talking about traditional, national breaks out so as to deny the 
security conceptions of security. attacking country its objectives and 
In the traditional conception of to turn back or defeat the attacking 
security, the greatest danger forces altogether.  Governments 
to a country is from military may choose to surrender when 
threats.  The source of this actually confronted by war, but 
danger is another country which they will not advertise this as the 
by threatening military action policy of the country.  Therefore, 
endangers the core values of security policy is concerned 
sovereignty, independence and with preventing war, which is 
territorial integrity.  Military called deterrence, and with 
action also endangers the lives limiting or ending war, which is 
of ordinary citizens. It is unlikely called defence.
that in a war only soldiers will 

Traditional security policy has 
be hurt or killed. Quite often, 

a third component called balance 
ordinary men and women are 

of power. When countries look 
made targets of war, to break their 

around them, they see that some 
support of the war.

countries are bigger and stronger. 
In responding to the threat of This is a clue to who might be a 

war, a government has three basic threat in the future.  For instance, War is a ll about 

choices:  to surrender; to prevent a neighbouring country may not insec urity, destruc tion 

the other side from attacking by say it is preparing for attack. and  dea ths. How c an 

promising to raise the costs of war There may be no obvious reason a  war make anyone 

to an unacceptable level; and to for attack. But the fact that this sec ure?

defend itself when war actually country is very powerful is a sign 

Reprint 2025-26



66 Contempora ry World  Politic s

formalised in written treaties 
and are based on a fairly clear 
identification of who constitutes 
the threat. Countries form 
al l iances to increase their 
e f fect ive power re lat ive to 
another country or alliance. 
Alliances are based on national 
interests and can change when 
national interests change. For 
example, the US backed the 
Islamic militants in Afghanistan 
against the Soviet Union in the 
1980s, but later attacked them 
when Al Qaeda—a group of 

How do the big powers react when new countries claim nuclear Islamic militants led by Osama 
status? On what basis can we say that some countries can be bin Laden—launched terrorist 
trusted with nuclear weapons while others can’t be?

strikes against America on 11 
September 2001.

that at some point in the future In the traditional view of 
it may choose to be aggressive. security, then, most threats 
Governments are, therefore, very to a country’s security come 
sensitive to the balance of power from outside its borders. That is 
between their country and other because the international system 
countries.  They do work hard to is a rather brutal arena in which 
maintain a favourable balance there is no central authority 
of power with other countries, capable of controlling behaviour. 
especially those close by, those Within a country, the threat 
with whom they have differences, of violence is regulated by an 
or with those they have had acknowledged central authority 
conflicts in the past. A good — the government.  In world 
part of maintaining a balance of politics, there is no acknowledged 
power is to build up one’s military central authority that stands 
power, although economic and above everyone else.  It is tempting 
technological power are also to think that the United Nations is 
important since they are the basis such an authority or could become 
for military power. such an institution.  However, as 

A  f o u r t h  a n d  r e l a t e d presently constituted, the UN is a 

component of traditional security creature of its members and has 
policy is alliance building. An authority only to the extent that 
alliance is a coalition of states the membership allows it to have 
that coordinate their actions to authority and obeys it. So, in world 
deter or defend against military politics, each country has to be 
attack.  Most al l iances are responsible for its own security.

Reprint 2025-26

© Christo Komarnitski, Cagle Cartoons Inc.



Sec urity in the Contempora ry World 67

traditional notions: Again, we draw attention to 
Browse through a  

contexts and situations.  We know 
internal week’s newspaper 

that the period after the Second 
and  list a ll the 

World War was the Cold War in 
By now you will have asked externa l and  

which the US-led Western alliance 
yourself:  doesn’t security depend internal conflicts 

faced the Soviet-led Communist 
on internal peace and order?  How tha t a re taking 

alliance. Above all, the two 
can a society be secure if there is p lac e a round  the 

alliances feared a military attack 
violence or the threat of violence g lobe. 

from each other.  Some European 
inside its borders?  And how can 

powers, in addition, continued 
it prepare to face violence from 

to worry about violence in their 
outside its borders if it is not 

colonies, from colonised people 
secure inside its borders?

who wanted independence. We 
Traditional security must have only to remember the French 

also, therefore, concern itself with fighting in Vietnam in the 1950s or 
internal security.  The reason it the British fighting in Kenya in the 
is not given so much importance 1950s and the early 1960s.
is that after the Second World 

As the colonies became free 
War it seemed that, for the most 

from the late 1940s onwards, 
powerful countries on earth, 

their security concerns were 
internal security was more or less 

often similar to that of the 
assured.  We said earlier that it 

European powers. Some of the 
is important to pay attention to 

newly-independent countries, like 
contexts and situations.  While 

the European powers, became 
internal security was certainly members of the Cold War alliances. 
a part  of  the concerns of They, therefore, had to worry 
governments historically, after about the Cold War becoming a 
the Second World War there was hot war and dragging them into 
a context and situation in which hostilities — against neighbours 
internal security did not seem to who might have joined the other 
matter as much as it had in the side in the Cold War, against 
past.  After 1945, the US and the leaders of the alliances (the 
the Soviet Union appeared to be United States or Soviet Union), or 
united and could expect peace against any of the other partners 
within their borders.  Most of the of the US and Soviet Union. 
European countries, particularly The Cold War between the two 
the powerful Western European superpowers was responsible for 
countries, faced no serious threats approximately one-third of all 

from groups or communities living wars in the post-Second World 

within those borders. Therefore, War period. Most of these wars 

these countries focused primarily were fought in the Third World. 

on threats from outside their Just as the European colonial 

borders. powers feared violence in the 
colonies, some colonial people 

What were the external threats feared, after independence, that 
facing these powerful countries? they might be attacked by their 

Reprint 2025-26



68 Contempora ry World  Politic s

Internally, the new states 
worried about threats from 
separatist movements which 
wanted to form independent 
countries.  Sometimes,  the 
external and internal threats 
merged. A neighbour might help 
or instigate an internal separatist 
movement leading to tensions 
between the two neighbouring 
countries. Internal wars now 
make up more than 95 per cent 
of all armed conflicts fought 
anywhere in the world. Between 
1946 and 1991, there was a 
twelve-fold rise in the number of 
civil wars—the greatest jump in 
200 years. So, for the new states, 

Third World Arms     © Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. external wars with neighbours 
and internal wars posed a serious 

former colonial rulers in Europe. 
challenge to their security.

They had to prepare, therefore, 
to defend themselves against an 
imperial war. traditional security and 

The security challenges facing cooperation
the newly-independent countries 
of Asia and Africa were different In traditional security, there is a 
from the challenges in Europe in recognition that cooperation in 
two ways.  For one thing, the new limiting violence is possible. These 
countries faced the prospect of limits relate both to the ends and 
military conflict with neighbouring the means of war. It is now an 
countries.  For another, they had almost universally-accepted view 
to worry about internal military that countries should only go to 
conflict. These countries faced war for the right reasons, primarily 
threats not only from outside their self-defence or to protect other 
borders, mostly from neighbours, people from genocide.  War must 
but also from within. Many newly- also be limited in terms of the 

Those who fight independent countries came to means that are used.  Armies 
aga inst their own fear their neighbours even more must avoid killing or hurting non-
c ountry must be 

than they feared the US or Soviet combatants as well as unarmed 
unhappy about 

Union or the former colonial and surrendering combatants. 
something. Perhaps it 

powers.  They quarrelled over They should not be excessively 
is their insec urity tha t 

c rea tes insec urity for borders and territories or control violent.  Force must in any case be 
the c ountry. of people and populations or all used only after all the alternatives 

of these simultaneously. have failed.

Reprint 2025-26



Sec urity in the Contempora ry World 69

Traditional views of security 
do not rule out other forms 
of cooperation as well. The 
most important of these are 
disarmament, arms control, and 
confidence building. Disarmament 
requires all states to give up 
certain kinds of weapons. For 
example, the 1972 Biological 
Weapons Convention (BWC) and 
the 1997 Chemical Weapons 
Convention (CWC) banned the 
production and possession of The text says: “ Whether Eleva ted  or Under Attac k, the Department 

these weapons. More than 155 of Homeland  Sec urity Terror Meter takes the unc erta inty out of 

states acceded to the BWC and staying informed  of the level of terror in our na tion. Move the Terror 
Ind ic a tor to the c urrent threa t level, whic h c orresponds to how 

193 states acceded to the CWC. terrified the American people are of the threat of terror attacks. 
Both conventions included all the Terror is a ll a round  us, and  c an strike a t anytime. Thanks to the Terror 

great powers. But the superpowers Meter, you will never have to wonder how terrified you should be. 
— the US and Soviet Union — did Proc eed  with c aution” .

not want to give up the third type 
of weapons of mass destruction, 
namely, nuclear weapons, so they to deploy a very limited number 

pursued arms control. of defensive systems, it stopped 
them from large-scale production 

Arms control regulates the of those systems.
acquisition or development of 
weapons. The Anti-ballistic The US and Soviet Union 

Missile (ABM) Treaty in 1972 signed a number of other arms 

tried to stop the United States and control treaties including the 

Soviet Union from using ballistic Strategic Arms Limitations Treaty 

missiles as a defensive shield II or SALT II and the Strategic 

to launch a nuclear attack. Arms Reduction Treaty (START). 

While it did allow both countries The Nuclear Non-Proliferation 
Treaty (NPT) of 1968 was an 
arms control treaty in the sense 
that it regulated the acquisition 
of nuclear weapons: those 
countries that had tested and 
manufactured nuclear weapons 

How funny! First they 
before 1967 were allowed to keep 

make dead ly and  
their weapons; and those that had expensive weapons. 
not done so were to give up the Then they make 

right to acquire them. The NPT c omplic a ted  trea ties 

did not abolish nuclear weapons; to save themselves 

rather, it limited the number of from these weapons. 

They c a ll it sec urity!
countries that could have them.

Reprint 2025-26



70 Contempora ry World  Politic s

Traditional security also security conception, the referent 
accepts confidence building as is the state with its territory and 
a means of avoiding violence. governing institutions.  In the 
Confidence building is a process non-traditional conceptions, the 
in which countries share ideas referent is expanded.  When we 
and information with their rivals. ask ‘Security for who?’ proponents 
They tell each other about their of non-traditional security reply 
military intentions and, up to a ‘Not just the state but also 
point, their military plans.  This individuals or communities or 
is a way of demonstrating that indeed all of humankind’. Non-
they are not planning a surprise traditional views of security have 
attack.  They also tell each other been called ‘human security’ or 
about the kind of forces they ‘global security’.
possess, and they may share 

Human security is about the 
information on where those forces 

protection of people more than 
are deployed.  In short, confidence 

the protection of states. Human 
building is a process designed to 

security and state security should 
ensure that rivals do not go to 

be — and often are — the same 
war through misunderstanding 

thing. But secure states do 
or misperception.

not automatically mean secure 
Overall, traditional conceptions peoples. Protecting citizens from 

of security are principal ly foreign attack may be a necessary 
concerned with the use, or threat of condition for the security of 
use, of military force. In traditional individuals, but it is certainly not 
security, force is both the principal 
threat to security and the principal 
means of achieving security.

non-traditional notions 

Non-tradit ional  not ions of 
security go beyond military 
threats to include a wide range of 
threats and dangers affecting the 
conditions of human existence. 
They begin by questioning the 
traditional referent of security.  In 
doing so, they also question the 
other three elements of security 
— what is being secured, from 
what kind of threats and the 

Now we a re ta lking ! The cartoon comments on the massive 
That is wha t I c a ll approach to security.  When we expenditure on defence and lack of 

money for peace-related initiatives in 
rea l sec urity for rea l say referent we mean ‘Security 

for who?’ In the traditional the US. Is it any different in our country?
human beings.

Reprint 2025-26

© Andy Singer, Cagle Cartoons Inc.



Sec urity in the Contempora ry World 71

a sufficient one. Indeed, during bird flu and so on. No country can 
the last 100 years, more people resolve these problems alone. And, 
have been killed by their own in some situations, one country 
governments than by foreign may have to disproportionately 
armies. bear the brunt of a global 

All proponents of human problem such as environmental 

security agree that its primary degradation. For example, due to 

goa l  i s  the  pro tec t i on  o f global warming, a sea level rise 

individuals. However, there are of 1.5–2.0 meters would flood 20 
differences about precisely what percent of Bangladesh, inundate 

threats individuals should be most of the Maldives, and threaten 

protected from. Proponents of nearly half the population of 

the ‘narrow’ concept of human Thailand. Since these problems 

secur i ty  focus  on  v io lent are global in nature, international 

threats to individuals or, as cooperation is vital, even though 

former UN Secretary-General Kofi it is difficult to achieve.

Annan puts it, “the protection 
of communities and individuals neW sources of threats
f r o m  i n t e r n a l  v i o l e n c e ” . 
Proponents of the ‘broad’ concept The non-traditional conceptions—
of human security argue that the both human security and global 
threat agenda should include security—focus on the changing 
hunger, disease and natural nature of threats to security. We 
disasters because these kill far will discuss some of these threats 
more people than war, genocide in the section below.
and terrorism combined. Human 

Terrorism refers to political 
security policy, they argue, 

violence that targets civilians 
should protect people from these 
threats as well as from violence. deliberately and indiscriminately. 

In its broadest formulation, the International terrorism involves 

human security agenda also the citizens or territory of more 

encompasses economic security than one country. Terrorist 

and ‘threats to human dignity’. groups seek to change a political 

Put differently, the broadest context or condition that they 

formulat ion stresses what do not like by force or threat of 

has been called ‘freedom from force.  Civ i l ian targets are 

want’ and ‘freedom from fear’, usually chosen to terrorise the 
respectively. public and to use the unhappiness 

of the public as a weapon against 
The idea of global security 

national governments or other 
emerged in the 1990s in response 

parties in conflict.
to the global nature of threats 
such  as  g l oba l  war ming , The classic cases of terrorism 
international terrorism, and involve hijacking planes or planting 
health epidemics like AIDS and bombs in trains, cafes, markets 

Reprint 2025-26



72 Contempora ry World  Politic s

and other crowded places. 
Since 11 September 2001 when 
terrorists attacked the World 
Trade Centre in America, other 
governments and public have 
paid more attention to terrorism, 
though terrorism itself is not 
new. In the past, most of the 
terror attacks have occurred in 
the Middle East, Europe, Latin 
America and South Asia.

Human rights have come to 
be classified into three types.  The 
first type is political rights such as 
freedom of speech and assembly. 
The second type is economic and 
social rights.  The third type is 
the rights of colonised people or 
ethnic and indigenous minorities. 
While there is broad agreement 
on this classification, there is no 

 Taking  the  train     © Tab, Cagle Cartoons Inc. agreement on which set of rights 
should be considered as universal 

Why do we a lways 

look outside when 

ta lking  about human 

rights viola tions? 

Don’ t we have 

examp les from our 

own c ountry? He doesn’t exist! 

Reprint 2025-26



Sec urity in the Contempora ry World 73

human rights, nor what the population growth occurs in 
international community should just six countries—India, China, 
do when rights are being violated. Pakistan, Nigeria, Bangladesh 

and Indonesia. Among the world’s 
Since the 1990s, developments 

poorest countries, population 
such as Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait, 
the genocide in Rwanda,  and the is expected to triple in the next 

Indonesian military’s killing of 50 years, whereas many rich 

people in East Timor have led to a countries will see population 

debate on whether or not the UN shrinkage in that period. High per 

should intervene to stop human capita income and low population 

rights abuses. There are those growth make rich states or rich 

who argue that the UN Charter social groups get richer, whereas 

empowers the international low incomes and high population 

community to take up arms growth reinforce each other to 

in defence of human rights. make poor states and poor groups 

Others argue that the national get poorer.

interests of the powerful states Global ly ,  this disparity 
will determine which instances of contributes to the gap between 
human rights violations the UN the Northern and Southern 
will act upon. countries of the world. Within 

Global poverty is another the South, disparities have also 
source of insecurity. World sharpened, as a few countries 
population—now at 760 crore— have managed to slow down 
will grow to nearly 1000 crore by population growth and raise 
the middle of the 21st century. incomes while others have failed 
Currently, half the world’s to do so. For example, most of the 

 

Reprint 2025-26



74 Contempora ry World  Politic s

world’s armed conflicts now take their country of origin, people 
Take a  map place in sub-Saharan Africa, who have fled their homes but 
of Afric a  and  which is also the poorest region of remain within national borders 
p lot va rious 

the world. At the turn of the 21st are called ‘internally displaced 
threa ts to 

century, more people were being people’. Kashmiri Pandits that 
the peop le’ s 

killed in wars in this region than fled the violence in the Kashmir 
sec urity on 
tha t map. in the rest of the world combined. Valley in the early 1990s are an 

example of an internally displaced 
Poverty in the South has also 

community.
led to large-scale migration 
to seek a better life, especially The world refugee map tallies 
better economic opportunities, almost perfectly with the world 
in the North. This has created conflicts map because wars and 
international political frictions. armed conflicts in the South have 
International law and norms generated millions of refugees 
make a distinction between seeking safe haven. From 1990 
migrants (those who voluntarily to 1995, 70 states were involved 
leave their home countries) and in 93 wars which killed about 
refugees (those who flee from 55 lakh people. As a result, 
war, natural disaster or political individuals, and families and, at 
persecution). States are generally times, whole communities have 
supposed to accept refugees, been forced to migrate because 
but they do not have to accept of generalised fear of violence 
migrants. While refugees leave or due to the destruction of 

livelihoods, identities and living 
Refugees in the world (2017)

environments. A look at the 
correlation between wars and 

Where the world ’s d isplac ed people are being hosted
refugee migration shows that in 

16% the 1990s, all but three of the 60 
Americas refugee flows coincided with an 

internal armed conflict.
17 11%

%

Europe Asia and Pacific Health epidemics such as 
HIV-AIDS, bird flu, and severe 
acute respiratory syndrome 
(SARS) have rapidly spread across 
countries through migration, 

30% business, tourism and military 

26% Africa operations. One country’s success 

Middle East and North Africa or failure in limiting the spread of 
these diseases affects infections in 

Source: http://www.unhcr.org other countries.

Reprint 2025-26



Sec urity in the Contempora ry World 75

By 2003, an estimated 4 crore 
people were infected with HIV-
AIDS worldwide, two-thirds of 
them in Africa and half of the 
rest in South Asia. In North 
America and other industrialised 
countries, new drug therapies 
dramatically lowered the death 
rate from HIV-AIDS in the late 
1990s. But these treatments were 
too expensive to help poor regions 
like Africa where it has proved 
to be a major factor in driving 
the region backward into deeper 
poverty.

Other  new  and  poor l y 
Keshav, The Hindu 

understood diseases such as 
Corona, ebola virus, hantavirus, How should  the world  address issues shown here?  

and hepatitis C have emerged, 
w h i l e  o l d  d i s e a s e s  l i k e 
tuberculosis, malaria, dengue To qualify as a security problem, 
fever and cholera have mutated therefore, an issue must share a 
into drug resistant forms that minimum common criterion, say, 
are difficult to treat. Epidemics of threatening the very existence 
among animals have major of the referent (a state or group of 
economic effects. Since the late people) though the precise nature 
1990s, Britain has lost billions of this threat may be different. 
of dollars of income during an For example, the Maldives may 
outbreak of the mad-cow disease, feel threatened by global warming 
and bird flu shut down supplies because a big part of its territory 
of poultry exports from several may be submerged with the rising 
Asian countries. Such epidemics sea level, whereas for countries 
demonstrate the growing inter- in Southern Africa, HIV-AIDS 
dependence of states making their poses a serious threat as one in 
borders less meaningful than in six adults has the disease (one 
the past and emphasise the need in three for Botswana, the worst 
for international cooperation. case). In 1994, the Tutsi tribe 

Expansion of the concept in Rwanda faced a threat to its 
of security does not mean that existence as nearly five lakh of 
we can include any kind of its people were killed by the rival 
disease or distress in the ambit Hutu tribe in a matter of weeks. 
of security. If we do that, the This shows that non-traditional 
concept of security stands to conceptions of security, like 
lose its coherence. Everything traditional conceptions of security, 
could become a security issue. vary according to local contexts.

Reprint 2025-26



76 Contempora ry World  Politic s

C businesses and corporations, 
ooperative 

and    great    personalities 
SeCurity (e.g. Mother Teresa, Nelson 

Mandela).
We can see that 
dealing with many Cooperative security may 
o f  t h e s e  non - involve the use of force as a 
traditional threats last resort. The international 
to security require community may have to sanction 
cooperation rather the use of force to deal with 
t h a n  m i l i t a r y 

World  Blindness  governments that kill their own 
 

confrontation.  Military force may people or ignore the misery of their 
have a role to play in combating populations who are devastated by 
terrorism or in enforcing human poverty, disease and catastrophe. 
rights (and even here there is a It may have to agree to the use 
limit to what force can achieve), of violence against international 
but it is difficult to see what terrorists and those who harbour 
force would do to help alleviate them. Non-traditional security 
poverty, manage migration and is much better when the use of 
refugee movements, and control force is sanctioned and applied 
epidemics.  Indeed, in most cases, collectively by the international 
the use of military force would community rather than when an 
only make matters worse! individual country decides to use 

Far more ef fective is to force on its own.
devise strategies that involve 
internat ional  cooperat ion. 

india’S SeCurity Strategy
Cooperation may be bilateral 
(i.e. between any two countries), India has faced traditional 
regional, continental, or global. (military) and non-traditional 
It would all depend on the nature threats to its security that 
of the threat and the willingness have emerged from within as 
and abil ity of countries to well as outside its borders. Its 
respond. Cooperative security security strategy has four broad 
may also involve a variety of components, which have been 
other players, both international used in a varying combination 
and national—international from time to time. 
organisations (the UN, the 
World Health Organisation, the The first component was streng-

World Bank, the IMF etc.), non- thening its military capabilities 
I feel happy when 

governmental organisations because India has been involved 
I hear tha t my 

(Amnesty International, the Red in conflicts with its neighbours 
c ountry has nuc lea r 

weapons. But I don’ t Cross, private foundations and — Pakistan in 1947–48, 1965, 
know how exac tly it charities, religious organisations, 1971 and 1999; and China in 
makes me and  my trade unions, associations, social 1962. Since it is surrounded 
family more sec ure. and development organisations), by nuclear-armed countries in 

Reprint 2025-26

© Ares, Cag le Cartoons Inc .



Sec urity in the Contempora ry World 77

the South Asian region, India’s the country. Several militant 
decision to conduct nuclear groups from areas such as the 
tests in 1998 was justified by the Nagaland, Mizoram,  the Punjab, 
Indian government in terms of and Kashmir among others have, 
safeguarding national security. from time to time, sought to 
India first tested a nuclear device break away from India. India 
in 1974. has tried to preserve national 

unity by adopting a democratic 
The second component of 

political system, which allows 
India’s security strategy has been 

different communities and groups 
to strengthen international norms 

of people to freely articulate their 
and international institutions 

grievances and share political 
to protect its security interests. 

power. 
India’s first Prime Minister, 
Jawaharlal Nehru, supported Finally, there has been an 
the cause of Asian solidarity, attempt in India to develop its 
decolonisation, disarmament, economy in a way that the vast 
and the UN as a forum in which mass of citizens are lifted out 
international conflicts could be of poverty and misery and huge 
settled.  India also took initiatives economic inequalities are not 
to bring about a universal allowed to exist. The attempt 
and non-discriminatory non- has partially succeeded; we are 
proliferation regime in which all advancing towards overcoming 
countries would have the same poverty and inequality. Yet 
rights and obligations with respect democratic politics allows spaces 
to weapons of mass destruction for articulating the voice of the poor 
(nuclear, biological, chemical). and the deprived citizens.  There is 
It argued for an equitable New a pressure on the democratically 
International Economic Order elected governments to combine 
(NIEO).  Most importantly, it used economic growth with human 
non-alignment to help carve out development.  Thus democracy 
an area of peace outside the bloc is not just a political ideal; a 
politics of the two superpowers. democratic government is also a 
India joined 160 countries that way to provide greater security. 
have signed and ratified the 1997 You will read more about the 
Kyoto Protocol, which provides a successes and failures of Indian 
roadmap for reducing the emissions democracy in this respect in the 
of greenhouse gases to check global textbook on politics in India since Compare the 

warming. Indian troops have been independence. expend iture 

sent abroad on UN peacekeeping by the Ind ian 

missions in support of cooperative government 

security initiatives. on trad itiona l 
sec urity with its 

The third component of Indian expend iture on 
security strategy is geared towards non-trad itiona l 
meeting security challenges within sec urity.

Reprint 2025-26



78 Contempora ry World  Politic s

STEPS
 Narra te the following imaginary situa tion of four villages settled  on the banks of 

a  river.

 Kotabagh, Gewali, Kandali and Goppa are villages adjoining each other beside 
a river. People in Kotabagh were the first settlers on the riverbank. They had an 
uninterrupted access to abundant natural resources available in the region. 
Gradually, people from different regions started coming to this region because of 
the abundant natural resources and water. Now there are four villages. With time 
the population of these villages expanded. But resources did not expand. Each 
village started making claims over natural resources including the boundary of their 
respective settlement. Inhabitants of Kotabagh argued for a greater share in natural 
resources, as they were the first settlers. Settlers of Kandali and Gewali said that as 
they have bigger populations than the others they both need a greater share. The 
people of Goppa said as they are used to an extravagant life they need a bigger 
share, though their population is smaller in size. All four villages disagreed with each 
other’s demands and continued to use the resources as they wished. This led to 
frequent clashes among the villagers. Gradually, everybody felt disgusted with the 
state of affairs and lost their peace of mind. Now they all wish to live the way they 
had lived earlier.  But they do not know how to go back to that golden age.

 Make a  brief note desc rib ing the charac teristic s of each village — the desc rip tion 
should reflect the actual nature of present-day nations. 

 Divide the c lassroom into four groups. Eac h group  is to rep resent a  village. Hand  
over the village notes to the respec tive groups. 

	The teac her is to a llot a  time (15 minutes) for g roup  d isc ussions on how to go 
bac k to the golden age. Eac h should  develop  its own stra tegy.

 All g roups a re to negotia te freely among themselves as village representa tives, 
to a rrive a t a  solution (within 20 minutes). Eac h would  put forth its a rguments and  
counter arguments. The result could be: an amicable agreement accommodating  
the demands of a ll, whic h seldom happens; or, the entire negotia tion/ d isc ussion 
ends without ac hieving the purpose.

Ideas for the Teac her

 Link the villages to na tions and  c onnec t to the p rob lems of sec urity (threa t to geographic a l territory/  
ac c ess to na tura l resourc es/ insurgenc y, and  so on).

 Ta lk about the observa tions made during  the negotia tion and  exp la in how simila rly the na tions 
behave while negotia ting  on rela ted  issues. 

 The ac tivity could  be conc luded by making reference to some of the current security issues between 
and  among na tions.

Reprint 2025-26



Sec urity in the Contempora ry World 79

1. Matc h the terms with their meaning:

   i.  Confidence Building Measures (CBMs)
  ii.  Arms Control

 iii.  Allianc e

iv.  Disa rmament

a .  Giving  up  c erta in types of weapons

b .  A p roc ess o f exc ha ng ing  informa tion on d efenc e ma tters 
between na tions on a  regula r basis

c .  A c oa lition of na tions meant to deter or defend  aga inst milita ry 
a ttac ks

d .  Regula tes the ac quisition or development of weapons

2. Whic h among the following would  you c onsider as a  trad itiona l 
sec urity c onc ern /  non-trad itiona l sec urity c onc ern /  not a  threa t?

a . The sp read  of c hikungunya  /  dengue fever

b. Inflow of workers from a neighbouring nation
c . Emergenc e of a  group  demand ing na tionhood  for their reg ion

d . Emergenc e of a  group  demand ing autonomy for their reg ion

 e. A newspaper tha t is c ritic a l of the a rmed  forc es in the c ountry

3. Wha t is the d ifferenc e between trad itiona l and  non-trad itiona l 
sec urity? Whic h c a tegory would  the c rea tion and  sustenanc e of 
a llianc es belong to?

4. What are the d ifferences in the threats tha t peop le in the Third  World  
fac e and  those living  in the First World  fac e?

5. Is terrorism a  trad itiona l or non-trad itiona l threa t to sec urity?

6. Wha t a re the c ho ic es a va ila b le  to  a  sta te  when its sec urity is 
threa tened , ac c ord ing to the trad itiona l sec urity perspec tive?

7. What is ‘Ba lanc e of Power’? How c ould  a  sta te ac hieve this?

8. What a re the ob jec tives of milita ry a llianc es? Give an examp le of 
a functioning military alliance with its specific objectives.

9. Rap id  environmenta l degrada tion is c ausing  a  serious threa t to 
sec urity. Do you a g ree w ith the sta tement? Sub sta ntia te  your 
a rguments.

Reprint 2025-26

E  x  e  r  c  i  s  e  s



80 Contempora ry World  Politic s

10. Nuc lea r weapons as deterrenc e or defenc e have limited  usage 
a g a inst  c ontem p o ra ry sec urity threa ts to  sta tes. Exp la in the 
sta tement.

11. Looking a t the Ind ian scenario, what type of security has been g iven 
p riority in Ind ia , trad itiona l or non-trad itiona l? What examples c ould  
you c ite to substantia te the a rgument?

12. Read  the c a rtoon below and  write a  short note in favour or aga inst 
the connec tion between war and terrorism dep ic ted  in this cartoon.

 

© Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.

Reprint 2025-26

E  x  e  r  c  i  s  e  s

##6##

Chapter 6

Environment and  
Na tura l Resourc es

Overview

This chapter examines the growing 
significance of environmental as 
well as resource issues in world 
politics. It analyses in a comparative 
perspective some of the important 
environmental movements against 
the backdrop of the rising profile of 
environmentalism from the 1960s 
onwards. Notions of common 
property resources and the global 
commons too are assessed. We 
also discuss, in brief, the stand 
taken by India in more recent 
environmental debates. Next follows The 1992 Earth Summit has b rought environmenta l issues to 

a brief account of the geopolitics of the c entre-stage of g loba l politic s. The p ic tures above show 
ra inforest and  mangroves.

resource competition. We conclude 
by taking note of the indigenous 
peoples’ voices and concerns from 
the margins of contemporary world 
politics.

Reprint 2025-26



82 Contempora ry World  Politic s

E  Throughout  the  wor ld , 
nvironmEntal ConCErns 

cultivable area is barely 
in Global PolitiCs expanding any more, and a 

substantial portion of existing 
In this book we have discussed 

agricultural land is losing 
‘world politics’ in a fairly limited 

fertility. Grasslands have been 
sense: wars and treaties, rise 

overgrazed and fisheries over-
and decline of state power, 

harvested. Water bodies have 
the relationship between the 

Politic s in forests, suffered extensive depletion 
governments that represent their 

politic s in wa ter, and pol lut ion,  severe ly 
politic s in countries in the international 

restricting food production. 
a tmosphere! What is arena and the role of inter-
not politic a l then? governmental organisations. In  According to the Human 

Chapter 5, we expanded the scope Development Report 2016 of the 
of world politics to include issues United Nations Development 
like poverty and epidemics. That Programme, 663 million people 
may not have been a very difficult in developing countries have 
step to take, for we all think that no access to safe water and 
governments are responsible for 2.4 billion have no access to 
controlling these. In that sense sanitation, resulting in the 
they fall within the scope of world death of more than three 
politics. Now consider some other million children every year. 
issues. Do you think they fall 

 Natural forests — which 
within the scope of contemporary 

help stabilise the climate, 
world politics?

moderate water supplies, 
and harbour a majority of the 
planet’s biodiversity on land—
are being cut down and people 
are being displaced. The loss 
of biodiversity continues due 
to the destruction of habitat 
in areas which are rich in 
species. 

 A steady decline in the total 
amount of ozone in the Earth’s 
stratosphere (commonly 
referred to as the ozone 
hole) poses a real danger 
to ecosystems and human 

Around  the Ara l Sea , thousands of peop le have had  to leave their health.
homes as the toxic waters have totally destroyed the fishing industry. 
The shipp ing industry and  a ll rela ted  ac tivities have c ollapsed .  Coastal pollution too is 
Rising c onc entra tions of sa lt in the soil have c aused  low c rop  yields. increasing globally. Although 
Numerous stud ies have been c onduc ted . In fac t loc a ls joke tha t if 
everyone who’d  c ome to study the Ara l had  b rought a  buc ket of the open sea is relatively 
water, the sea  would  be full by now. Sourc e: www.gobartimes.org clean, the coastal waters are 

Reprint 2025-26



Environment and  Na tura l Resourc es 83

becoming increasingly polluted 
largely due to land-based 
activities. If unchecked, 
intensive human settlement 
of coastal zones across the 
globe will lead to further 
deterioration in the quality of 
marine environment. 

You might ask are we not 
talking here about ‘natural 
phenomena’ that should be 
studied in geography rather than 
in political science. But think 
about it again. If the various 
governments take steps to check 
environmental degradation 
of the kind mentioned above, 
these issues will have political 

Globa l Warming       © Ares, Cag le Cartoons Inc .
consequences in that sense. 
Most of them are such that no Why do you think the fingers are designed like chimneys and the 

world  made into a  lighter? 
single government can address 
them fully. Therefore they have 

dramatising the potential depletion 
to become part of ‘world politics’. of the Earth’s resources against the 
Issues of environment and backdrop of rapidly growing world 
natural resources are political in population. International agencies, 
another deeper sense. Who causes including the United Nations 
environmental degradation? Environment Programme (UNEP), 
Who pays the price? And who is began holding international 
responsible for taking corrective conferences and promoting 
action? Who gets to use how detailed studies to get a more 
much of the natural resources coordinated and effective response 
of the Earth? All these raise the to environmental problems. Since 
issue of who wields how much then, the environment has emerged 
power. They are, therefore, deeply as a significant issue of global 
political questions. politics.

Although environmental  The growing focus on Collec t news 
concerns have a long history, environmental issues within the c lipp ings 
awareness of the environmental arena of global politics was firmly on reports 
consequences of economic growth consolidated at the United Nations linking  
acquired an increasingly political Conference on Environment environment 
character from the 1960s onwards. and Development held in Rio and  politic s 
The Club of Rome, a global de Janeiro, Brazil, in June in your own 
think tank, published a book in 1992. This was also called the loc a lity.
1972 entitled Limits to Growth, Earth Summit. The summit was 

Reprint 2025-26



84 Contempora ry World  Politic s

countries of the First World, 
generally referred to as the ‘global 
North’ were pursuing a different 
environmental agenda than the 
poor and developing countries of 
the Third World, called the ‘global 
South’. Whereas the Northern 
states were concerned with ozone 
depletion and global warming, the 
Southern states were anxious to 
address the relationship between 
economic development and 
environmental management.

The Rio Summit produced 
conventions dealing with climate 
change, biodiversity, forestry, and 
recommended a list of development 
practices called ‘Agenda 21’. But 
it left unresolved considerable 
differences and difficulties. There 
was a consensus on combining 
economic growth with ecological 
responsibility. This approach to 
development is commonly known 
as ‘sustainable development’. 
The problem however was how 
exactly this was to be achieved. 
Some critics have pointed out 
that Agenda 21 was biased 
in favour of economic growth 
rather than ensuring ecological 

Are there d ifferent perspec tives from whic h the ric h and  the poor 
conservation.  Let us look at some 

c ountries agree to p rotec t the Earth?
of the contentious issues in the 

attended by 170 states, thousands global politics of environment.
of NGOs and many multinational 
corporations. Five years earlier, 
the 1987 Brundtland Report, Our thE ProtECtion of Global 
Common Future, had warned that Commons 
traditional patterns of economic 
growth were not sustainable in the ‘Commons’ are those resources 
long term, especially in view of the which are not owned by anyone 
demands of the South for further but rather shared by a community. 
industrial development. What This could be a ‘common room’, a 
was obvious at the Rio Summit ‘community centre’, a park or a 
was that the rich and developed river. Similarly, there are some 

Reprint 2025-26

© Ares, Cag le Cartoons Inc .



Environment and  Na tura l Resourc es 85

ANTARCTI CA 

The Anta rc tic  c ontinenta l reg ion extends 
o ve r 14 m illio n sq ua re  kilo m e tres a nd  
c o m p rise s 26 p e r c e nt  o f the  w o rld ’ s 
wilderness a rea , rep resenting  90 per c ent 
o f a ll te rrestria l ic e  a nd  70 p er c ent o f 
p laneta ry fresh wa ter. The Anta rc tic  a lso 
extend s to  a  furthe r 36 m illion sq ua re 
kilo m e t re s o f o c e a n. It  ha s a  lim ite d  
te rrestria l life  a nd  a  hig hly p rod uc t ive 
m a rine  e c o syste m , c o m p rising  a  fe w 
p lants (e.g . mic rosc op ic  a lgae, fung i and  
lichen), marine mammals, fish and hordes 
of b irds adap ted  to ha rsh c ond itions, as 
well as the krill, whic h is c entra l to marine 
food  c ha in and  upon whic h other anima ls 
a re d ep end ent. The Anta rc tic  p la ys a n 
im p o rta nt ro le  in m a inta ining  c lim a t ic  
equilib rium, and  deep  ic e c ores p rovide 
an important sourc e of information about 
g re e nho use  g a s c o nc e nt ra t io ns a nd  
a tmosp heric  temp era tures o f hund red s 
and  thousands of years ago.

Who owns this c oldest, fa rthest, and  wind iest c ontinent on g lobe? There a re two c la ims about it. Some 
c ountries like  the UK, Argentina , Chile, Norway, Franc e, Austra lia  and  New Zea land  have made lega l 
c la ims to sovereign rights over Anta rc tic  territory.  Most other sta tes have taken the opposite view tha t 
the Anta rc tic  is a  pa rt of the g loba l c ommons and  not sub jec t to the exc lusive jurisd ic tion of any sta te. 
These d ifferenc es, however, have not p revented  the adop tion of innova tive and  potentia lly fa r-reac hing 
rules for the p rotec tion of the Anta rc tic  environment and  its ec osystem. The Anta rc tic  and  the Arc tic  pola r 
reg ions a re sub jec ted  to spec ia l reg iona l rules of environmenta l p rotec tion. Sinc e 1959, ac tivities in the 
area have been limited to scientific research, fishing and tourism. Even these limited activities have not 
prevented  parts of the reg ion from being degraded  by waste as a  result of o il sp ills.

areas or regions of the world which Cooperation over the global 
are located outside the sovereign commons is not easy. There 
jurisdiction of any one state, have been many path-breaking 
and therefore require common agreements such as the 1959 
governance by the international Antarctic Treaty, the 1987 Montreal 
community. These are known Protocol, and the 1991 Antarctic 
as res communis humanitatis or Environmental Protocol. A major 
global commons. They include the problem underlying all ecological 

Very soon we will 
earth’s atmosphere, Antarctica issues relates to the difficulty of have ec olog ic a l 
(see Box), the ocean floor, and achieving consensus on common degrada tion of the 

outer space. environmental agendas on the moon!

Reprint 2025-26



86 Contempora ry World  Politic s

One of the biggest catastrophes in Africa in the 1970s, a drought turned the best cropland in five countries into 
c rac ked  and  barren earth. In fac t, the term environmenta l refugees c ame into popula r voc abula ry a fter this. Many 
had to flee their homelands as agriculture was no longer possible. Source: www.gobartimes.org

basis of vague scientific evidence issue here is technology and 
and time frames. In that sense the industrial development. This is 
discovery of the ozone hole over important because the benefits 
the Antarctic in the mid-1980s of exploitative activities in outer 

revealed the opportunity as well space are far from being equal 

as dangers inherent in tackling either for the present or future 

global environmental problems. generations.

Find  out more Similarly, the history of outer 
about the space as a global commons shows Common but DiffErEntiatED 
Kyoto Protoc ol. that the management of these 
Whic h ma jor areas is thoroughly influenced rEsPonsibilitiEs

c ountries d id  by North-South inequalities. 
not sign it? And  We have noted above a difference 

As with the earth’s atmosphere 
why? in the approach to environment 

and the ocean floor, the crucial between the countries of the  North 

Reprint 2025-26



Environment and  Na tura l Resourc es 87

and the South. The developed responsibility that they bear 
countries of the North want in the international pursuit of 
to discuss the environmental sustainable development in view of 
issue as it stands now and want the pressures their societies place 
everyone to be equally responsible on the global environment and of 
for ecological conservation. The the technological and financial 
developing countries of the South resources they command.”
feel that much of the ecological 

The 1992 United Nations 
degradation in the world is the 

Framework Convent ion on 
product of industrial development 

Climate Change (UNFCCC) also 
undertaken by the developed 

provides that the parties should 
countries. If they have caused more 
degradation, they must also take act to protect the climate system 

more responsibility for undoing “on the basis of equity and in 

the damage now. Moreover, the accordance with their common 

developing countries are in the but differentiated responsibilities 

process of industrialisation and and respective capabilities.” The 

they must not be subjected to parties to the Convention agreed 

the same restrictions, which that the largest share of historical 

apply to the developed countries. and current global emissions of 

Thus the special needs of the greenhouse gases has originated 

developing countries must in developed countries. It was 
be taken into account in the also acknowledged that per capita 
development, application, and emissions in developing countries 
interpretation of rules of inter- are still relatively low. China, India, 
national environmental law. and other developing countries 
This argument was accepted in were, therefore, exempted from 
the Rio Declaration at the Earth the requirements of the Kyoto 
Summit in 1992 and is called Protocol. The Kyoto Protocol 
the principle of ‘common but is an international agreement 
differentiated responsibilities’. setting targets for industrialised 

The relevant part of the Rio countries to cut their greenhouse 

Declaration says that “States gas emissions. Certain gases like 

shall cooperate in the spirit of Carbon dioxide, Methane, Hydro-

global partnership to conserve, fluoro carbons etc. are considered 

protect and restore the health at least partly responsible for 

and integrity of the Earth’s global warming - the rise in global 

ecosystem. In v iew of  the temperature which may have 
different contributions of global catastrophic consequences for 
environmental degradation, states life on Earth. The protocol was 
have common but differentiated agreed to in 1997 in Kyoto in That’ s a  c ool 

responsibilities. The developed Japan, based on principles set princ ip le! A b it like 

the reserva tion polic y 
countries acknowledge the out in UNFCCC. 

in our c ountry, isn’ t it?

Reprint 2025-26



88 Contempora ry World  Politic s

Common ProPErty availability to the poor in much 
of the world. The institutional 

rEsourCEs arrangement for the actual 
management of  the sacred 

Common property represents 
groves on state-owned forest land 

common property for the group. 
appropriately fits the description 

The underlying norm here is that 
of a common property regime. 

members of the group have both 
Along the forest belt of South 

rights and duties with respect to 
India, sacred groves have been 

the nature, levels of use, and the 
traditionally managed by village 

maintenance of a given resource. 
communities. 

Through mutual understanding 
and centuries of practice, many 
village communities in India, for inDia’s stanD on 
example, have defined members’ 
rights and responsibilities. A EnvironmEntal issuEs

combination of factors, including India signed and ratified the 1997 
privatisation, agricultural intensi-

I heard  about some Kyoto Protocol in August 2002. 
rivers being sold  fication, population growth and India, China and other developing 
in La tin Americ a . ecosystem degradation have countries were exempt from the 
How c an c ommon caused common property to requirements of the Kyoto Protocol 
property be sold? dwindle in size, quality, and because their contribution to the 

SACRED GROVES I N  I NDI A

Protec ting  na ture for relig ious reasons is an anc ient p rac tic e in many trad itiona l soc ieties. Sac red  
groves in Ind ia  (pa rc els of unc ut forest vegeta tion in the name of c erta in deities or na tura l or 
anc estra l sp irits) exemp lify suc h p rac tic e. As a  model of c ommunity-based  resourc e management, 
g roves have la tely ga ined  a ttention in c onserva tion litera ture. The sac red  groves c an be seen as a  
system tha t informa lly forc es trad itiona l c ommunities to ha rvest na tura l resourc es in an ec olog ic a lly 
susta ined  fashion. Some researc hers believe tha t sac red  groves hold  the potentia l for p reserving 
not only b iod iversity and  ec olog ic a l func tions, but a lso c ultura l d iversity. 

Sac red  groves embody a  ric h set of forest p reserva tion p rac tic es and  they share c harac teristic s 
with c ommon p roperty resourc e systems. Their size ranges from c lumps of a  few trees to severa l 
hundred  ac res. Trad itiona lly, sac red  groves have been va lued  for their embod ied  sp iritua l and  
c ultura l a ttributes. Hindus c ommonly worshipped  na tura l ob jec ts, inc lud ing trees and  groves. Many 
temp les have orig ina ted  from sac red  groves. Deep  relig ious reverenc e for na ture, ra ther than 
resourc e sc arc ity, seems to be the basis for the long-stand ing c ommitment to p reserving these 
forests. In rec ent years, however, expansion and  human settlement have slowly enc roac hed  on 
sac red  forests. 

In many p lac es, the institutiona l identity of these trad itiona l forests is fad ing with the advent of new 
na tiona l forest polic ies. A rea l p rob lem in managing sac red  groves a rises when lega l ownership  
and  opera tiona l c ontrol a re held  by d ifferent entities. The two entities in question, the sta te and  the 
c ommunity, va ry in their polic y norms and  underlying  motives for using the sac red  grove.

Reprint 2025-26



Environment and  Na tura l Resourc es 89

emission of greenhouse gases responsibilities, India is of the 
during the industrialisation view that the major responsibility 
period (that is believed to be of curbing emission rests with the 
causing today’s global warming developed countries, which have 
and climate change) was not accumulated emissions over a 
significant. However, the critics long period of time.
of the Kyoto Protocol point out 
that sooner or later, both India I n d i a ’ s  i n t e r n a t i o n a l 

and China, along with other negot iat ing posit ion rel ies 

developing countries, will be heavily on principles of historical 

among the leading countributors responsibility, as enshrined in 

to greenhouse gas emissions. At UNFCCC. This acknowledges 

the G-8 meeting in June 2005, that developed countries are 

India pointed out that the per responsible for most historical and 

capita emission rates of the current greenhouse gas emissions, 
and emphasizes that ‘economic I get it! First they 

developing countries are a tiny 
destroyed  the earth, 

fraction of those in the developed and social development are the 
now it is our turn to 

world. Following the principle first and overriding priorities of do the same! Is tha t 

of common but differentiated the developing country parties’. So our stand?

Reprint 2025-26



90 Contempora ry World  Politic s

India is wary of recent discussions by India in 1997. One of the key 
within UNFCCC about introducing conclusions was that there had 
binding commitments on rapidly been no meaningful progress 
industrialising countries (such as with respect to transfer of new 
Brazil, China and India) to reduce and additional financial resources 
their greenhouse gas emissions. and environmentally-sound 
India feels this contravenes the technology on concessional terms 
very spirit of UNFCCC. Neither to developing nations. India 
does it seem fair to impose finds it necessary that developed 
restrictions on India when the countr ies  take  immediate 
country’s rise in per capita carbon measures to provide developing 
emissions by 2030 is likely to still countries with financial resources 
represent less than half the world and clean technologies to enable 
average of 3.8 tonnes in 2000. them to meet their existing 
Indian emissions are predicted commitments under UNFCCC. 
to rise from 0.9 tonnes per capita India is also of the view that the 
in 2000 to 1.6 tonnes per capita SAARC countries should adopt a 
in 2030. common position on major global 

The Indian government is environment issues, so that the 

already participating in global region’s voice carries greater 
efforts through a number of weight.
programmes. For example, 
India’s National Auto-fuel Policy 
mandates cleaner fuels for EnvironmEntal movEmEnts: 
vehicles. The Energy Conservation onE or many?
Act, passed in 2001, outlines 
initiatives to improve energy We have, so far, looked at the way 
efficiency. Similarly, the Electricity governments have reacted at the 
Act of 2003 encourages the use of international level to the challenge 
renewable energy. Recent trends of environmental degradation. 
in importing natural gas and But some of the most significant 
encouraging the adoption of clean responses to this challenge have 
coal technologies show that India come not from the governments 
has been making real efforts. The but rather from groups of environ-
government is also keen to launch mentally conscious volunteers 
a National Mission on Biodiesel, working in different parts of the 
using about 11 million hectares world. Some of them work at 
of land to produce biodiesel by the international level, but most 
2011–2012. India ratified the of them work at the local level. 
Paris Climate Agreement on 

These environmental movements 
2 October 2016. And India has 

are amongst the most vibrant, 
one of the largest renewable 

diverse, and powerful social 
energy programmes in the world. 

movements across the globe 
A review of the implementation today. It is within social movements 

of the agreements at the Earth that new forms  of political action 
Summit in Rio was undertaken are born or reinvented. These 

Reprint 2025-26



Environment and  Na tura l Resourc es 91

movements raise new ideas and examples) are faced with enormous 
long-term visions of what we pressures. Forest clearing in 
should do and what we should the Third World continues Let’s find 
not do in our individual and at an alarming rate, despite 

out about 
collective lives. Here are  just a few three decades of environmental 

‘Chipko 
examples to show that diversity activism. The destruction of the 

Movement’ .
i s  an  impo r t an t  t r a i t  o f world’s last remaining grand 
contemporary environmental forests has actually increased in 
movements. the last decade. 

The forest movements of the The minerals industry is one 
South, in Mexico, Chile, Brazil, of the most powerful forms of 
Malaysia, Indonesia, continental industry on the planet. A large 
Africa and India (just to list a few number of economies of the South 

ARE FORESTS “ W I LDERNESS” ?

What d istinguishes the forest movements of the South from 
those of the North is tha t the forests of the former a re still 
peop led , whilst the forests of the la tter a re more or less 
devoid  of human hab ita t or, a t least, a re perc eived  as 
thus. This exp la ins to some extent the p reva iling  notion of 
wilderness in the North as a  ‘w ild  p lac e’  where peop le 
do not live. In this perspec tive, humans a re not seen as 
pa rt of na ture. In other words, ‘ environment’  is perc eived  
as ‘ somewhere out there’ , as something  tha t should  be 
p rotec ted  from  humans through the c rea tion of pa rks and  
reserves. On the other hand , most environmenta l issues in 
the South a re based  on the assumption tha t peop le live in 
the forests.

Wilderness-oriented  perspec tives have been p redominant 
in Austra lia , Sc and inavia , North Americ a  and  New Zea land . 
In these reg ions, there a re still la rge tra c ts o f re la tive ly 
‘ und erd eve lop ed  w ild erness’ , unlike  in most Europ ea n 
c ountries. This is no t to  sa y tha t w ild erness c a mp a igns 
a re entirely missing in the South. In the Philipp ines, g reen 
organisations fight to protect eagles and other birds of 

Do you agree with the efforts 
prey from extinc tion. In Ind ia , a  ba ttle goes on to p rotec t 

made by ec olog ists? Do you 
the a la rming ly low number of Benga l tigers. In Afric a , a  

agree with the way ec olog ists a re 
long c ampa ign has been waged  aga inst the ivory trade portrayed  here?
and  the savage slaughter of elephants. Some of the most 
famous wilderness strugg les have been fought in the forests 
of Brazil and  Indonesia . All of these c ampa igns foc us on ind ividua l spec ies as well as the c onserva tion 
of the wilderness hab ita ts, whic h support them. Many of the wilderness issues have been renamed 
biodiversity issues in recent times, as the concept of wilderness has been proved difficult to sell in the 
South. Many of these c ampa igns have been initia ted  and  funded  by NGOs suc h as the Worldwide 
Wild life Fund  (WWF), in assoc ia tion with loc a l peop le. 

Reprint 2025-26

© Ares, Cag le Cartoons Inc .



92 Contempora ry World  Politic s

are now being re-opened present, there has been a spurt in 
to MNCs through the mega-dam building in the South, 
liberalisation of the from Turkey to Thailand to South 
global economy. The Africa, from Indonesia to China. 
mineral industry’s India has had some of the leading 
extraction of earth, anti-dam, pro-river movements. 

its use of chemicals, Narmada Bachao Andolan is 

i t s  p o l l u t i o n  o f one of the best known of these 

waterways and land, movements.  It is significant to 
An entire 
c ommunity erup ted  its clearance of native vegetation, note that, in anti-dam and other 
in p rotests aga inst its displacement of communities, environmental movements in 
a  p roposed  

amongst other factors, continue India, the most important shared 
open-c ast c oa l 

to invite criticism and resistance idea is non-violence. 
mine p rojec t in 
Phulba ri town, in in various parts of the globe. 
the North-West One good example is that of the 
d istric t of Dina jpur, rEsourCE GEoPolitiCs 
Bangladesh. Here Philippines, where a vast network 

Resource geopolit ics is al l 
severa l dozen of groups and organisations 
women, one with about who gets what, when, 

campaigned against the Western 
her infant c hild , where and how. Resources have 

Mining Corporation (WMC), an 
are c hanting  provided some of the key means 
slogans aga inst the Australia-based multinational 

and motives of global European 
proposed  c oa l mine company. Much opposition to 
projec t in 2006. power expansion. They have 

the company in its own country, 
also been the focus of inter-

Australia, is based on anti-
state rivalry. Western geopolitical 

nuclear sentiments and advocacy 
thinking about resources has been 

for the basic rights of Australian 
dominated by the relationship of 

indigenous peoples. 
trade, war and power, at the core 

Another group of movements of which were overseas resources 
are those involved in struggles and maritime navigation. Since 
against mega-dams. In every sea power itself  rested on 
country where a mega-dam is access to timber, naval timber 

being built, one is likely to find supply became a key priority for 

an environmental movement major European powers from 

opposing it. Increasingly anti- the 17th century onwards. The 

dam movements are pro-river critical importance of ensuring 

movements for more sustainable uninterrupted supply of strategic 

and equitable management of resources, in particular oil, was 

river systems and valleys. The well established both during the 

early 1980s saw the first anti-dam First World War and the Second 

movement launched in the North, World War.

namely, the campaign to save the Throughout the Cold War 
Franklin River and its surrounding the industrialised countries of 
forests in Australia. This was a the North adopted a number of 
wilderness and forest campaign methods to ensure a steady flow 
as well as anti-dam campaign. At of resources. These included the 

Reprint 2025-26



Environment and  Na tura l Resourc es 93

deployment of military forces 
near exploitation sites and along 
sea-lanes of communication, the 
stockpiling of strategic resources, 
efforts to prop up friendly 
governments in producing 
countries, as well as support 
to multinational companies 
and favourable international 
agreements. Traditional Western 
strategic thinking remained 
concerned with access to supplies, 
which might be threatened by 
the Soviet Union. A particular 
concern was Western control of oil 
in the Gulf and strategic minerals 
in Southern and Central Africa. 
After the end of the Cold War and 
the disintegration of the Soviet 
Union, the security of supply 
continues to worry government 
and business decisions with 
regard to several minerals, in 
particular radioactive materials. 
However, oil continues to be the 
most important resource in global 
strategy. satisfy any substantial rise in 

oil demand. Saudi Arabia has 
The global economy relied on 

a quarter of the world’s total 
oil for much of the 20th century 

reserves and is the single largest 
as a portable and indispensable 

producer. Iraq’s known reserves 
fuel .  The immense wealth 

are second only to Saudi Arabia’s. 
associated with oil generates 

And, since substantial portions of 
political struggles to control it, 

Iraqi territory are yet to be fully 
and the history of petroleum 

explored, there is a fair chance 
is also the history of war and 

that actual reserves might be 
struggle. Nowhere is this more 

far larger. The United States, 
obviously the case than in West 

Europe, Japan, and increasingly 
Asia and Central Asia. West 

India and China, which consume 
Asia, specifically the Gulf region, 

this petroleum, are located at a 
accounts for about 30 per cent 

considerable distance from the 
of global oil production. But it 

region.
has about 64 per cent of the 
planet’s known reserves, and is Water is another crucial 
therefore the only region able to resource that is relevant to global 

Reprint 2025-26

© Andy Singer, Cag le Cartoons Inc .



94 Contempora ry World  Politic s

EVERYONE IS PLAYING CRUDE!

“The list of petroleum based products in our lives is endless. Toothbrush, pacemaker, paints, 
inks, ....Oil provides the energy for 95 per cent of the world’s transportation needs. The whole 
industrialised world survives on petroleum. We cannot imagine living without it. There are 
billions of barrels of it under the earth for us to use. Yet there are disputes between countries. 
Why here is one of the problems”

I belong to the Royal Family of the Kingdom of Black Gold. I am 
what they call filthy rich. Ever since black gold was found in my 
Kingdom things have never been the same again. Mr. Bigoil and his 
government came prospecting one day. We struck oil...and a deal. 
They armed me to the teeth till it hurt. So when I grin my subjects 
look at me with awe. In return Bigoil and sons get to buy all my oil 
and loyalty. I am happy and rich and so are they. I turn my blind eye 
to their military in this holy land.
 I value precious things. Bigoil says his President values 
freedom and democracy. So I keep both safely under lock and 
key in my land. Sheikh Petrodollah

King of the land of Black Gold

As advised, I did ask myself what can I do for my country. My country has an 
enormous appetite for oil. So ...provide it with oil of course! I believe in the 
free market system. Free to dig up oil in far away countries, free to create 
pliable tin-pot dictators to keep local populations at bay and free to destroy 
ecology.
 We play no politics but pay them at election campaigns and get them to 
invest in our company. That way we don’t have to embarrass ourselves by 

Mr. Bigoil foolishly waving and smiling at TV cameras.

CEO of Bigoil and sons

Leading the good life
A new beauty is parked outside our garage. Awesome! Isn’t it?... 
sleek chrome finish, power steering, automatic gears. Excellent 
pick up and great mileage too. It is low on emissions too...gentle on 
the atmosphere, you know. Global warming and all that stuff. Now 
we really are in hurry to zoom off and lead the good life...God Save 
Everyone!...vvrrroooommmmm

Mr & Mrs Gobbledoo

Toppleton defends freedom and democracy. That’s why he is so generous with guns 
and missiles. Like the ones he gave us to fight the invading Ruffians. He even trained 
us. We did not realise that it was the oil they were after. Bigoil is always trying to woo 
us. But we are too busy playing war games. Now we have rules of our own.
 Toppleton’s govt. kept changing its rules. Not fair we said. Some of us now hate 
Toppleton, his government and his people. Of course their bullets and missiles come in 
handy when we have to beat them at their game.

Make no mistake, we are Errorists.
Errorists

Loose cannonballs

Adapted  from http :/ / www.gobartimes.org / g t_c ovfea ture2.htm

Reprint 2025-26



Environment and  Na tura l Resourc es 95

(lower riparian) state’s objection 
to pollution, excessive irrigation, 
or the construction of dams by an 
upstream (upper riparian) state, 
which might decrease or degrade 
the quality of water available to 
the downstream state. States 
have used force to protect or 
seize freshwater resources. How are these 

Examples of violence include conflicts different 

those between Israel, Syria, and from the many wa ter 

conflicts within our 
Jordan in the 1950s and 1960s 

own c ountry?
over attempts by each side to 
divert water from the Jordan and 
Yarmuk Rivers, and more recent 
threats between Turkey, Syria, 
and Iraq over the construction 
of dams on the Euphrates River. 
A number of studies show that 
countries that share rivers — and 
many countries do share rivers — 
are involved in military conflicts 
with each other.

© Ares, Cag le Cartoons Inc . thE inDiGEnous PEoPlEs 
The la rger pa rt of the Earth is wa ter than 

anD thEir riGhts
the land  and  yet the c a rtoonist dec ides 
to show la rger image of the land  than The question of indigenous 
water. How does the image show the 

people brings the issues of 
sc arc ity of wa ter?

environment, resources and 
politics. Regional variations politics together. The UN defines 
and the increasing scarcity of indigenous populations as 
freshwater in some parts of the comprising the descendants 
world point to the possibility of of peoples who inhabited the 
disagreements over shared water present territory of a country 
resources as a leading source of at the time when persons of a 
conflicts in the 21st century. Some different culture or ethnic origin 
commentators on world politics arrived there from other parts of 
have referred to ‘water wars’ to the world and overcame them. 
describe the possibility of violent Indigenous people today live more 
conflict over this life-sustaining in conformity with their particular 
resource. Countries that share social, economic, and cultural 
rivers can disagree over many customs and traditions than the 
things.  For instance, a typical institutions of the country of 
disagreement is a downstream which they now form a part.

Reprint 2025-26



96 Contempora ry World  Politic s

island states in the Oceania 
region (including Australia and 
New Zealand), were inhabited 
by the Polynesian, Melanesian 
and Micronesian people over the 
course of thousands of years. 
They appeal to governments to 
come to terms with the continuing 
existence of indigenous nations 
as enduring communities with an 
identity of their own. ‘Since times 
immemorial’ is the phrase used 
by indigenous people all over the 
world to refer to their continued 
occupancy of the lands from which 
they originate. The worldviews of 
indigenous societies, irrespective 
of their geographical location, are 

In the context of world politics, 
strikingly similar with respect 

what are the common interests of 
to land and the variety of life 

approximately 30 crore indigenous 
systems supported by it. The 

peoples spread throughout the 
loss of land, which also means 

world including India? There the loss of an economic resource 
are 20 lakh indigenous people base, is the most obvious threat 
of the Cordillera region of the 
Philippines, 10 lakh Mapuche 
people of Chile, six lakh tribal 
people of the Chittagong Hill 
Tracts in Bangladesh, 35 lakh 
North American natives, 50,000 
Kuna living east of Panama Canal 
and 10 lakh Small Peoples of the 
Soviet North. Like other social 
movements, indigenous people 
speak of their struggles, their 
agenda and their rights.

The indigenous voices in world 
politics call for the admission 

Why don’ t we 
of indigenous people to the 

hear muc h about 

the ind igenous world community as equals. 
peop le and  their Indigenous people occupy areas Spoonful of Ec ology

movements? Is the in Central and South America, Do you agree with this perspec tive 
med ia  b iased  aga inst Africa, India (where they are where a  man from an urban 
them? known as Tribals) and Southeast (developed !) a rea  bec omes greedy 

for na ture?
Asia. Many of the present day 

Reprint 2025-26

© Ares, Cag le Cartoons Inc .



Environment and  Na tura l Resourc es 97

to the survival of indigenous of Indigenous Peoples was formed in 1975. The 
people. Can political autonomy be Council became subsequently the first of 11 
enjoyed without its attachment to indigenous NGOs to receive consultative status 
the means of physical survival? in the UN. Many of the movements against 

globalisation, discussed in Chapter 7, have 
In India, the description 

focussed on the rights of the indigenous people. 
‘indigenous people’ is usually 
applied to the Scheduled Tribes 
who constitute nearly eight per 
cent of the population of the 
country. With the exception of 
small communities of hunters 
and gatherers, most indigenous 
populations in India depend 
for their subsistence primarily 
on the cultivation of land. For 
centuries, if not millennia, they STEPS
had free access to as much land  Eac h student is asked  to list any ten items they 
as they could cultivate. It was 

c onsume/ use every day.
only after the establishment of 
the British colonial rule that  (The list c ould  inc lud e — p en/ p a p er/ era ser/

areas, which had previously been c omputer/ wa ter etc .)

inhabited by the Scheduled Tribe  Ask students to c a lc ula te the amount of na tura l 
communities, were subjected to resourc es being used  to make these items. (For 
outside forces. Although they finished products like pen/pencil/computer etc., 
enjoy a constitutional protection students will c a lc ula te the amount of resourc es 
in political representation, they and  for items like wa ter they c ould  c a lc ula te 
have not got much of the benefits the amount of elec tric ity used  for purifying  and  
of development in the country. In p ump ing  a long  w ith ga llons o f wa ter). Ea c h 
fact they have paid a huge cost would  c a lc ula te and  a rrive a t an approximate 
for development since they are figure. 
the single largest group among Ideas for the Teac her
the people displaced by various  Collect the approximate figures from each student and sum 
developmental projects since up a ll to a rrive a t tota l resourc es c onsumed by the students 
independence. of tha t partic ula r c lass. (Teac her is to ac t as a  fac ilita tor and  

a llow students to do the c a lc ula tions.)
Issues related to the rights 

 Project this figure to other classes of the same school, then 
of the indigenous communities to schools across the country. The country figure could 
have been neglected in domestic be used  to measure the amount of resourc es being used  

and international politics for very by sc hools in other c ountries too. (The teac her is to have 

long. During the 1970s, growing background information about the resources being used by 
students in a  few selec t c ountries. While selec ting c ountries, 

international contacts among 
teac her should  ensure tha t the selec ted  c ountries belong 

indigenous leaders from around to the developed  /  develop ing c ountries c a tegory).
the world aroused a sense of 	Ask students to imag ine the amount of resourc es we a re 
common concern and shared c onsuming and  a lso to estima te future c onsumption. 

experiences. The World Council 

Reprint 2025-26



98 Contempora ry World  Politic s

1.  Whic h a mong  the fo llow ing  best exp la ins the rea son for g rowing 
c onc erns about the environment?

a . The developed countries are concerned about protec ting nature.

b . Protec tion of the environment is vita l for ind igenous peop le and  
na tura l hab ita ts.

c . The environmenta l degrada tion c aused  by human ac tivities has 
bec ome pervasive and  has reac hed  a  dangerous level.

d . None of the above.

2.  Mark c orrec t or wrong aga inst eac h of the following sta tements about 
the Earth Summit:

a . It was a ttended  by 170 c ountries, thousands of NGOs and  many 
MNCs.

b . The summit was held  under the aeg is of the UN.

c . Fo r the  f irst  t im e , g lo b a l e nviro nm e nta l issue s w e re  f irm ly 
c onsolida ted  a t the politic a l level.

d . It was a  summit meeting .

3.  Whic h among the following a re TRUE about the g loba l c ommons?

a. The Earth’s atmosphere, Antarctica, ocean floor and outer space 
are c onsidered  as pa rt of the g loba l c ommons.

b . The g loba l c ommons a re outside sovereign jurisd ic tion.

c. The question of managing the global commons has reflected the 
North-South d ivide.

d . The  c ountries o f the  North a re  more  c onc erned  a b out the 
protec tion of the g loba l c ommons than the c ountries of the South.

4.  What were the outc omes of the Rio Summit? 

5.  What is meant by the g loba l c ommons? How a re they exp loited  and  
polluted?

6.  What is meant by ‘ c ommon but d ifferentia ted  responsib ilities’? How 
c ould  we imp lement the idea?

7.  Why have issues rela ted  to g loba l environmenta l p rotec tion bec ome 
the p riority c onc ern of sta tes sinc e the 1990s?

8.  Comp romise a nd  a c c ommod a tion a re the two essentia l p o lic ies 
required  by sta tes to save p lanet Earth.  Substantia te the sta tement 
in the light of the ongoing negotia tions between the North and  South 
on environmenta l issues.

9.  The most serious c ha llenge before the sta tes is pursuing ec onomic  
d e ve lo p m e nt  w itho ut  c a using  furthe r d a m a g e  to  the  g lo b a l 
environment. How could  we achieve this? Exp la in with a  few examples.

Reprint 2025-26

E  x  e  r  c  i  s  e  s
##7##

Overview Chapter 7
In this final chapter of the book we 
look at globalisation, something 
that has been referred to in Globalisation
many chapters of this book and 
textbooks of many other subjects. 
We begin by analysing the concept 
of globalisation and then examine 
its causes. We then discuss at 
length the political, economic 
and cultural consequences of 
globalisation. Our interest is also in 
studying the impact of globalisation 
on India as well as how India is 
affecting globalisation. We finally 
draw attention to resistance to 
globalisation and how social 
movements in India also form part 
of this resistance.     

Reprint 2025-26



100 Contempora ry World  Politic s

The ConCepT of college life by working very hard. 
She now has an opportunity 

GlobalisaTion to take on a job and begin an 
independent career, which the 

Janardhan works in a call centre. 
women of her family had never 

He leaves late in the evening for 
dreamt of earlier. While some 

work, becomes John when he 
of her relatives are opposed, 

enters his office, acquires a new 
she finally decides to go ahead 

accent and speaks a different 
because of the new opportunities 

language (than he does when he is 
that have been made available to 

at home) to communicate with his 
her generation.  

clients who are living thousands 
of miles away. He works all night, All three examples illustrate 

So many Nepa lese 

workers c ome to which is actually day time for his an aspect each of what we call 

Ind ia  to work. Is tha t overseas customers. Janardhan is globalisation. In the first instance 
g loba lisa tion? rendering a service to somebody Janardhan was participating 

who in all probability he is never in the globalisation of services. 

likely to meet physically. This is Ramdhari’s birthday purchases 

his daily routine. His holidays tell us something about the 

also do not correspond to the movement of commodities from 

Indian calendar but to those of one part of the world to another. 

his clients who happen to be from Sarika is faced with a conflict of 

the US. values partly originating from 
a new opportunity that earlier 

Ramdhari has gone shopping was not available to the women 
to buy a birthday gift for his in her family but today is part of 
nine-year old daughter. He has a reality that has gained wider 
promised her a small cycle and acceptability.
decides to search the market for 
something he finds affordable as If we look for examples of the 

well as of reasonable quality. He use of the term ‘globalisation’ in 

finally does buy a cycle, which is real life, we will realise that it is 

actually manufactured in China used in various contexts. Let us 

but is being marketed in India. look at some examples, different 

It meets his requirements of from the ones that we have looked 

quality as well as affordability, above:

and Ramdhari decides to go  Some farmers committed 
ahead with his purchase. Last suicide because their crops 

Go through year, Ramdhari on his daughter’s failed. They had bought very 
newspapers insistence had bought her a expensive seeds supplied 
for a  week Barbie doll, which was originally by a multinational company 
and  c ollec t manufactured in the US but was (MNC).
c lipp ings 

being sold in India. 
on anything  An Indian company bought 

rela ted  to Sarika is a first generation a major rival company based 

g loba lisa tion. learner who has done remarkably in Europe, despite protests by 
well throughout her school and some of the current owners.

Reprint 2025-26



Globa lisa tion 101

 Many retail shopkeepers fear 
Th is c h a p t e r h a s 

that they would lose their 
a  se ries o f im a g es 

livelihoods if some major a b o u t  p o l i t i c a l , 
international companies open e c o n o m i c  a n d  
retail chains in the country. c ultura l a sp ec ts o f 

g loba lisa tion, taken 
 A film producer in Mumbai 

from d ifferent p a rts 
was accused of lifting the of the world .
story of his film from another 
film made in Hollywood.

 A militant group issued a 
statement threatening college 
gir ls who wear western 
clothes.

These examples show us that 
globalisation need not always 
be positive; it can have negative 
consequences for the people. 
Indeed, there are many who 
believe that globalisation has 
more negative consequences than 
positive. These examples also 
show us that globalisation need 
not be only about the economic 
issues, nor is the direction of 
influence always from the rich to 
the poor countries.

Since much of the usage 
tends to be imprecise, it becomes 
important to clarify what we mean 
by globalisation. Globalisation as 
a concept fundamentally deals 
with flows. These flows could be 
of various kinds — ideas moving 
from one part of the world to 
another, capital shunted between 
two or more places, commodities 
being traded across borders, and 
people moving in search of better 
livelihoods to different parts of the 
world. The crucial element is the 

Muc h of the Chinese 
‘worldwide interconnectedness’ 

stuff tha t c omes to 
that is created and sustained as Ind ia  is smuggled . 
a consequence of these constant Does g loba lisa tion 

flows. lead  to smuggling?

Reprint 2025-26



102 Contempora ry World  Politic s

Globalisation is a multi- While globalisation is not 
dimensional concept. It has caused by any single factor, 
political, economic and cultural technology remains a critical 
manifestations, and these must element. There is no doubt that 
be adequately distinguished. It is the invention of the telegraph, 
wrong to assume that globalisation the telephone, and the microchip 
has purely economic dimensions, in  more  recent  t imes has 

Isn’ t g loba lisa tion just as it would also be mistaken revolutionised communication 
a  new name for to assume that it is a purely 
imperia lism? Why between different parts of the 

cultural phenomenon. The impact 
do we need  a  new world. When printing initially 

of globalisation is vastly uneven — 
name? came into being it laid the basis 

it affects some societies more than 
for the creation of nationalism. 

others and some parts of some 
So also today we should expect 

societies more than others — and 
that technology will affect the 

it is important to avoid drawing 
way we think of our personal but 

general conclusions about the 
impact of globalisation without also our collective lives.

paying sufficient attention to The ability of ideas, capital, 
specific contexts.  commodities and people to move 

more easily from one part of the 
world to another has been made 

Causes of GlobalisaTion
possible largely by technological 

What accounts for globalisation? advances. The pace of these 

If globalisation is about the flows flows may vary. For instance, 

of ideas, capital, commodities, and the movement of capital and 
people, it is perhaps logical to ask commodities will most likely 

if there is anything novel be quicker and wider than the 
about this phenomenon. movement of peoples across 
Globalisation in terms of different parts of the world.
these four flows has taken 

Globalisation, however, does 
place through much of 

not emerge merely because 
human history. However, 

of the availability of improved 
those who argue that there 

communicat ions .  What  i s 
is something distinct about 
contemporary globalisation important is for people in different 

point out that it is the parts of the world to recognise 

scale and speed of these these interconnections with the 

flows that account for the rest of the world. Currently, we 

uniqueness of globalisation are aware of the fact that events 

in the contemporary era. taking place in one part of the 

Globalisation has a strong world could have an impact on 
historical basis, and it is another part of the world. The 
important to view contem- Bird flu or tsunami is not confined 
porary flows against this to any particular nation. It does 

Dig ita l Ec onomy backdrop. not respect national boundaries. 

Reprint 2025-26

© Ares, Cag le Cartoons Inc .



Globa lisa tion 103

Similarly, when major economic 
events take place, their impact is 
felt outside their immediate local, 
national or regional environment 
at the global level.

poliTiCal ConsequenCes 

One of the debates that has been 
generated as a consequence 
of contemporary processes of 
globalisation relates to its ongoing 
polit ical impact. How does 
globalisation affect traditional 
conceptions of state sovereignty? 
There are at least three aspects 
that we need to consider when 
answering this question. 

At the most simple level, 
globalisation results in an erosion 
of state capacity, that is, the 
ability of government to do what 
they do. All over the world, the old 
‘welfare state’ is now giving way 
to a more minimalist state that 
performs certain core functions 
such as the maintenance of law 
and order and the security of its 
citizens. However, it withdraws 
from many of its earlier welfare 
functions directed at economic 
and social well-being. In place 
of the welfare state, it is the 
market that becomes the prime 
determinant of economic and 
social priorities. The entry and the 
increased role of multinational 
companies all over the world leads 
to a reduction in the capacity of 
governments to take decisions on 
their own.

At the same time, globalisation 
does not always reduce state 
capacity. The primacy of the state 

Reprint 2025-26



104 Contempora ry World  Politic s

continues to be the unchallenged eConomiC ConsequenCes 
basis of political community. 
The old jealousies and rivalries While everything may not be 
between countries have not ceased known about the economic 
to matter in world politics. The facets of globalisation, this 
state continues to discharge its particular dimension shapes 
essential functions (law and order, a large part of the content and 
national security) and consciously direction of contemporary debates 
withdraws from certain domains surrounding globalisation.
from which it wishes to. States 

A part of the problem has 
continue to be important.

to do with defining economic 
Indeed, in some respects state globalisation itself. The mention of 

capacity has received a boost as a economic globalisation draws our 
consequence of globalisation, with attention immediately to the role 
enhanced technologies available of international institutions like 
at the disposal of the state to the IMF and the WTO and the role 
collect information about its they play in determining economic 
citizens. With this information, policies across the world. Yet, 
the state is better able to rule, globalisation must not be viewed 
not less able. Thus, states become in such narrow terms. Economic 
more powerful than they were globalisation involves many actors 
earlier as an outcome of the new other than these international 
technology. institutions. A much broader way 

of understanding of economic 
globalisation requires us to look 
at the distribution of economic 
gains, i.e. who gets the most from 
globalisation and who gets less, 
indeed who loses from it.

What is often called economic 
globalisation usually involves 
greater economic flows among 
different countries of the world. 
Some of this is voluntary and 
some forced by international 
inst i tut ions and power fu l 
countries. As we saw in the 
examples at the beginning of this 
chapter, this flow or exchange can 
take various forms: commodities, 
capital ,  people and ideas. 
Globalisation has involved greater 
trade in commodities across the 
globe; the restrictions imposed by 

Reprint 2025-26

© Milt Priggee, Cag le Cartoons Inc .



Globa lisa tion 105

different countries on allowing 
the imports of other countries 
have been reduced. Similarly, 
the restrictions on movement 
of capital across countries have 
also been reduced. In operational 
terms, it means that investors in 
the rich countries can invest their 
money in countries other than 
their own, including developing 
countries, where they might get 
better returns. Globalisation has 
also led to the flow of ideas across 
national boundaries. The spread 
of internet and computer related 
services is an example of that. 
But globalisation has not led to 
the same degree of increase in the 
movement of people across the 
globe. Developed countries have 
carefully guarded their borders 
with visa policies to ensure that 
citizens of other countries cannot 
take away the jobs of their own 
citizens. 

In  th ink ing  about  the 
consequences of globalisation, it 
is necessary to keep in mind that 
the same set of policies do not lead 
to the same results everywhere. 
While globalisation has led to 
similar economic policies adopted 
by governments in different parts 
of the world, this has generated 
vastly different outcomes in 
different parts of the world. It is 
again crucial to pay attention to 
specific context rather than make 
simple generalisations in this 

When we ta lk about 
connection. ‘ sa fety net’  it means 

tha t we expec t 
Economic globalisation has 

some peop le to fa ll 
created an intense division of 

down bec ause of 
opinion all over the world. Those g loba lisa tion. Isn’ t 
who are concerned about social tha t right?

Reprint 2025-26



106 Contempora ry World  Politic s

justice are worried about the What, however, cannot be denied 
extent of  state withdrawal is the increased momentum 
caused by processes of economic towards inter-dependence and 
globalisation. They point out that integration between governments, 
it is likely to benefit only a small businesses, and ordinary people 
section of the population while in different parts of the world as 
impoverishing those who were a result of globalisation.
dependent on the government 
for jobs and welfare (education, 
health, sanitation, etc.). They CulTural ConsequenCes

have emphasised the need to 
The consequences of globalisation 

ensure institutional safeguards 
are not confined only to the 

or creating ‘social safety nets’ 
sphere of politics and economy. 

to minimise the negative effects 
Globalisation affects us in our 

of globalisation on those who 
home, in what we eat, drink, wear 

are economically weak. Many 
and indeed in what we think. It 

movements all over the world feel 
shapes what we think are our 

that safety nets are insufficient 
Make a  list of preferences. The cultural effect 

or unworkable. They have called 
produc ts of of globalisation leads to the fear 

for a halt to forced economic 
multina tiona l that this process poses a threat to 

globalisation, for its results would 
c ompanies cultures in the world. It does so, 

lead to economic ruin for the 
(MNCs) tha t because globalisation leads to the 

weaker countries, especially for 
are used  by rise of a uniform culture or what 

the poor within these countries. 
you or your is called cultural homogenisation. 

Some economists have described 
family. The rise of a uniform culture is 

economic globalisation as re-
not the emergence of a global 

colonisation of the world.
culture. What we have in the 

Advocates  o f  economic 
globalisation argue that it 
generates greater economic 
growth and well-being for larger 
sections of the population when 
there is de-regulation. Greater 
trade among countries allows 
each economy to do what it does 
best. This would benefit the 
whole world. They also argue 
that economic globalisation is 
inevitable and it is not wise 
to resist the march of history. 
More moderate supporters of 
globalisation say that globalisation 
provides a challenge that can 
be responded to intelligently 
without accepting it uncritically. Invad ing new markets

Reprint 2025-26

© Andy Singer, Cag le Cartoons Inc .



Globa lisa tion 107

name of a global culture is the 
imposition of Western culture 
on the rest of the world. This 
phenomenon is known as the 
soft power of US hegemony. The 
popularity of a burger or blue 
jeans, some argue, has a lot to 
do with the powerful influence of 
the American way of life. Thus, 

Why a re we sc ared  
the culture of the politically of Western c ulture? 
and economically dominant Are we not confident 
society leaves its imprint on a of our own c ulture?

less powerful society, and the 
world begins to look more like 
the dominant power wishes it 
to be. Those who make this 
argument often draw attention 
to the ‘McDonaldisation’ of the 
world, with cultures seeking to 
buy into the dominant American 
dream. This is dangerous not only 
for the poor countries but for the 
whole of humanity, for it leads to 
the shrinking of the rich cultural 
heritage of the entire globe.

At the same time, it would be 
a mistake to assume that cultural 
consequences of globalisation are 
only negative. Cultures are not 
static things. All cultures accept 
outside influences all the time. 
Some external influences are 
negative because they reduce our Make a  list of 
choices. But sometimes external a ll the known 
influences simply enlarge our ‘ d ia lec ts’  of 
choices, and sometimes they your language.  
modify our culture without Consult 
overwhelming the traditional. peop le of your 
The burger is no substitute for grandparents’  
a masala dosa and, therefore, genera tion 
does not pose any real challenge. about this. How 
It is simply added on to our many peop le 
food choices. Blue jeans, on the speak those 
other hand, can go well with a d ia lec ts today?
homespun khadi kurta. Here 

Reprint 2025-26



108 Contempora ry World  Politic s

the outcome of outside influence india and GlobalisaTion
is a new combination that is 
unique — a khadi kurta worn over We said earlier that globalisation 
jeans. Interestingly, this clothing has occurred in earlier periods in 
combination has been exported history in different parts of the 
back to the country that gave us world. Flows pertaining to the 
blue jeans so that it is possible movement of capital, commodities, 
to see young Americans wearing ideas and people go back several 
a kurta and jeans! centuries in Indian history.

While cultural homogenisation During the colonial period, 
is an aspect of globalisation, the as a consequence of Britain’s 
same process also generates imper ia l  ambi t ions ,  Ind ia 

precisely the opposite effect. It became an exporter of primary 

leads to each culture becoming goods and raw materials and a 

more different and distinctive. This consumer of finished goods. After 

phenomenon is called cultural independence, because of this 

heterogenisation. This is not to experience with the British, we 

deny that there remain differences decided to make things ourselves 

in power when cultures interact rather than relying on others. 

but instead more fundamentally We also decided not to allow 

to suggest that cultural exchange others to export to us so that our 

is rarely one way. own producers could learn to 
make things. This ‘protectionism’ 
generated its own problems. 

‘Gosh, an Indian again!’ While some advances were made 
in certain arenas, critical sectors 
such as health, housing and 

An insider’ s view of a  c a ll c entre job primary education did not receive 
the attention they deserved. 

Working in a  c a ll c entre, in fac t, c an be enlightening in its 
India had a fairly sluggish rate of 

own way. As you hand le c a lls from Americ ans, you get an 
insight into the true Americ an c ulture. An average Americ an economic growth.

c omes out as more lively and  honest than we imagine… In 1991, responding to a 
financial crisis and to the desire 

However, not a ll c a lls and  c onversa tions a re p leasant. You 
c an a lso rec eive ira te and  abusive c a llers. Sometimes the for higher rates of economic 

ha tred  tha t they exhib it in their tone on knowing tha t their growth, India embarked on a 
c a ll has been routed  to Ind ia  is very stressful. Americ ans tend  programme of economic reforms 
to perc eive every Ind ian as one who has denied  them their that has sought increasingly to 
rightful job ... de-regulate various sectors including 

trade and foreign investment. 
One c an rec eive a  c a ll, beg inning on the lines of “ I spoke to 

While it may be too early to say 
a  South Afric an a  few minutes ago and  now I’m speaking 
to an Ind ian!”  or “ Oh gosh, an Ind ian aga in! Connec t me to how good this has been for India, 
an American please...”. It’s difficult to find the right response the ultimate test is not high 
in situa tions of this kind .  growth rates as making sure that 

the benefits of growth are shared 
Sourc e: Report by Ranjeetha  Urs in The Hindu, 10 January 2005.

so that everyone is better off.

Reprint 2025-26



Globa lisa tion 109

resisTanCe To 

GlobalisaTion 

We have already noted that 
globalisation is a very contentious 
subject and has invited strong 
criticism all over the globe. Critics 
of globalisation make a variety of 
arguments. Those on the left argue 
that contemporary globalisation It is true sometimes  

represents a particular phase of I like the new songs. 

global capitalism that makes the Didn’ t we a ll like to 

danc e a  b it? Does 
rich richer (and fewer) and the 

it rea lly matter if 
poor poorer. Weakening of the it is influenced by 
state leads to a reduction in the western music ?
capacity of the state to protect 
the interest of its poor. Critics of 
globalisation from the political 
right express anxiety over the 
political, economic and cultural 
effects. In political terms, they 
also fear the weakening of the 
state. Economically, they want 
a return to self-reliance and 
protectionism, at least in certain 
areas of the economy. Culturally, 
they are worried that traditional 
culture will be harmed and people 
will lose their age-old values and 
ways.

It is important to note here that 
anti-globalisation movements too 
participate in global networks, 
allying with those who feel like 
them in other countries. Many 
anti-globalisation movements 
are not opposed to the idea of 
globalisation per se as much as 
they are opposed to a specific 
programme of globalisation, 
which they see as a form of 
imperialism. 

In 1999, at the World Trade 
Organisation (WTO) Ministerial 
Meeting there were widespread 

Reprint 2025-26



110 Contempora ry World  Politic s

 The ac tivity enab les students to understand  how 
g lob a lisa tion ha s p enetra ted  our lives a nd  the 
impac t the a ll-inc lusive na ture of g loba lisa tion has 
on an ind ividua l, a  c ommunity and  a  na tion as a  
whole.

STEPS
 Students a re to list the names of p roduc ts — food  

produc ts, white goods, and luxuries, they are familia r 
with.

 Stud ents a re  to  w rite  d o w n the ir fa vo urite  TV 
p rogrammes.

	The teac her is to c ollec t the list and  c onsolida te. 

	Divide the c lassroom (into c onvenient g roups) and  
assign eac h group  a  number of items (depends on 

how exhaustive the list is) and  TV p rogrammes. 

	Let students find out who are the manufacturers of 
the p roduc ts they use everyday and  the makers/
sponsors of their favourite TV p rogrammes.

	The tea c her is to  (by invo lving  stud ents) c la ssify 
the names of manufac turers and  makers/ sponsors 
collec ted by students into three categories: exc lusive 
foreign c ompanies; exc lusive Ind ian c ompanies; 
and  c ompanies working in c ollabora tion. 

Ideas for the Teac her

 The teac her is to debrief the students foc ussing on:

 How g loba lisa tion has been impac ting  our lives. 

 Dra w ing  the a ttention o f the stud ents to  d ifferent fa c es o f 
g loba lisa tion. As we use more foreign goods, our own sma ll-
sca le industries have been losing their customers and are c losing 
down.

 The ac tivity c ould  be c onc luded  by introduc ing  students to 
the ongoing deba tes about the impac t of g loba lisa tion on the 

develop ing and  developed  c ountries.     

Reprint 2025-26



Globa lisa tion 111

protests at Seattle alleging around them and finding ways 
unfair trading practices by the to deal with matters that trouble 
economically powerful states. It them. Resistance to globalisation 
was argued that the interests of in India has come from different 
the developing world were not quarters. There have been left wing 
given sufficient importance in the protests to economic liberalisation 
evolving global economic system. voiced through political parties 

as well as through forums like 
The World Social Forum (WSF) 

the Indian Social Forum. Trade 
is another global platform, which 

unions of industrial workforce 
brings together a wide coalition 

as well as those representing 
composed of human rights 

farmer interests have organised 
activists, environmentalists, 

protests against the entry of 
labour,  youth and women 

multinationals. The patenting 
activists opposed to neo-liberal 

of certain plants like Neem by 
globalisation. The first WSF American and European firms 
meeting was organised in Porto has also generated considerable 
Alegre, Brazil in 2001. The fourth opposition.
WSF meeting was held in Mumbai 
in 2004. The latest WSF meeting Resistance to globalisation 

was held in Nepal in February has also come from the political 

2024. right. This has taken the form 
of objecting particularly to 
various cultural influences — 

IndIa and ResIstance to ranging from the availability 
o f  f o r e i gn  T.V.  channe l s 

GlobalIsatIon provided by cable networks, 
What has been India’s experience celebration of Valentine’s Day, 
in resisting globalisation?  Social and westernisation of the dress 
movements play a role in helping tastes of girl students in schools 
people make sense of the world and colleges.

1.  Whic h of the sta tements a re TRUE about g loba lisa tion? 

a .  Globa lisa tion is purely an ec onomic  phenomenon.

b .  Globa lisa tion began in 1991.

c .  Globa lisa tion is the same thing as westernisa tion.

d .  Globa lisa tion is a  multi-d imensiona l phenomenon. 

2.  Which of the sta tements are TRUE about the impac t of g loba lisa tion? 

a .  Globa lisa tion has been uneven in its impac t on sta tes and  
soc ieties.

b .  G lob a lisa tion ha s ha d  a  unifo rm imp a c t on a ll sta tes a nd  
soc ieties.

Reprint 2025-26

Exercises



112 Contempora ry World  Politic s

c.  The impact of globalisation has been confined to the political 
sphere.

d .  Globa lisa tion inevitab ly results in c ultura l homogeneity.

3.  Which of the sta tements are TRUE about the causes of g loba lisa tion?

a .  Tec hnology is an important c ause of g loba lisa tion.

b .  Globa lisa tion is c aused  by a  pa rtic ula r c ommunity of peop le.

c .  Globa lisa tion orig ina ted  in the US.

d .  Ec onomic  interdependenc e a lone c auses g loba lisa tion.

4.  Whic h of the sta tements a re TRUE about g loba lisa tion?

a .  Globa lisa tion is only about movement of c ommod ities

b.  Globalisation does not involve a conflict of values.
c.  Services are an insignificant part of globalisation.
d .  Globa lisa tion is about worldwide interc onnec tedness.

5.  Whic h of the sta tements a re FALSE about g loba lisa tion?

a .  Advoc a tes of g loba lisa tion a rgue tha t it w ill result in grea ter 
ec onomic  growth.

b .  Critics of g lobalisation argue that it will result in greater economic  
d isparity.

c .  Advoc a tes of g loba lisa tion a rgue tha t it w ill result in c ultura l 
homogenisa tion.

d .  C rit ic s o f g lob a lisa t ion a rg ue  tha t it  w ill result  in c ultura l 
homogenisa tion.

6.  What is worldwide interc onnec tedness? What a re its c omponents?

7.  How has tec hnology c ontributed  to g loba lisa tion?

8.  Critic a lly eva lua te the impac t of the c hang ing role of the sta te in 
the develop ing c ountries in the light of g loba lisa tion.

9.  Wha t a re the ec onomic  imp lic a tions of g loba lisa tion? How has 
g lob a lisa tion imp a c ted  on Ind ia  w ith reg a rd  to  this p a rtic ula r 
d imension?

10.  Do you agree with the a rgument tha t g loba lisa tion leads to c ultura l 
heterogeneity? 

11.  How has g loba lisa tion impac ted  on Ind ia  and  how is Ind ia  in turn 
impac ting  on g loba lisa tion? 

Reprint 2025-26

E x e r c i s e s