Moments
Supplementary Reader in English

for Class IX

Reprint 2025-26



0960 – MOMENTS
ISBN  81-7450-503-2

Textbook for Class 9

First Edition ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

February 2006  Phalguna 1927 q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,

Reprinted recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.

November 2006, October 2007, q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,

December 2009, November 2010, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in
any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.

January 2012, December 2012,
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised

November 2013, December 2014, price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
December 2015, December 2016, and should be unacceptable.

December 2017, December 2018,
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION

August 2019, January 2021,
DIVISION, NCERT

August 2021 and November 2021
NCERT Campus

Revised Edition Sri Aurobindo Marg

January 2023  Pausha 1944 New  Delhi 110 016 Phone :  011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road
Reprinted Hosdakere Halli Extension

March 2024  Chaitra 1946 Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740

December 2024 Agrahayana 1946
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O. Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone :  079-27541446

PD 130T BS CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop

© National Council of Educational Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone :  033-25530454

Research and Training, 2006, 2023
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone :  0361-2674869

Publication Team
` 40.00

Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan
Division
Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar

Chief Production Officer : Jahan Lal
(In charge)

Chief Business Manager : Amitabh Kumar
Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT watermark Editor : Vijayam

Sankaranarayanan
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of Production Officer : Deepak Jaiswal

Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110016                  Illustrations
and printed at Kalyan Enterprises, Bhushan Shaligram and Nidhi Wadhwa
D-20, Sector B-3, Trans Delhi Cover and Layout
Signature City (Tronica City) Industrial Nidhi Wadhwa
Area, Loni, Ghaziabad (U.P.) 201101

Reprint 2025-26



FOREWORD

THE National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the
school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on
the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They
also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures
will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred
system of education outlined in the National Policy of Education (1986).

The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own
learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.  We must
recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new
knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one
of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat
children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of
knowledge.

These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode
of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as
rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the required
number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.  The methods
used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this
book proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience,
rather than a source of stress or boredom.  Syllabus designers have
tried to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring
and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration
for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The
supplementary reader attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving
higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and
wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring
hands-on experience.

The National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development

Reprint 2025-26



iv

committee responsible for this book.  We wish to thank the Chairperson
of the advisory group in languages, Professor Namwar Singh and the
Chief Advisor for this book, Professor R. Amritavalli for guiding the
work of this committee. Several teachers contributed to the
development of this supplementary reader; we are grateful to their
principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions
and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon
their resources, materials and personnel. We are especially grateful
to the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by
the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande for their valuable
time and contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic
reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products,
NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to
undertake further revision and refinements.

Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 December 2005 Research and Training

Reprint 2025-26



v

RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE

TEXTBOOK

In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load
on students. The National Education Policy 2020 also emphasises reducing
the content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with
creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the
exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration
in this exercise.

Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:

• Content based on genres of literature in the textbooks and supplementary
readers at different stages of school education

• Content that is meant for achieving Learning Outcomes for developing
language proficiency and is accessible at different stages

• For reducing the curriculum load and examination stress in view of the
prevailing condition of the pandemic

• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much
interventions from teachers and can be learnt by children through
self-learning or peer-learning

• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context

This present edition is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes
given above.

Reprint 2025-26



Reprint 2025-26



A NOTE FOR THE TEACHER

MOMENTS, a supplementary reader in English for Class IX, is meant for
extensive reading. It is designed to promote a love for reading by exposing
the learners to a variety of materials.

An attempt has been made to provide learners with a rich reading
experience through stories of mystery, adventure, courage, growing
up, romance, wit and humour. These carefully selected pieces would
cater to the needs and interests of adolescents and hold the mirror up
to different aspects of life and people.

A deliberate effort has been made to gloss only some potentially
difficult words in the stories to aid the reading process. The few
questions given under ‘Think About It’ are all global questions, designed
to help learners develop their ability of intelligent and imaginative
reading. The ‘Talk about It’ section has discussion topics which take a
constructive approach to the analysis of contemporary issues. The
learners may be encouraged to interact with their classmates or seniors,
integrate their understanding of the issues and make a purposeful,
personalised, and imaginative oral presentation. A list of suggested
readings is given at the end of each story to encourage learners to
read extensively and independently.

Reprint 2025-26



THE CONSTITUTION OF

INDIA

PREAMBLE

Reprint 2025-26



TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT

COMMITTEE

CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP IN LANGUAGES

Professor Namwar Singh, formerly Chairman, School of Languages,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

CHIEF ADVISOR

R. Amritavalli, Professor, Central Institute of English and Foreign
Languages (CIEFL), Hyderabad

CHIEF COORDINATOR

Ram Janma Sharma, Professor and Head, Department of Languages,
NCERT, New Delhi

MEMBERS

Amber Banerjee, Principal, Dehli Public School, Dagapur, Darjeeling
Road, Pradhan Nagar, Siliguri

Nasiruddin Khan, Reader in English, Department of Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi

S. Neerada, Principal, Kendriya Vidyalaya, AF 8, Rajokri, New Delhi

Sadhana Parashar, AEO (ELT), CBSE, 17, Rouse Avenue, Institutional
Area, New Delhi

Shruti Sircar, Lecturer, Centre for ESL Studies, CIEFL, Hyderabad

Sonia Makhija, TGT (English), Govt Girls’ Secondary School No. 3, Uttam
Nagar, New Delhi

MEMBER-COORDINATOR

Sandhya Rani Sahoo, Reader in English, Department of Languages,
NCERT, New Delhi

Reprint 2025-26



CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part  IV A (Article  51 A)

Fundamental Duties

Fundamental Duties – It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —

(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;

(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;

(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;

(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;

(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the
people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional
diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;

(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;

(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;

(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry
and reform;

(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;

(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;

(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen
years.

Reprint 2025-26



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

THE National Council of Educational Research and Training is
grateful to Professor M.L. Tickoo, formerly of the Central Institute
of English and Foreign Languages, Hyderabad, and the Regional
Language Centre, Singapore, for going through the manuscript
and making valuable suggestions.

NCERT would like to thank Westland Books Pvt. Ltd., Chennai
for ‘A House Is Not a Home’ by Zan Gaudioso; Black Swan
Transworld Publishers, London for ‘The Accidental Tourist’ by
Bill Bryson; and R. K. Laxman for ‘Iswaran the Storyteller’ along
with the illustrations.

Special thanks are also due to the Publication Department,
NCERT, for their support. NCERT gratefully acknowledges
the contributions made by Matthew John, Proofreader, and
Uttam Kumar, DTP Operator.

Reprint 2025-26



CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)

(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)

guarantees these

Fundamental Rights

Right to Equality

• before law and equal protection of laws;

• irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;

• of opportunity in public employment;

• by abolition of untouchability and titles.

Right to Freedom

• of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;

• of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;

• of protection of life and personal liberty;

• of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;

• of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.

Right against Exploitation

• for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;

• for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.

Right to Freedom of Religion

• freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;

• freedom to manage religious affairs;

• freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;

• freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in
educational institutions wholly maintained by the State.

Cultural and Educational Rights

• for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;

• for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.

Right to Constitutional Remedies

• by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.

Reprint 2025-26



Contents
Foreword . . . . .  iii
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbook.....v
A Note for the Teacher . . . . .  vii

1. The Lost Child . . . . .  1
Mulk Raj Anand

2. The Adventures of Toto  . . . . .  7
Ruskin Bond

3. Iswaran the Storyteller . . . . .  12
R. K. Laxman

4. In the Kingdom of Fools . . . . .  19
Kannada Folktale (ed.) A. K. Ramanujan

5. The Happy Prince . . . . .  28
Oscar Wilde

6. Weathering the Storm in Ersama . . . . .  37
Harsh Mander

7. The Last Leaf . . . . . 44
O. Henry

8. A House Is Not a Home . . . . .  49
Zan Gaudioso

9. The Beggar . . . . .  56
Anton Chekhov

Reprint 2025-26



xiv

Reprint 2025-26




##1##
1.  The Lost Child

A child goes to a fair with his parents. He is happy
and excited and wants the sweets and toys
displayed there. But his parents don’t buy them for
him. Why then does he refuse when someone else
offers them to him?

IT was the festival of spring. From the wintry shades of narrow
lanes and alleys emerged a gaily clad humanity. Some walked,
some rode on horses, others sat, being carried in bamboo and
bullock carts. One little boy ran between his father’s legs,
brimming over with life and laughter.

Reprint 2025-26



“Come, child, come,” called his parents, as he lagged behind,
fascinated by the toys in the shops that lined the way.

He hurried towards his parents, his feet obedient to their call,
his eyes still lingering on the receding toys. As he came to where
they had stopped to wait for him, he could not suppress the desire
of his heart, even though he well knew the old, cold stare of refusal
in their eyes.

“I want that toy,” he pleaded.
His father looked at him red-eyed, in his familiar tyrant’s way.

His mother, melted by the free spirit of the day was tender and,
giving him her finger to hold, said, “Look, child, what is before you!”

It was  a flowering mustard-field, pale like melting gold as it
swept across miles and miles of even land.

A group of dragon-flies were bustling about on their gaudy
purple wings, intercepting the flight of a lone black bee or butterfly
in search of sweetness from the flowers. The child followed them
in the air with his gaze, till one of them would still its wings and
rest, and he would try to catch it. But it would go fluttering,
flapping, up into the air, when he had almost caught it in his
hands. Then his mother gave a cautionary call: “Come, child,
come, come on to the footpath.”

He ran towards his parents gaily and walked abreast of them
for a while, being, however, soon left behind, attracted by the
little insects and worms along the footpath that were teeming out
from their hiding places to enjoy the sunshine.

“Come, child, come!” his parents  called from the shade  of a
grove where they had seated themselves on the edge of a well. He
ran towards them.

A shower of young flowers fell upon the child as he entered
the grove, and, forgetting his parents, he began to gather the
raining petals in his hands. But lo! he heard the cooing of  doves
and ran towards his parents, shouting, “The dove! The dove!” The
raining petals dropped from his forgotten hands.

“Come, child, come!” they called to the child, who had now
gone running in wild capers round  the banyan tree, and  gathering
him up they took the narrow, winding footpath which led to the
fair through the mustard fields.

2 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



As they neared the village the child could see many other
footpaths full of throngs, converging to the whirlpool of the fair,
and felt at once repelled and fascinated by the confusion of the
world he was entering.

A sweetmeat seller hawked, “gulab-jaman, rasagulla, burfi,
jalebi,” at the corner of the entrance and a crowd pressed round
his counter at the foot of an architecture of many coloured  sweets,
decorated with leaves of silver and gold. The child stared open-
eyed and his mouth watered for the burfi that was his favourite
sweet. “I want that burfi,”  he slowly murmured. But he half knew
as he begged that his plea would not be heeded because his
parents would say he was greedy. So without waiting for an answer
he moved on.

A flower-seller hawked, “A garland of gulmohur, a garland of
gulmohur!” The child seemed irresistibly drawn. He went towards
the basket where the flowers lay heaped and half murmured, “I
want that garland.” But he well knew his parents would refuse to
buy him those flowers because they would say that they were
cheap. So, without waiting for an answer, he moved on.

A man stood holding a pole with yellow, red, green and purple
balloons flying from it. The child was simply carried away by the
rainbow glory of their silken colours and he was filled with an
overwhelming desire to possess them all. But he well knew his
parents would never buy him the balloons because they would
say he was too old to play with such toys. So he walked on farther.

A snake-charmer stood playing a flute to a snake which coiled
itself in a basket, its head raised in a graceful bend like the neck
of a swan, while the music stole into its invisible ears like the
gentle rippling of an invisible waterfall. The child went towards
the snake-charmer. But, knowing his parents had forbidden him
to hear such coarse music as the snake-charmer played, he
proceeded farther.

There was a roundabout in full swing. Men, women and
children, carried away in a whirling motion, shrieked and cried
with dizzy laughter. The child watched them intently and then he
made a bold request: “I want to go on the roundabout, please,
Father, Mother.”

The Lost Child / 3

Reprint 2025-26



There was no reply. He turned to look at his parents. They were
not there, ahead of him. He turned to look on either side. They
were not there. He looked behind. There was no sign of them.

A full, deep cry rose within his dry throat and with a sudden
jerk of his body he ran from where he stood, crying in real fear,
“Mother, Father.” Tears rolled down from his eyes, hot and fierce;
his flushed face was convulsed with fear. Panic-stricken, he ran
to one side first, then to the other, hither and thither in all
directions, knowing not where to go. “Mother, Father,” he wailed.
His yellow turban came untied and his clothes  became muddy.

Having run to and fro in a rage of running for a while, he
stood defeated, his cries suppressed into sobs. At little distances
on the green grass he could see, through his filmy eyes, men and
women talking.  He tried to look intently among the patches of
bright yellow clothes, but there was no sign of his father and
mother among these people, who seemed to laugh and talk just
for the sake of laughing and talking.

He ran quickly again, this time to a shrine to which people
seemed to be crowding. Every little inch of space here was
congested with men, but he ran through people’s legs, his little
sob lingering: “Mother, Father!” Near the entrance to the temple,
however, the crowd became very thick: men jostled each other,
heavy men, with flashing, murderous eyes and hefty shoulders.
The poor child struggled to thrust a way between their feet but,
knocked to and fro by their brutal movements, he might have
been trampled underfoot, had he not shrieked at the highest
pitch of his voice, “Father, Mother!” A man in the surging crowd
heard his cry and, stooping with great difficulty, lifted him up
in his arms.

“How did you get here, child? Whose baby are you?” the man
asked as he steered clear of the mass.  The child wept more
bitterly than ever now and only cried, “I want my mother, I
want my father!”

The man tried to soothe him by taking him to the roundabout.
“Will you have a ride on the horse?” he gently asked as he
approached the ring.  The child’s throat tore into a thousand shrill
sobs and he only shouted, “I want my mother, I want my father!”

4 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



The man headed towards the place where the snake-charmer
still played on the flute to the swaying cobra. “Listen to that
nice music, child!” he pleaded. But the child shut his ears with
his fingers and shouted his double-pitched strain: “I want my
mother, I want my father!” The man took him near the balloons,
thinking the bright colours of the balloons would distract the
child’s attention and quieten him. “Would you like a rainbow-
coloured balloon?” he persuasively asked.  The child turned his
eyes from the flying balloons and just sobbed, “I want my mother,
I want my father!”

The man, still trying to make the child happy, bore him to the
gate where the flower-seller sat. “Look! Can you smell those nice
flowers, child!  Would you like a garland to put round your neck?”

The Lost Child / 5

Reprint 2025-26



The child turned his nose away from the basket and reiterated
his sob, “I want my mother, I want my father!”

Thinking to humour his disconsolate charge by a gift of
sweets, the man took him to the counter of the sweet shop.
“What sweets would you like, child?” he asked. The child turned
his face from the sweet shop and only sobbed, “I want my
mother, I want my father!”

MULK RAJ ANAND

THINK ABOUT IT

1. What are the things the child sees on his way to the fair?
Why does he lag behind?

2. In the fair he wants many things. What are they? Why does
he move on without waiting for an answer?

3. When does he realise that he has lost his way? How have his
anxiety and insecurity been described?

4. Why does the lost child lose interest in the things that he
had wanted earlier?

5. What do you think happens in the end? Does the child find
his parents?

TALK ABOUT IT

How to ensure not to get lost.

SUGGESTED READING

l The Coolie by Mulk Raj Anand

l ‘Kabuliwallah’ by Rabindranath Tagore

6 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26




##2##
2.  The Adventures of Toto

Have you ever had a baby monkey as a pet? Toto
is a baby monkey. Let’s find out whether he is
mischievous or docile.

GRANDFATHER bought Toto from a tonga-driver for the sum of five
rupees. The tonga-driver used to keep the little red monkey tied
to a feeding-trough, and the monkey looked so out of place there
that Grandfather decided he would add the little fellow to his
private zoo.

Toto was a pretty monkey. His bright eyes sparkled with
mischief beneath deep-set eyebrows, and his teeth, which were a
pearly white, were very often displayed in a smile that frightened
the life out of elderly Anglo-lndian ladies. But his hands looked
dried-up as though they had been pickled in the sun for many
years. Yet his fingers were quick and wicked; and his tail, while
adding to his good looks (Grandfather believed a tail would add
to anyone’s good looks), also served as a third hand. He could
use it to hang from a branch; and it was capable of scooping up
any delicacy that might be out of reach of his hands.

Grandmother always fussed when Grandfather brought home
some new bird or animal. So it was decided that Toto’s presence
should be kept a secret from her until she was in a particularly
good mood. Grandfather and I put him away in a little closet opening
into my bedroom wall, where he was tied securely — or so we
thought  — to a peg fastened into the wall.

A few hours later, when Grandfather and I came back to
release Toto, we found that the walls, which had been covered
with some ornamental paper chosen by Grandfather, now stood
out as naked brick and plaster. The peg in the wall had been
wrenched from its socket, and my school blazer, which had been
hanging there, was in shreds. I wondered what Grandmother

Reprint 2025-26



would say. But Grandfather didn’t worry; he seemed pleased
with Toto’s performance.
 “He’s clever,” said Grandfather. “Given time, I’m sure he could
have tied the torn pieces of your blazer into a rope, and made his
escape from the window!”

His presence in the house still a secret, Toto was now
transferred to a big cage in the servants’ quarters where a number
of Grandfather’s pets lived very sociably together — a tortoise, a
pair of rabbits, a tame squirrel and, for a while, my pet goat. But
the monkey wouldn’t allow any of his companions to sleep at
night; so Grandfather, who had to leave Dehra Dun next day to
collect his pension in Saharanpur, decided to take him along.

Unfortunately I could not accompany Grandfather on that trip,
but he told me about it afterwards. A big black canvas kit-bag
was provided for Toto. This, with some straw at the bottom, became
his new abode. When the bag was closed, there was no escape.
Toto could not get his hands through the opening, and the canvas
was too strong for him to bite his way through.  His efforts to get
out only had the effect of making the bag roll about on the floor
or occasionally jump into the air — an exhibition that attracted a
curious crowd of onlookers on the Dehra Dun railway platform.

Toto remained in the bag as far as Saharanpur, but while
Grandfather was producing his ticket at the railway turnstile,
Toto suddenly poked his head out of the bag and gave the ticket-
collector a wide grin.

The poor man was taken aback; but, with great presence of
mind and much to Grandfather’s annoyance, he said, “Sir, you
have a dog with you.  You’ll have to pay for it accordingly.”

In vain did Grandfather take Toto out of the bag; in vain did
he try to prove that a monkey did not qualify as a dog, or even
as a quadruped. Toto was classified a dog by the ticket-collector;
and three rupees was the sum handed over as his fare.

Then Grandfather, just to get his own back, took from his
pocket our pet tortoise, and said, “What must I pay for this, since
you charge for all animals?”

The ticket-collector looked closely at the tortoise, prodded it
with his forefinger, gave Grandfather a pleased and triumphant
look, and said, “No charge.  It is not a dog.”

8 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



When Toto was finally accepted by Grandmother he was given
a comfortable home in the stable, where he had for a companion
the family donkey, Nana.  On Toto’s first night in the stable,
Grandfather paid him a visit to see if he was comfortable. To his
surprise he found Nana, without apparent cause, pulling at her
halter and trying to keep her head as far as possible from a
bundle of hay.

Grandfather gave Nana a slap across her haunches, and she
jerked back, dragging Toto with her. He had fastened on to  her
long ears with his sharp little teeth.

Toto and Nana never became friends.
A great treat for Toto during cold winter evenings was the

large bowl of warm water given him by Grandmother for his bath.
He would cunningly test the temperature with his hand, then
gradually step into the bath, first one foot, then the other (as he
had seen me doing), until he was into the water up to his neck.

The Adventures of Toto/ 9

Reprint 2025-26



Once comfortable, he would take the soap in his hands or feet,
and rub himself all over.  When the water became cold, he would
get out and run as quickly as he could to the kitchen-fire in order
to dry himself. If anyone laughed at him during this performance,
Toto’s feelings would be hurt and he would refuse to go on with
his bath. One day Toto nearly succeeded in boiling himself alive.

A large kitchen kettle had been left on the fire to boil for tea
and Toto, finding himself with nothing better to do, decided to
remove the lid. Finding the water just warm enough for a bath,
he got in, with his head sticking out from the open kettle. This
was just fine for a while, until the water began to boil. Toto then
raised himself a little; but, finding it cold outside, sat down again.
He continued hopping up and down for some time, until
Grandmother arrived and hauled him, half-boiled, out of the kettle.

If there is a part of the brain especially devoted to mischief, that
part was largely developed in Toto. He was always tearing things to
pieces. Whenever one of my aunts came near him, he made every
effort to get hold of her dress and tear a hole in it.

One day, at lunch-time, a large dish of pullao stood in the
centre of the dining-table. We entered the room to find Toto stuffing
himself with rice. My grandmother screamed — and Toto threw a
plate at her. One of my aunts rushed forward — and received a glass
of water in the face. When Grandfather arrived, Toto picked up the
dish of pullao and made his exit through a window. We found
him in the branches of the jackfruit tree, the dish still in his
arms. He remained there all afternoon, eating slowly through the
rice, determined on finishing every grain. And then, in order to
spite Grandmother, who had screamed at him, he threw the dish
down from the tree, and chattered with delight when it broke into
a hundred pieces.

Obviously Toto was not the sort of pet we could keep for long.
Even Grandfather realised that. We were not well-to-do, and could
not afford the frequent loss of dishes, clothes, curtains and
wallpaper. So Grandfather found the tonga-driver, and sold Toto
back to him — for only three rupees.

RUSKIN BOND

10 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



Glossary

turnstile: a mechanical gate consisting of
revolving horizontal arms fixed to a vertical
post, allowing only one person at a time to
pass through

halter: a rope or strap placed around the head
of a horse or other animal, used for leading or tethering it

THINK ABOUT IT

1. How does Toto come to grandfather’s private zoo?

2. “Toto was a pretty monkey.” In what sense is Toto pretty?

3. Why does grandfather take Toto to Saharanpur and how?
Why does the ticket collector insist on calling Toto a dog?

4. How does Toto take a bath? Where has he learnt to do
this? How does Toto almost boil himself alive?

5. Why does the author say, “Toto was not the sort of pet we
could keep for long”?

TALK ABOUT IT

Do you have a pet? Is your pet mischievous? Tell the class
about it.

SUGGESTED READING

l My Family and Other Animals by Gerald Durrell

l ‘Grandfather’s Private Zoo’ by Ruskin Bond

l Jungle Book  by Rudyard Kipling

The Adventures of Toto/ 11

Reprint 2025-26


##3##


3.  Iswaran the Storyteller

One night Mahendra woke up from his sleep and
saw “a dark cloudy form”. He broke out into a cold
sweat. Was it a ghost?

THE story was narrated to Ganesh by a young man, Mahendra by
name. He was a junior supervisor in a firm which offered on hire
supervisors at various types of construction sites: factories, bridges,
dams, and so on. Mahendra’s job was to keep an eye on the activities
at the work site. He had to keep moving from place to place every
now and then as ordered by his head office: from a coal mining
area to a railway bridge construction site, from there after a few
months to a chemical plant which was coming up somewhere.

Reprint 2025-26



He was a bachelor. His needs were simple and he was able to
adjust himself to all kinds of odd conditions, whether it was an
ill-equipped circuit house or a makeshift canvas tent in the
middle of a stone quarry. But one asset he had was his cook,
Iswaran. The cook was quite attached to Mahendra and followed
him uncomplainingly wherever he was posted. He cooked for
Mahendra, washed his clothes and chatted away with his master
at night. He could weave out endless stories and anecdotes on
varied subjects.

Iswaran also had an amazing capacity to produce vegetables
and cooking ingredients, seemingly out of nowhere, in the middle
of a desolate landscape with no shops visible for miles around.
He would miraculously conjure up the most delicious dishes made
with fresh vegetables within an hour of arriving at the zinc-sheet
shelter at the new workplace.

Mahendra would be up early in the morning and leave for
work after breakfast, carrying some prepared food with him.
Meanwhile Iswaran would tidy up the shed, wash the clothes,
and have a leisurely bath, pouring several buckets of water over
his head, muttering a prayer all the while. It would be lunchtime
by then. After eating, he would read for a while before dozing
off. The book was usually some popular Tamil thriller running
to hundreds of pages. Its imaginative descriptions and  narrative
flourishes would hold Iswaran in thrall.

His own descriptions were greatly influenced by the Tamil
authors that he read.  When he was narrating even the smallest
of incidents, he would try to work in suspense and a surprise
ending into the account. For example, instead of saying that
he had come across an uprooted tree on the highway, he would
say, with eyebrows suitably arched and hands held out in a
dramatic gesture, “The road was deserted and I was all alone.
Suddenly I spotted something that looked like an enormous
bushy beast lying sprawled across the road. I was half inclined
to turn and go back. But as I came closer I saw that it was a
fallen tree, with its dry branches spread out.” Mahendra would
stretch himself back in his canvas chair and listen to Iswaran’s
tales uncritically.

Iswaran the Storyteller/ 13

Reprint 2025-26



“The place I come from is famous for timber,” Iswaran would
begin. “There is a richly wooded forest all around. The logs are
hauled on to the lorries by elephants. They are huge well-fed
beasts. When they turn wild even the most experienced mahout
is not able to control them.” After this prologue Iswaran would
launch into an elaborate anecdote involving an elephant.

“One day a tusker escaped from the timber yard and began to
roam about, stamping on bushes, tearing up wild creepers and
breaking branches at will. You know, sir, how an elephant behaves
when it goes mad.” Iswaran would get so caught up in the
excitement of his own story that he would get up from the floor
and jump about, stamping his feet in emulation of the mad elephant.

“The elephant reached the outskirts of our town; breaking the
fences down like matchsticks,” he would continue. “It came into
the main road and smashed all the stalls selling fruits, mud pots
and clothes. People ran helter-skelter in panic! The elephant now
entered a school ground where children were playing, breaking
through the brick wall. All the boys ran into the classrooms and
shut the doors tight. The beast grunted and wandered about,
pulling out the football goal-post, tearing down the volleyball net,
kicking and flattening the drum kept for water, and uprooting
the shrubs. Meanwhile all the teachers had climbed up to the
terrace of the school building; from there they helplessly watched
the depredations of the elephant. There was not a soul below on
the ground. The streets were empty as if the inhabitants of the
entire town had suddenly disappeared.

“I was studying in the junior class at that time, and was
watching the whole drama from the rooftop. I don’t know what
came over me suddenly. I grabbed a cane from the hands of one
of the teachers and ran down the stairs and into the open. The
elephant grunted and menacingly swung a branch of a tree  which
it held in its trunk. It stamped its feet, kicking up a lot of mud
and dust. It looked frightening. But I moved slowly towards it,
stick in hand. People were watching the scene hypnotised from
nearby housetops. The elephant looked at me red-eyed, ready to
rush towards me. It lifted its trunk and trumpeted loudly. At that
moment I moved forward and, mustering all my force, whacked

14 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



its third toenail on the quick. The beast looked stunned for a
moment; then it shivered from head to foot — and collapsed.”

At this point Iswaran would leave the story unfinished, and
get up mumbling, “I will be back after lighting the gas and warming
up the dinner.” Mahendra who had been listening with rapt
attention would be left hanging. When he returned, Iswaran
would not pick up the thread of the story right away. Mahendra
would have to remind him that the conclusion was pending.
“Well, a veterinary doctor was summoned to revive the animal,”
Iswaran would shrug casually. “Two days later it was led away by
its mahout to the jungle.”

“Well, how did you manage to do it, Iswaran — how did you
bring down the beast?”

“It has something to do with a Japanese art, I think, sir. Karate
or ju-jitsu it is called. I had read about it somewhere.  It temporarily
paralyses the nervous system, you see.”

Not a day passed without Iswaran recounting some story
packed with adventure, horror and suspense. Whether the story
was credible or not, Mahendra enjoyed listening to it because
of the inimitable way in which it was told. Iswaran seemed to
more than make up for the absence of a TV in Mahendra’s
living quarters.

One morning when Mahendra was having breakfast Iswaran
asked, “Can I make something special for dinner tonight, sir?
After all today is an auspicious day — according to tradition we
prepare various delicacies to feed the spirits of our ancestors
today, sir.”

That night Mahendra enjoyed the most delicious dinner and
complimented Iswaran on his culinary skills. He seemed very
pleased but, unexpectedly, launched into a most garish account
involving the supernatural.

“You know, sir, this entire factory area  we are occupying was
once a burial ground,” he started. Mahendra was jerked out of
the pleasant reverie he had drifted into after the satisfying meal.

“I knew on the first day itself when I saw a human  skull lying
on the path. Even now I come across a number of skulls and
bones,” Iswaran continued.

Iswaran the Storyteller/ 15

Reprint 2025-26



He went on to narrate how he sometimes saw ghosts at night.
“I am not easily frightened by these things, sir. I am a brave
fellow. But one horrible ghost of a woman which appears off
and on at midnight during the full moon... It is an ugly creature
with matted hair and a shrivelled face, like a skeleton holding a
foetus in its arms.”

Mahendra shivered at the description and interrupted rather
sharply, “You are crazy, Iswaran. There are no such things as
ghosts or spirits. It is all a figment of your imagination. Get your
digestive system examined — and maybe your head as well. You
are talking nonsense.”

He left the room and retired for the night, expecting Iswaran
to sulk for a couple of days. But the next morning he was surprised
to find the cook as cheerful and talkative as ever.

From that day on Mahendra, for all his brave talk, went to bed
with a certain unease. Every night he peered into the darkness

16 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



outside through the window next to his bed, trying to make sure
that there was no movement of dark shapes in the vicinity. But
he could only see a sea of darkness with the twinkling lights of
the factory miles away.

He had always liked to admire the milk-white landscape on
full-moon nights. But after hearing Iswaran’s story of the female
ghost he avoided looking  out of his window altogether when the
moon was full.

One night, Mahendra was woken up from his sleep by a low
moan close to his window. At first he put it down to a cat
prowling around for mice. But the sound was too guttural for a
cat. He resisted the curiosity to look out lest he should behold
a sight which would stop his heart. But the wailing became
louder and less feline. He could not resist the temptation any
more. Lowering himself to the level of the windowsill he looked
out at the white sheet of moonlight outside. There, not too far
away, was a dark cloudy form clutching a bundle. Mahendra
broke into a cold sweat and fell back on the pillow, panting.
As he gradually recovered from the ghastly experience he
began to reason with himself, and finally concluded that it
must have been some sort of auto suggestion, some trick that
his subconscious had played on him.

By the time he had got up in the morning, had a bath and
come out to have his breakfast, the horror of the previous night
had faded from his memory. Iswaran greeted him at the door
with his lunch packet and his bag. Just as Mahendra was
stepping out Iswaran grinned and said, “Sir, remember the other
day when I was telling you about the female ghost with a foetus
in its arms, you were so angry with me for imagining things?
Well, you saw her yourself last night. I came running hearing
the sound of moaning that was coming from your room...”

A chill went down Mahendra’s spine. He did not wait for
Iswaran to complete his sentence. He hurried away to his office
and handed in his papers, resolving to leave the haunted place
the very next day!

R.K. LAXMAN

Iswaran the Storyteller/ 17

Reprint 2025-26



Glossary

in thrall: the state of being in someone’s power

depredations: attacks which are made to destroy something

guttural sound: sound produced in the throat; harsh-sounding

feline: relating to cats or other members of the cat family

THINK ABOUT IT

1. In what way is Iswaran an asset to Mahendra?

2. How does Iswaran describe the uprooted tree on the highway?
What effect does he want to create in his listeners?

3. How does he narrate the story of the tusker? Does it appear
to be plausible?

4. Why does the author say that Iswaran seemed to more than
make up for the absence of a TV in Mahendra’s living quarters?

5. Mahendra calls ghosts or spirits a figment of the imagination.
What happens to him on a full-moon night?

6. Can you think of some other ending for the story?

TALK ABOUT IT

Is Iswaran a fascinating storyteller? Discuss with your friends
the qualities of a good storyteller. Try to use these qualities and
tell a story.

SUGGESTED READING

l ‘The Story Teller’ by Saki (H.H. Munro)

l Ghost Stories (ed.) Ruskin Bond

l ‘The Canterville Ghost’ by Oscar Wilde

l ‘Pret in the House’ by Ruskin Bond

18 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26

##4##

4. In the Kingdom of Fools

It is believed that fools are so dangerous that only
very wise people can manage them. Who are the
fools in this story? What happens to them?

IN the Kingdom of Fools, both the king and the minister were idiots.
They didn’t want to run things like other kings, so they decided to
change night into day and day into night. They ordered that everyone
should be awake at night, till their fields and run their businesses
only after dark, and go to bed as soon as the sun came up. Anyone
who disobeyed would be punished with death. The people did as
they were told for fear of death. The king and the minister were
delighted at the success of their project. One day a guru and his
disciple arrived in the city. It was a beautiful city, it was broad
daylight, but there was no one about. Everyone was asleep, not a
mouse stirring. Even the cattle had been taught to sleep by day.
The two strangers were amazed by what they saw around them
and wandered around town till evening, when suddenly the whole
town woke up and went about its nightly business.

The two men were hungry. Now that the shops were open,
they went to buy some groceries. To their astonishment, they
found that everything cost the same, a single duddu — whether
they bought a measure of rice or a bunch of bananas, it cost a
duddu. The guru and his disciple were delighted. They had never
heard of anything like this. They could buy all the food they
wanted for a rupee.

When they had cooked and eaten, the guru realised that this
was a kingdom of fools and it wouldn’t be a good idea for them to
stay there. “This is no place for us. Let’s go,” he said to his disciple.
But the disciple didn’t want to leave the place. Everything was
cheap here. All he wanted was good, cheap food. The guru said,

Reprint 2025-26



“They are all fools. This won’t last very long, and you can’t tell
what they’ll do to you next.”

But the disciple wouldn’t listen to the guru’s wisdom. He
wanted to stay. The guru finally gave up and said, “Do what you
want. I’m going,” and left. The disciple stayed on, ate his fill every
day — bananas and ghee and rice and wheat, and grew fat like a
street-side sacred bull.

One bright day, a thief broke into a rich merchant’s house. He
had made a hole in the wall and sneaked in, and as he was carrying
out his loot, the wall of the old house collapsed on his head and
killed him on the spot.  His brother ran to the king and complained,
“Your Highness, when my brother was pursuing his ancient trade,
a wall fell on him and killed him. This merchant is to blame. He
should have built a good, strong wall. You must
punish the wrongdoer and compensate the family
for this injustice.”

The king said, “Justice will be done. Don’t
worry,” and at once summoned the owner of
the house.

20 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



When the merchant arrived, the king questioned him.
“What’s your name?”
“Such and Such, Your Highness.”
“Were you at home when the dead man burgled your house?”
“Yes, My Lord. He broke in and the wall was weak. It fell on him.”
“The accused pleads guilty. Your wall killed this man’s brother.

You have murdered a man. We have to punish you.”
“Lord,” said the helpless merchant, “I didn’t put up the wall.

It’s really the fault of the man who built the wall. He didn’t build
it right. You should punish him.”

“Who is that?”
“My Lord, this wall was built in my father’s time. I know the

man. He’s an old man now. He lives nearby.”
The king sent out messengers to bring in the bricklayer who

had built the wall. They brought him, tied hand and foot.
“You there, did you build this man’s wall in his father’s time?”
“Yes, My Lord, I did.”
“What kind of a wall is this that you built? It has fallen on a

poor man and killed him. You’ve murdered him. We have to punish
you by death.”

Before the king could order the execution, the poor bricklayer
pleaded, “Please listen to me before you give your orders. It’s true
I built this wall and it was no good. But that was because my
mind was not on it. I remember very well a dancing girl  who was
going up and down that street all day with her anklets jingling,
and I couldn’t keep my eyes or my mind on the wall I was building.
You must get that dancing girl. I know where she lives.”

“You’re right. The case deepens. We must look into it. It is not
easy to judge such complicated cases. Let’s get that dancer,
wherever she is.”

The dancing girl, now an old woman, came trembling to
the court.

“Did you walk up and down that street many years ago, while
this poor man was building a wall? Did you see him?”

“Yes, My Lord, I remember it very well.”
“So you did walk up and down, with your anklets jingling.

You were young and you distracted him, so he built a bad wall.

In the Kingdom of Fools/ 21

Reprint 2025-26



It has fallen on a poor burglar and
killed him. You’ve killed an innocent
man. You’ll have to be punished.”

She thought for a minute and said,
“My Lord, wait. I know now why I was
walking up and down that street. I
had given some gold to the goldsmith
to make some jewellery for me. He
was a lazy scoundrel. He made so
many excuses, said he would give it
now and he would give it then and
so on all day. He made me walk up
and down to his house a dozen times.

That was when this bricklayer saw me. It’s
not my fault, My Lord, it’s the damned
goldsmith’s fault.”

“Poor thing, she’s absolutely right,”
thought the king, weighing the evidence.
“We’ve got the real culprit at last. Get the
goldsmith, wherever he is hiding. At once!”

The king’s bailiffs searched for the
goldsmith, who was hiding in a corner of
his shop. When he heard the accusation
against him, he had his own story to tell.

“My Lord,” he said, “I ’m a poor
goldsmith. It’s true I made this dancer
come many times to my door. I gave her
excuses because I couldn’t finish making
her jewellery before I finished the rich
merchant’s orders. They had a wedding
coming, and they wouldn’t wait. You know
how impatient rich men are!”

“Who is this rich merchant who kept
you from finishing this poor woman’s
jewellery, made her walk up and down,
which distracted this bricklayer, which
made a mess of his wall, which has now

22 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



fallen on an innocent man and killed him?
Can you name him?”

The goldsmith named the merchant, and
he was none other than the original owner of
the house whose wall had fallen. Now justice
had come full circle, thought the king, back to
the merchant. When he was rudely summoned
back to the court, he arrived crying, “It wasn’t
me but my father who ordered the jewellery!
He’s dead! I’m innocent!”

But the king consulted his minister and ruled
decisively: “It’s true your father is the true
murderer. He’s dead, but somebody must be
punished in his place. You’ve inherited
everything from that criminal father of yours,
his riches as well as his sins. I knew at once,
even when I first set eyes on you, that you were
at the root of this horrible crime. You must die.”

And he ordered a new stake to be made
ready for the execution. As the servants
sharpened the stake and got it ready for the
final impaling of the criminal, it occurred to
the minister that the rich merchant was
somehow too thin to be properly executed on
the stake. He appealed to the king’s common
sense. The king too worried about it.

“What shall we do?” he said, when
suddenly it struck him that all they needed
to do was to find a man fat
enough to fit the stake. The
servants were immediately sent
all over the town looking for a
man who would fit the stake,
and their eyes fel l  on the
disciple who had fattened
himself for months on bananas
and rice and wheat and ghee.

In the Kingdom of Fools/ 23

Reprint 2025-26



“What have I done wrong? I’m innocent. I’m a sanyasi!” he cried.
“That may be true. But it’s the royal decree that we should

find a man fat enough to fit the stake,” they said, and carried him
to the place of execution. He remembered his wise guru’s words:
“This is a city of fools. You don’t know what they will do next.”
While he was waiting for death, he prayed to his guru in his heart,
asking him to hear his cry wherever he was. The guru saw
everything in a vision; he had magic powers, he could see far,
and he could see the future as he could see the present and the
past. He arrived at once to save his disciple, who had got himself
into such a scrape through love of food.

As soon as he arrived, he scolded the disciple and told him
something in a whisper. Then he went to the king and addressed
him, “O wisest of kings, who is greater? The guru or the disciple?”

“Of course, the guru. No doubt about it. Why  do you ask?”
“Then put me to the stake first. Put my disciple to death after me.”

24 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



When the disciple heard this, he understood and began to
clamour, “Me first!  You brought me here first! Put me to death
first, not him!”

The guru and the disciple now got into a fight about who should
go first. The king was puzzled by this behaviour. He asked the
guru, “Why do you want to die? We chose him because we needed
a fat man for the stake.”

“You shouldn’t ask me such questions. Put me to death first,”
replied the guru.

“Why? There’s some mystery here. As a wise man you must
make me understand.”

“Will you promise to put me to death if I tell you?” asked the
guru. The king gave him his solemn word. The guru took him
aside, out of the servants’ earshot, and whispered to him, “Do you
know why we want to die right now, the two of us? We’ve been all
over the world but we’ve never found a city like this or a king like
you. That stake is the stake of the god of justice. It’s new, it has
never had a criminal on it. Whoever dies on it first will be reborn as
the king of this country. And whoever goes next will be the future
minister of this country. We’re sick of our ascetic life. It would be
nice to enjoy ourselves as king and minister for a while. Now keep
your word, My Lord, and put us to death. Me first, remember?”

The king was now thrown into deep thought. He didn’t want
to lose the kingdom to someone else in the next round of life. He
needed time. So he ordered the execution postponed to the next
day and talked in secret with his minister. “It’s not right for us to
give over the kingdom to others in the next life. Let’s go on the
stake ourselves and we’ll be reborn as king and minister again.
Holy men do not tell lies,” he said, and the minister agreed.

So he told the executioners, “We’ll send the criminals tonight.
When the first man comes to you, put him to death first. Then do
the same to the second man. Those are my orders. Don’t make
any mistake.”

That night, the king and his minister went secretly to the
prison, released the guru and the disciple, disguised themselves
as the two, and as arranged beforehand with loyal servants, were
taken to the stake and promptly executed.

In the Kingdom of Fools/ 25

Reprint 2025-26



When the bodies were taken down to be thrown to crows and
vultures the people panicked. They saw before them the dead
bodies of the king and the minister. The city was in confusion.

All night they mourned and discussed the future of the
kingdom. Some people suddenly thought of the guru and the
disciple and caught up with them as they were preparing to leave
town unnoticed. “We people need a king and a minister,” said
someone. Others agreed. They begged the guru and the disciple
to be their king and their minister. It didn’t take many arguments
to persuade the disciple, but it took longer to persuade the guru.
They finally agreed to rule the kingdom of the foolish king and
the silly minister, on the condition that they could change all the
old laws.

From then on, night would again be night and day would again
be day, and you could get nothing for a duddu. It became like any
other place.

[A Kannada folktale from A.K. Ramanujan’s
Folk Tales from India]

26 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



Glossary

bailiff: a law officer who makes sure that the decisions of a court
are obeyed

scrape: a difficult situation that one has got into

THINK ABOUT IT

1. What are the two strange things the guru and his disciple
find in the Kingdom of Fools?

2. Why does the disciple decide to stay in the Kingdom of Fools?
Is it a good idea?

3. Name all the people who are tried in the king’s court, and give
the reasons for their trial.

4. Who is the real culprit according to the king? Why does he
escape punishment?

5. What are the Guru’s words of wisdom? When does the disciple
remember them?

6. How does the guru manage to save his disciple’s life?

TALK ABOUT IT

In Shakespeare’s plays the fool is not really foolish. If you have
read or seen Shakespeare’s plays such as King Lear, As You Like
It, Twelfth Night, you may talk about the role of the fool.
Do you know any stories in your language about wise fools, such
as Tenali Rama or Gopal Bhar? You can also read about them in
Ramanujan’s collection of folk tales.

SUGGESTED READING

l Tales from Shakespeare by Charles and Mary Lamb
l Folk Tales from India: A Selection of Oral Tales from Twenty-

two Languages  Selected and Edited by  A.K. Ramanujan
l Classic Folk Tales from Around the World Edited by Robert Nye

In the Kingdom of Fools/ 27

Reprint 2025-26


##5##
5. The Happy Prince

The Happy Prince was a beautiful statue. He was
covered with gold, he had sapphires for eyes, and a
ruby in his sword. Why did he want to part with all
the gold that he had, and his precious stones?

HIGH above the city, on a tall column, stood the statue of the
Happy Prince. He was gilded all over with thin leaves of fine gold,
for eyes he had  two bright sapphires, and a large red ruby glowed
on his sword hilt.

One night there flew over the city a little swallow. His friends
had gone away to Egypt six weeks before, but he had stayed
behind; then he decided to go to Egypt too.

All day long he flew,
and at night time he
arrived at the city.

“Where shall I put
up?” he said. “I hope
the town has made
preparations.”

Then he saw the
statue on the tall column.

“I will put up there,”
he cried. “It is a fine
position with plenty of
fresh air.” So he alighted
just between the feet of
the Happy Prince.

“I have a golden
bed-room,” he said
softly to himself as he
looked round, and he

Reprint 2025-26



prepared to go to sleep; but just as he was putting his head under
his wing a large drop of water fell on him. “What a curious thing!”
he cried. “There is not a single cloud in the sky, the stars are
quite clear and bright, and yet it is raining.”

Then another drop fell.
“What is the use of a statue if it cannot keep the rain off ?” he said.

“I must look for a good chimney pot,” and he determined to fly away.
But before he had opened his wings, a third drop fell, and he

looked up, and saw — Ah! What did he see?
The eyes of the Happy Prince were filled with tears, and tears

were running down his golden cheeks. His face was so beautiful
in the moonlight that the little swallow was filled with pity.

“Who are you?” he said.
“I am the Happy Prince.”
“Why are you weeping then?” asked the swallow. “You have

quite drenched me.”
“When I was alive and had a human heart,” answered the

statue, “I did not know what tears were, for I lived in the Palace,
where sorrow is not allowed to enter.  My courtiers called me the
Happy Prince, and happy indeed I was. So I lived, and so I died.
And now that I am dead they have set me up here so high that I
can see the ugliness and all the misery of my city, and though my
heart is made of lead yet I cannot choose but weep.”

‘What! Is he not solid gold?’ said the swallow to himself. He
was too polite to make any personal remarks.

“Far away,” continued the statue in a low musical voice, “far
away in a little street there is a poor house. One of the windows is
open, and through it I can see a woman seated at a table. Her
face is thin and worn, and she has coarse, red hands, all pricked
by the needle, for she is a seamstress. She is embroidering flowers
on a satin gown for the loveliest of the Queen’s maids of honour,
to wear at the next Court ball. In a bed in the corner of the room
her little boy is lying ill. He has a fever, and is asking his mother
to give him oranges. His mother has nothing to give him but river
water, so he is crying. Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, will you
not bring her the ruby out of my sword hilt?  My feet are fastened
to this pedestal and I cannot move.”

The Happy Prince/ 29

Reprint 2025-26



“I am waited for in Egypt,” said the swallow. “My friends are
flying up and down the Nile, and talking to the large lotus flowers.
Soon they will go to sleep.”

The Prince asked the swallow to stay with him for one night
and be his messenger. “The boy is so thirsty, and the mother so
sad,” he said.

“I don’t think I like boys,” answered the swallow. “I want to go
to Egypt.”

But the Happy Prince looked so sad that the little swallow was
sorry. “It is very cold here,” he said. But he agreed to stay with
him for one night and be his messenger.

“Thank you, little Swallow,” said the Prince.
The swallow picked out the great ruby from the Prince’s sword,

and flew away with it in his beak over the roofs of the town.
He passed by the cathedral tower, where the white marble angels

were sculptured.  He passed by the palace and heard the sound of
dancing. A beautiful girl came out on the balcony with her lover.

“I hope my dress will be ready in time for the State ball,” she
said. “I have ordered flowers to be embroidered on it, but the
seamstresses are so lazy.”

He passed over the river, and saw the lanterns hanging on the
masts of the ships. At last he came to the poor woman’s house
and looked in. The boy was tossing feverishly on his bed, and the
mother had fallen asleep, she was so tired. In he hopped, and
laid the great ruby on the table beside the woman’s thimble. Then
he flew gently round the bed, fanning the boy’s forehead with his
wings. “How cool I feel!” said the boy, “I must be getting better;”
and he sank into a delicious slumber.

Then the swallow flew back to the Happy Prince, and told him
what he had done. “It is curious,” he remarked, “but I feel quite
warm now, although it is so cold.”

“That is because you have done a good action,” said the Prince.
And the little swallow began to think, and then fell asleep. Thinking
always made him sleepy.

When day broke he flew down to the river and had a bath.
“Tonight I go to Egypt,” said the swallow, and he was in high

30 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



spirits at the prospect. He visited all the monuments and sat a
long time on top of the church steeple.

When the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.
“Have you any commissions for Egypt?” he cried. “I am

just starting.”
“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you

stay with me one night longer?”
“I am waited for in Egypt,” answered the swallow.
“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “far away

across the city I see a young man in a garret. He is leaning over a
desk covered with papers, and in the glass by his side there is a
bunch of withered violets. His hair is brown and crisp, and his
lips are red as a pomegranate, and he has large and dreamy eyes.
He is trying to finish a play for the Director of the Theatre, but he
is too cold to write any more. There is no fire in the grate, and
hunger has made him faint.”

“I will wait with you one night longer,” said the swallow, who
really had a good heart. He asked if he should take another ruby
to the young playwright.

“Alas! I have no ruby now,” said the Prince. “My eyes are all
that I have left. They are made of rare sapphires, which were

The Happy Prince/ 31

Reprint 2025-26



brought out of India a thousand
years ago.” He ordered the
swallow to pluck out one of
them and take it to the
playwright. “He will sell it to the
jeweller, and buy firewood, and
finish his play,” he said.

“Dear Prince,” said the
swallow, “I cannot do that,” and
he began to weep.

“Swallow, Swallow, little
Swallow,” said the Prince, “do
as I command you.”

So the swallow plucked out
the Prince’s eye, and flew away
to the young man’s garret. It

was easy enough to get in, as there was a hole in the roof. Through
this he darted, and came into the room. The young man had his
head buried in his hands, so he did not hear the flutter of the
bird’s wings, and when he looked up he found the beautiful
sapphire lying on the withered violets.

“I am beginning to be appreciated,” he cried. “This is from some
great admirer. Now I can finish my play,” and he looked quite happy.

The next day the swallow flew down to the harbour. He sat on
the mast of a large vessel and watched the sailors working. “I am
going to Egypt,” cried the swallow, but nobody minded, and when
the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince.

“I have come to bid you goodbye,” he cried.
“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “will you

not stay with me one night longer?”
“It is winter,” answered the swallow, “and the snow will soon

be here. In Egypt the sun is warm on the green palm trees, and
the crocodiles lie in the mud and look lazily about them.”

“In the square below,” said the Happy Prince, “there stands a
little matchgirl. She has let her matches fall in the gutter, and
they are all spoiled. Her father will beat her if she does not bring
home some money, and she is crying. She has no shoes or

32 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



stockings, and her little head is bare. Pluck out my other eye,
and give it to her, and her father will not beat her.”

“I will stay with you one night longer,” said the swallow, “but I
cannot pluck out your eye. You would be quite blind then.”

“Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow,” said the Prince, “do as I
command you.”

So he plucked out the Prince’s other eye, and darted down
with it. He swooped past the matchgirl, and slipped the jewel into
the palm of her hand.

“What a lovely bit of glass!” cried the little girl; and she ran
home, laughing.

Then the swallow came back to the Prince. “You are blind
now,” he said, “so I will stay with you always.”

“No, little Swallow,” said the poor Prince, “you must go away
to Egypt.”

“No, I will stay with you always,” said the swallow, and he
slept at the Prince’s feet.

All the next day he sat on the Prince’s shoulder, and told him
stories of what he had seen in strange lands.

“Dear little Swallow,” said the Prince, “you tell me of marvellous
things, but more marvellous than anything is the suffering of
men and women. There is no Mystery so great as Misery. Fly over
my city, little Swallow, and tell me what you see there.”

So the swallow flew over the great city, and saw the rich making
merry in their beautiful houses, while the beggars were sitting at
the gates. He flew into dark lanes, and saw the white faces of
starving children looking out listlessly at the black streets. Under
the archway of a bridge two little boys were lying in each other’s
arms to try and keep themselves warm. “How hungry we are!”
they said. “You must not lie here,” shouted the watchman, and
they wandered out into the rain.

Then he flew back and told the Prince what he had seen.
“I am covered with fine gold,” said the Prince. “You must take

it off, leaf by leaf, and give it to the poor; the living always think
that gold can make them happy.”

Leaf after leaf of the fine gold the swallow picked off, till the
Happy Prince looked quite dull and grey. Leaf after leaf of the

The Happy Prince/ 33

Reprint 2025-26



fine gold he brought to the poor, and the children’s faces grew
rosier, and they laughed and played in the street. “We have bread
now!” they cried.

Then the snow came, and after the snow came the frost. The
streets looked as if they were made of silver. Everybody went about
in furs, and the little boys wore scarlet caps and skated on the ice.

The poor little swallow grew colder and colder, but he would
not leave the Prince, he loved him too well. He picked up crumbs
outside the baker’s door when the baker was not looking, and
tried to keep himself warm by flapping his wings.

But at last he knew that he was going to die. He had just
enough strength to fly up to the Prince’s shoulder once more.
“Goodbye, dear Prince!” he murmured. “Will you let me kiss your
hand?

“I am glad that you are going to Egypt at last, little Swallow,”
said the Prince. “You have stayed too long here but you must kiss
me on the lips, for I love you.”

“It is not to Egypt that I am going,” said the swallow. “I am going
to the House of Death. Death is the brother of Sleep, is he not?”

And he kissed the Happy Prince on the lips, and fell down
dead at his feet.

At that moment a curious crack sounded inside the statue, as
if something had broken. The fact is that the leaden heart had
snapped right in two. It certainly was a dreadfully hard frost.

Early the next morning the Mayor was walking in the square
below in company with the Town Councillors. As they passed the
column he looked up at the statue. “Dear me! How shabby the
Happy Prince looks!” he said.

“How shabby, indeed!” cried the Town Councillors, who always
agreed with the Mayor and they went up to look at it.

“The ruby has fallen out of his sword, his eyes are gone, and
he is golden no longer,” said the Mayor. “In fact, he is little better
than a beggar!”

“Little better than a beggar,” said the Town Councillors.
“And here is actually a dead bird at his feet!” continued the

Mayor. “We must really issue a proclamation that birds are not

34 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



to be allowed to die here.” And the Town Clerk made a note of
the suggestion.

So they pulled down the statue of the Happy Prince. “As he is
no longer beautiful he is no longer useful,” said the Art Professor
at the University.

Then they melted the statue in a furnace. “What a strange
thing!” said the overseer of the workmen at the foundry. “This
broken lead heart will not melt in the furnace. We must throw it
away.” So they threw it on a dust heap where the dead swallow
was also lying.

“Bring me the two most precious things in the city,” said God
to one of His Angels; and the Angel brought Him the leaden
heart and the dead bird.
“You have rightly chosen,” said God, “for in my garden of

Paradise this little bird shall sing for ever more and in my city
of gold the Happy Prince shall praise me.”

OSCAR WILDE

The Happy Prince/ 35

Reprint 2025-26



Glossary

seamstress: a woman who makes a living by sewing

thimble: a metal or plastic cap with a closed end,
worn to protect the finger and push the needle in
sewing

garret: small dark room at the top of the house

THINK ABOUT IT

1. Why do the courtiers call the prince ‘the Happy Prince’? Is he
really happy? What does he see all around him?

2. Why does the Happy Prince send a ruby for the seamstress?
What does the swallow do in the seamstress’ house?

3. For whom does the prince send the sapphires and why?

4. What does the swallow see when it flies over the city?

5. Why did the swallow not leave the prince and go to Egypt?

6. What are the precious things mentioned in the story? Why are
they precious?

TALK ABOUT IT

The little swallow says, “It is curious, but I feel quite warm now,
although it is so cold.” Have you ever had such a feeling? Share
your experience with your friends.

SUGGESTED READING

l ‘The Selfish Giant’ by Oscar Wilde.
l ‘How Much Land Does a Man Require?’ by Leo Tolstoy

36 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26

 ##6##

6. Weathering the Storm in Ersama

The cyclone that hit Orissa in October 1999
killed thousands of people and devastated
hundreds of villages. For two dreadful nights
Prashant, a young man, was  marooned on the
roof of a house. On the third day he decided to
go to his village. Did he find his family?

ON 27 October 1999, seven years after his mother’s death,
Prashant had gone to the block headquarters of Ersama, a small
town in coastal Orissa, some eighteen kilometres from his village,
to spend the day with a friend.  In the evening, a dark and
menacing storm quickly gathered. Winds beat against the houses
with a speed and fury that Prashant had never witnessed before.
Heavy and incessant rain filled the darkness, ancient trees were

Reprint 2025-26



uprooted and crashed to the earth.  Screams rent the air as people
and houses were swiftly washed away. The angry waters swirled
into his friend’s house, neck deep. The building was of brick and
mortar and was strong enough to survive the devastation of the
wind’s velocity of 350 km per hour. But the cold terror of the
family grew with the crashing of trees that had got uprooted and
fallen on their house, some time in the middle of the night,
damaging its roof and walls.

The crazed destruction wrought by the cyclone and the surge
of the ocean continued for the next thirty-six hours, although wind
speeds had reduced somewhat by the next morning.  To escape
the waters rising in the house, Prashant and his friend’s family
had taken refuge on the roof.  Prashant will never forget the shock
he experienced at his first glimpse of the devastation wrought by
the super cyclone, in the grey light of the early morning.  A raging,
deadly, brown sheet of water covered everything as far as the eye
could see; only fractured cement houses still stood in a few places.
Bloated animal carcasses and human corpses floated in every
direction.  All round even huge old trees had fallen.  Two coconut
trees had fallen on the roof of their house.  This was a blessing in
disguise, because the tender coconuts from the trees kept the
trapped family from starving in the several days that followed.

For the next two days, Prashant sat huddled with his friend’s
family in the open on the rooftop.  They froze in the cold and incessant
rain; the rain water washed away Prashant’s tears.  The only thought
that flashed through his mind was whether his family had survived
the fury of the super cyclone. Was he to be bereaved once again?

Two days later, which seemed to Prashant like two years, the
rain ceased and the rain waters slowly began to recede. Prashant
was determined to seek out his family without further delay.  But
the situation was still dangerous, and his friend’s family pleaded
with Prashant to stay back a little while longer.  But Prashant
knew he had to go.

He equipped himself with a long, sturdy stick, and then started
on his eighteen-kilometre expedition back to his village through
the swollen flood waters.  It was a journey he would never forget.
He constantly had to use his stick to locate the road, to determine

38 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



where the water was most shallow.  At places it was waist deep,
and progress was slow.  At several points, he lost the road and
had to swim.  After some distance, he was relieved to find two
friends of his uncle who were also returning to their village. They
decided to move ahead together.

As they waded through the waters, the scenes they witnessed
grew more and more macabre.  They had to push away many
human bodies — men, women, children — and carcasses of dogs,
goats and cattle that the current swept against them as they moved
ahead.  In every village that they passed, they could barely see a
house standing.  Prashant now wept out loud and long.  He was
sure that his family could not have survived this catastrophe.

Eventually, Prashant reached his village, Kalikuda. His heart
went cold. Where their home once stood, there were only
remnants of its roof.  Some of their belongings were caught,
mangled and twisted in the branches of trees just visible above
the dark waters. Young Prashant decided to go to the Red Cross
shelter to look for his family.

Among the first people he saw in the crowd was his maternal
grandmother.  Weak with hunger, she rushed to him, her hands
outstretched, her eyes brimming.  It was a miracle.  They had
long given him up for dead.

Quickly word spread and his extended family gathered around
him, and hugged him tight in relief. Prashant anxiously scanned
the motley, battered group. His brother and sister, his uncles
and aunts, they all seemed to be there.

Weathering the Storm in Ersama/ 39

Reprint 2025-26



By the next morning, as he took in the desperate situation in
the shelter, he decided to get a grip over himself.  He sensed a
deathly grief settling upon the 2500 strong crowd in the shelter.
Eighty-six lives were lost in the village.  All the ninety-six houses
had been washed away. It was their fourth day at the shelter.  So
far they had survived on green coconuts, but there were too few
to go around such a tumult of people.

Prashant, all of nineteen years, decided to step in
as leader of his village, if no one else did. He organised
a group of youths and elders to jointly pressurise the
merchant once again to part with his rice.  This time
the delegation succeeded and returned triumphantly,
wading through the receding waters with food for the
entire shelter.  No one cared that the rice was already
rotting. Branches from fallen trees were gathered to
light a reluctant and slow fire, on which to cook the
rice.  For the first time in four days, the survivors at
the cyclone shelter were able to fill their bellies. His
next task was to organise a team of youth volunteers to
clean the shelter of filth, urine, vomit and floating
carcasses, and to tend to the wounds and fractures of
the many who had been injured.

On the fifth day, a military helicopter flew over the
shelter and dropped some food parcels.  It then did
not return. The youth task force gathered empty

40 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



utensils from the shelter.
Then they deputed the
children to lie in the sand
left by the waters around
the shelter with these
utensils on their stomachs,
to communicate to the
passing helicopters that they
were hungry.  The message
got through, and after that
the helicopter made regular
rounds of the shelter,
airdropping food and other
basic needs.

Prashant found that a
large number of children had
been orphaned.  He brought
them together and put up a
polythene sheet shelter for
them. Women were mobilised
to look after them, while the
men secured food and
materials for the shelter.

As the weeks passed,
Prashant was quick to
recognise that the women
and children were sinking
deeper and deeper in their
grief. He persuaded the women to start working in the food-for-
work programme started by an NGO, and for the children he
organised sports events. He himself loved to play cricket, and so
he organised cricket matches for children.  Prashant engaged,
with other volunteers, in helping the widows and children to pick
up the broken pieces of their lives. The initial government plan
was to set up institutions for orphans and widows. However, this
step was successfully resisted, as it was felt that in such
institutions, children would grow up without love, and widows

Weathering the Storm in Ersama/ 41

Reprint 2025-26



would suffer from stigma and loneliness. Prashant’s group believed
orphans should be resettled in their own community itself, possibly
in new foster families made up of childless widows and children
without adult care.

It is six months after the devastation of the super cyclone.
This time Prashant’s wounded spirit has healed simply because
he had no time to bother about his own pain.  His handsome,
youthful face is what the widows and orphaned children of his
village seek out most in their darkest hour of grief.

HARSH MANDER

Glossary

menacing: dangerous and harmful

incessant: unceasing; continual

swirled: moved or flowed along with a whirling motion

carcasses: dead bodies of animals

bereaved: lost a close relation or friend through his/her death

remnants: small remaining quantities

motley: disparate; varied  in  appearance or character

tumult: uproar of a disorderly crowd

THINK ABOUT IT

1. What havoc has the super cyclone wreaked in the life of the
people of Orissa?

2. How has Prashant, a teenager, been able to help the people
of his village?

3. How have the people of the community helped one another?
What role do the women of Kalikuda play during these days?

4. Why do Prashant and other volunteers resist the plan to set
up institutions for orphans and widows? What alternatives
do they consider?

42 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



5. Do you think Prashant is a good leader? Do you think young
people can get together to help people during natural
calamities?

TALK ABOUT IT

Talk about the preparedness of the community for a natural
disaster.

(You can talk about evacuation plans and rehabilitation; permanent
safe shelters; warning systems; relief efforts; building materials
to withstand cyclone/flood/earthquake, i.e. safe housing; peoples’
organisation of their own rescue; the survival instinct, etc.)

SUGGESTED READING

l ‘A Home on the Street’ by Harsh Mander
l ‘Paying for His Tea’ by Harsh Mander
l Eton Munda Won the Battle by Mahasweta Devi

Weathering the Storm in Ersama/ 43

Reprint 2025-26


##7##
7. The Last Leaf

It is autumn. The wind is blowing hard and it is
raining heavily. All the leaves on an ivy creeper
have fallen, except one. Why doesn’t the last
leaf fall?

SUE and Johnsy, two young artists, shared a small flat. The flat
was on the third storey of an old house.

Johnsy fell very seriously ill in November. She had pneumonia.
She would lie in her bed without moving, just gazing out of the
window. Sue, her friend, became very worried. She sent for the
doctor. Although he came every day there was no change in
Johnsy’s condition.

One day the doctor took Sue aside and asked her, ”Is anything
worrying Johnsy?”

“No,” replied Sue. “But why do you ask?”
The doctor said “Johnsy, it seems, has made up her mind that

she is not going to get well. If she doesn’t want to live, medicines
will not help her.”

Sue tried her best to make Johnsy take an interest in things
around her. She talked about clothes and fashions, but Johnsy
did not respond. Johnsy continued to lie still on her bed. Sue
brought her drawing-board into Johnsy’s room and started
painting. To take Johnsy’s mind off her illness, she whistled
while working.

Suddenly Sue heard Johnsy whisper something. She quickly
rushed to the bed and heard Johnsy counting backwards. She was
looking out of the window and was saying, “Twelve!” After sometime
she whispered “eleven”, then “ten”, then “nine”, “eight”, “seven”. Sue
anxiously looked out of the window. She saw an old ivy creeper
climbing half-way up the brick wall opposite their window.  In the
strong wind outside, the creeper was shedding its leaves.

Reprint 2025-26



“What is it, dear?” Sue asked.
“Six,” whispered Johnsy. “They are falling faster now. Three days

ago there were almost a hundred leaves. There are only five left now.”
“It is autumn,” said Sue, “and the leaves will fall.”
“When the last leaf falls, I will die,” said Johnsy with finality.

“I have known this for the last three days.”
“Oh, that’s nonsense,” replied Sue. “What have old ivy leaves

to do with your getting well? The doctor is confident that you will
get better.”

Johnsy did not say anything. Sue went and brought her a
bowl of soup.

“I don’t want any soup,” said Johnsy. “I am not hungry…  Now
there are only four leaves left. I want to see the last one fall before
it gets dark. Then I will sleep forever.”

Sue sat on Johnsy’s bed, kissed her and said, “You are not
going to die. I can’t draw the curtain for I need the light. I want to
finish the painting and get some money for us. Please, my dear

The Last Leaf/ 45

Reprint 2025-26



friend,” she begged Johnsy, “promise not to look out of the window
while I paint.”

“All right,” said Johnsy. “Finish your painting soon for I want
to see the last leaf fall. I’m tired of waiting. I have to die, so let me
go away peacefully like one of those poor, tired leaves.”

“Try to sleep,” said Sue. “I have to paint an old miner. I will
call Behrman up to be my model.”

Sue rushed down. Behrman lived on the ground floor.
He was a sixty-year-old painter. His lifelong dream was to

paint a masterpiece but that had remained a dream. Sue poured
out her worries to Behrman. She told him how Johnsy was
convinced that she would die when the last leaf fell.

“Is she stupid?” asked Behrman. “How can she be so foolish?”
“She is running a high temperature,”complained Sue. “She

refuses to eat or drink and that worries me a lot.”
“I will come with you and see Johnsy,” Behrman said.
They tiptoed into the room. Johnsy was sleeping. Sue drew

the curtains together and they went to the next room. She peeped
out through the window. There was only one leaf on the creeper.
It was raining heavily and an icy-cold wind was blowing. It seemed

as though the leaf
would fall any minute
now. Behrman did not
say a word. He went
back to his room.

Johnsy woke up
next morning. In a
feeble voice she asked
Sue to draw the
curtains. Sue was
nervous. She drew
back the curtains very
reluctantly.

“Oh!” Sue exclaimed
as she looked at the
vine creeper. “Look,
there is still one leaf

46 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



on the creeper. It looks quite green and healthy. In spite of the storm
and the fierce winds, it didn’t fall.”

“I heard the wind last night,” said Johnsy. “I thought it would
have fallen. It will surely fall today. Then I’ll die.”

“You won’t die,” said Sue energetically. “You have to live for
your friends. What would happen to me if you die?”

Johnsy smiled weakly and closed her eyes. After every hour or
so she would look out of the window and find the leaf still there.
It seemed to be clinging to the creeper.

In the evening, there was another storm but the leaf did not
fall. Johnsy lay for a long time looking at the leaf. Then she called
out to Sue.

“I have been a bad girl. You have looked after me so lovingly
and I have not cooperated with you. I have been depressed and
gloomy. The last leaf has shown me how wicked I have been. I
have realised that it is a sin to want to die.”

Sue hugged Johnsy. Then she gave her lots of hot soup and a
mirror. Johnsy combed her hair and smiled brightly.

In the afternoon the doctor came. After examining his patient  he
told Sue, “Johnsy now has the will to live. I am confident she’ll recover
soon. Now I must go downstairs and see Behrman. He is also suffering
from pneumonia. But I am afraid, there is no hope for him.”

The next morning
Sue came and sat on
Johnsy’s bed. Taking
Johnsy’s hand in hers
she said, “I have
something to tell you.
Mr Behrman died
of pneumonia this
morning. He was ill for
only two days. The first
day the janitor found him
on his bed. His clothes
and shoes were wet and
he was shivering. He
had been out in that
stormy night.”

The Last Leaf/ 47

Reprint 2025-26



Then they found a ladder and a lantern still lighted lying near
his bed. There were also some brushes and green and yellow
paints on the floor near the ladder. “Johnsy dear,” said Sue, “look
out of the window. Look at that ivy leaf. Haven’t you wondered
why it doesn’t flutter when the wind blows? That’s Behrman’s
masterpiece. He painted it the night the last leaf fell.”

O. HENRY

Glossary

janitor: a person whose job is to look after a building

THINK ABOUT IT

1. What is Johnsy’s illness? What can cure her, the medicine or
the willingness to live?

2. Do you think the feeling of depression Johnsy has is common
among teenagers?

3. Behrman has a dream. What is it? Does it come true?

4. What is Behrman’s masterpiece? What makes Sue say so?

TALK ABOUT IT

Have you ever felt depressed and rejected? How did you overcome
such feelings? Share your experience with your classmates.

SUGGESTED READING

l ‘The Gift of the Magi’ by O.Henry
l ‘Dusk’ by Saki (H.H. Munro)
l Chicken Soup for the Teenage Soul on Tough Stuff: Compiled

and edited by Jack Canfield, Mark Victor Hansen, Kimberly
Kirberger

48 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26


##8##

8. A House Is Not a Home

This story reflects the challenges of being a teenager,
and the problems of growing up. How does the author
overcome his problems?

MY first year of high school felt awkward. After leaving junior
high at the head of my class with all the seniority the upper grade
levels could afford me, it felt strange starting over as a freshman.
The school was twice as big as my old school, and to make matters
worse, my closest friends were sent to a different high school. I
felt very isolated.

I missed my old teachers so much that I would go back and
visit them. They would encourage me to get involved in school
activities so that I could meet new people. They told me that in
time I would adjust and probably end up loving my new school
more than I had my old one. They made me promise that when
that happened I would still come by and visit them from time to
time. I understood the psychology in what they were saying, but
I took some comfort in it nonetheless.

One Sunday afternoon, not long after I had started high
school, I was sitting at home at our dining-room table doing
homework. It was a cold and windy fall day, and we had a fire
going in our fireplace. As usual, my red tabby cat was lying on
top of all my papers, purring loudly and occasionally swatting at
my pen for entertainment’s sake.

She was never far from me. I had rescued her when she was
a kitten, and somehow she knew that I was the one responsible
for giving her ‘the good life’.

My mother kept stoking the fire to keep the house nice and
warm. Suddenly, I smelled something strange, and then I noticed
it... smoke pouring in through the seams of the ceiling. The smoke
began to fill the room so quickly that we could barely see. Groping

Reprint 2025-26



our way to the front door, we all ran out into the front yard. By
the time we made our way outside, the whole roof was engulfed
in flames and it was spreading quickly. I ran to the neighbours to
call the fire department, while I watched my mother run back
into the house.

My mother then ran out of the house carrying a small metal
box full of important documents. She dropped the case on the
lawn and, in a crazed state, ran back into the house. I knew what
she was after. My father had died when I was young, and I was
certain that she was not going to let his pictures and letters go up
in flames. They were the only things that she had to remember
him by. Still I screamed at her, “Mom! No!”

I was about to run after her when I felt a large hand hold me
back. It was a fireman. I hadn’t even noticed that the street had
already filled with fire trucks. I was trying to free myself from his
grasp, yelling, “You don’t understand, my mother’s in there!”

He held on to me while other firefighters ran into the house.
He knew that I wasn’t acting very logically and that if he were to
let go, I’d run. He was right.

“It’s all right, they’ll get her,” he said.
He wrapped a blanket around me and sat me down in our

car. Soon after that, a fireman emerged from our house with

50 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



my mom in tow. He quickly took her over to the truck and put
an oxygen mask on her. I ran over and hugged her. All those
times I ever argued with her and hated her vanished at the
thought of losing her.

“She’s going to be okay,” said the fireman. “She just
inhaled a little smoke.” And then he ran back to fight the fire
while my mother and I sat there dazed. I remember watching
my house burn down and thinking that there was nothing I
could do about it.

Five hours later, the fire was finally out. Our house was almost
completely burned down. But then it struck me ... I hadn’t seen
my cat. Where was my cat? Much to my horror, I realised that
she was nowhere to be found. Then all at once it hit me — the
new school, the fire, my cat — I broke down in tears and cried
and cried. I was suffering loss, big time.

The firemen wouldn’t let us go back into the house that night.
It was still too dangerous. Dead or alive, I couldn’t imagine leaving
without knowing about my cat. Regardless, I had to go. We piled
into the car with just the clothes on our backs and a few of the
firemen’s blankets, and made our way to my grandparents’ house
to spend the night.

The next day, Monday, I went to school. When the fire broke
out, I was still wearing the dress I had worn to church that morning
but I had no shoes! I had kicked them off when I was doing my
homework. They became yet another casualty of the fire. So I had
to borrow some tennis shoes from my aunt. Why couldn’t I just
stay home from school? My mother wouldn’t hear of it, but I was
totally embarrassed by everything. The clothes I was wearing
looked weird, I had no books or homework, and my backpack
was gone. I had my life in that backpack! The more I tried to fit in,
the worse it got. Was I destined to be an outcast and a geek all my
life? That’s what it felt like. I didn’t want to grow up, change or
have to handle life if it was going to be this way. I just wanted to
curl up and die.

I walked around school like a zombie. Everything felt surreal,
and I wasn’t sure what was going to happen. All the security I
had known, from my old school, my friends, my house and my
cat had all been ripped away.

A House Is Not a Home/ 51

Reprint 2025-26



When I walked through what used to be my house after school
that day, I was shocked to see how much damage there was —
whatever hadn’t burned was destroyed by the water and chemicals
they had used to put out the fire. The only material things not
destroyed were the photo albums, documents and some other
personal items that my mother had managed to heroically rescue.
But my cat was gone and my heart ached for her.

There was no time to grieve. My mother rushed me out of the
house. We would have to find a place to live, and I would have to
go buy some clothes for school.

We had to borrow money from my grandparents because there
were no credit cards, cash or even any identification to be able to
withdraw money from the bank. Everything had gone up in smoke.

That week the rubble that used to be our house was being
cleared off the lot. Even though we had rented an apartment
nearby, I would go over to watch them clear away debris, hoping
that my cat was somewhere to be found. She was gone. I kept
thinking about her as that vulnerable little kitten. In the early
morning when I would disturb her and get out of bed, she would
tag along after me, climb up my robe and crawl into my pocket to
fall asleep. I was missing her terribly.

It always seems that bad news spreads quickly, and in my
case it was no different. Everyone in high school, including the
teachers, was aware of my plight. I was embarrassed as if somehow
I were responsible. What a way to start off at a new school! This
was not the kind of attention I was looking for.

The next day at school, people were acting even more strange
than usual. I was getting ready for gym class at my locker. People
were milling around me, asking me to hurry up. I thought it
strange, but in the light of the past few weeks, nothing would
surprise me. It almost seemed that they were trying to shove me
into the gym — then I saw why. There was a big table set up with
all kinds of stuff on it, just for me. They had taken up a collection
and bought me school supplies, notebooks, all kinds of different
clothes — jeans, tops, sweatsuits. It was like Christmas. I was
overcome by emotion. People who had never spoken to me before
were coming up to me to introduce themselves. I got all kinds of
invitations to their houses. Their genuine outpouring of concern

52 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



really touched me. In that instant, I finally breathed a sigh of
relief and thought for the first time that things were going to be
okay. I made friends that day.

A month later, I was at my house watching them rebuild it.
But this time it was different — I wasn’t alone. I was with two of
my new friends from school. It took a fire for me to stop focusing
on my feelings of insecurity and open up to all the wonderful
people around me. Now I was sitting there watching my house
being rebuilt when I realised my life was doing the same thing.

While we sat there on the curb, planning my new bedroom,
I heard someone walk up to me from behind and say, “Does this
belong to you?” When I turned around to see who it was, I couldn’t
believe my eyes. A woman was standing there holding my cat! I
leapt up and grabbed her out of the woman’s arms. I held her

A House Is Not a Home/ 53

Reprint 2025-26



close to me and cried into that beautiful orange fur. She purred
happily. My friends were hugging me, hugging the cat and
jumping around.

Apparently, my cat had been so freaked by the fire that she
ran over a mile away. Her collar had our phone number on it, but
our phones had been destroyed and disconnected. This wonderful
woman took her in and worked hard to find out whose cat it was.
Somehow, she knew this cat was loved and sorely missed.

As I sat there with my friends and my cat curled up in my
lap, all the overwhelming feelings of loss and tragedy seemed to
diminish. I felt gratitude for my life, my new friends, the kindness
of a stranger and the loud purr of my beloved cat. My cat was
back and so was I.

ZAN GAUDIOSO

Glossary

stoking the fire: feeding and tending the fire

zombie: a dull and apathetic person

surreal: strange; bizarre

milling around: moving in an aimless manner

shove: push hard

THINK ABOUT IT

1. What does the author notice one Sunday afternoon? What is
his mother’s reaction? What does she do?

2. Why does he break down in tears after the fire?

3. Why is the author deeply embarrassed the next day in school?
Which words show his fear and insecurity?

4. The cat and the author are very fond of each other. How has
this been shown in the story? Where was the cat after the
fire? Who brings it back and how?

5. What actions of the schoolmates change the author’s
understanding of life and people, and comfort him

54 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



emotionally? How does his loneliness vanish and how does
he start participating in life?

6. What is the meaning of “My cat was back and so was I”?
Had the author gone anywhere? Why does he say that he
is also back?

TALK ABOUT IT

Have any of your classmates/schoolmates had an experience
like the one described in the story where they needed help?
Describe how they were helped.

SUGGESTED READING

l Her Story So Far: Tales of the Girl Child in India edited by
Monica Das

l Modern Hindi Stories edited by Indu Jain
l Malgudi Days by R.K. Narayan

A House Is Not a Home/ 55

Reprint 2025-26


##9##
9. The Beggar

What induced the beggar, Lushkoff, to change his
ways?  Let’s read and find out.

“KIND sir, have pity; turn your attention to a poor, hungry man!
For three days I have had nothing to eat; I haven’t five copecks
for a lodging, I swear it before God.  For eight years I was a
village schoolteacher and then I lost my place through intrigues.
I fell a victim to calumny.  It is a year now since I have had
anything to do.”

The advocate, Sergei, looked at the ragged, fawn-coloured
overcoat of the suppliant, at his dull, drunken eyes, at the red
spot on either cheek, and it seemed to him as if he had seen this
man somewhere before.

“I have now had an offer of a position in the province of Kaluga,”
the mendicant went on, “but I haven’t the money to get there.
Help me kindly; I am ashamed to ask, but — I am obliged to
by circumstances.”

Sergei’s eyes fell on the man’s overshoes, one of which was
high and the other low, and he suddenly remembered something.

“Look here, it seems to me I met you the day before yesterday
in Sadovya Street,” he said; “but you told me then that you were
a student who had been expelled, and not a village schoolteacher.
Do you remember?”

“N-no, that can’t be so,” mumbled the beggar, taken aback. “I
am a village schoolteacher, and if you like I can show you
my papers.”

“Have done with lying! You called yourself a student and even
told me what you had been expelled for. Don’t you remember?”

Sergei flushed and turned from the ragged creature with an
expression of disgust.

Reprint 2025-26



“This is dishonesty, my dear sir!” he cried angrily. “This is
swindling — I shall send the police for you, damn you!”

“Sir!” he said, laying his hand on his heart, “the fact is I was
lying! I am neither a  student nor a schoolteacher.  All that was
fiction.  Formerly I sang in a Russian choir and was sent away
for drunkenness.  But what else can I do?  I can’t get along
without lying.  No one will give me anything when I tell the truth,
what can I do?”

“What can you do?  You ask what you can do?” cried
Sergei, coming close to him. “Work! That’s what you can do!
You must work!”

“Work — yes. I know that myself; but where can I find work?”
“How would you like to chop wood for me?”
“I wouldn’t refuse to do that, but in these days even skilled

wood-cutters find themselves sitting without bread.”
“Will you come and chop wood for me?”
“Yes sir, I will.”
“Very well; we’ll soon find out.”
Sergei hastened along, rubbing his hands. He called his cook

out of the kitchen.
“Here, Olga,” he said, “take this gentleman into the wood-shed

and let him chop wood.”
The scarecrow of a beggar shrugged his shoulders, as if in

perplexity, and went irresolutely after the cook.  It was obvious
from his gait that he had not consented to go and chop wood
because he was hungry and wanted work, but simply from pride
and shame and because he had been trapped by his own words.
It was obvious, too, that his strength had been undermined by
vodka and that he was unhealthy and did not feel the slightest
inclination for toil.

Sergei hurried into the dining-room. From its windows one
could see the wood-shed and everything that went on in the yard.
Standing at the window, Sergei saw the cook and the beggar come
out into the yard by the back door and make their way across the
dirty snow to the shed. Olga glared wrathfully at her companion,
shoved him aside with her elbow, unlocked the shed, and angrily
banged the door.

The Beggar/ 57

Reprint 2025-26



Next he saw the pseudo-teacher seat himself on a log and
become lost in thought with his red cheeks resting on his fists.
The woman flung down an axe at his feet, spat angrily, and,
judging from the expression of her lips, began to scold him. The
beggar irresolutely pulled a billet of wood towards him, set it up
between his feet, and tapped it feebly with the axe. The billet
wavered and fell down.  The beggar again pulled it to him, blew
on his freezing hands, and tapped it with his axe cautiously, as if
afraid of hitting his overshoe or of cutting off his finger; the stick
of wood again fell to the ground.

Sergei’s anger had vanished and he now began to feel a little
sorry and ashamed of himself for having set a spoiled, drunken,
perhaps sick man to work at menial labour in the cold.

An hour later Olga came in and announced that the wood had
all been chopped.

“Good! Give him half a rouble,” said Sergei.  “If he wants to he
can come back and cut wood on the first day of each month.  We
can always find work for him.”

On the first of the month the waif made his appearance and
again earned half a rouble, although he could barely stand on his
legs. From that day on he often appeared in the yard and every

58 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



time work was found for him. Now he would shovel snow, now put
the wood-shed in order, now beat the dust out of rugs and
mattresses. Every time he received from twenty to forty copecks,
and once, even a pair of old trousers were sent out to him.

When Sergei moved into another house he hired him to help
in the packing and hauling of the furniture. This time the waif
was sober, gloomy, and silent. He hardly touched the furniture,
and walked behind the wagons hanging his head, not even making
a pretence of appearing busy. He only shivered in the cold and
became embarrassed when the carters jeered at him for his
idleness, his feebleness, and his tattered, fancy overcoat. After
the moving was over Sergei sent for him.

“Well, I am happy that my words have taken effect,’” he said,
handing him a rouble. “Here’s for your pains.  I see you are sober
and have no objection to work.  What is your name?’”

“Lushkoff.”
“Well, Lushkoff, I can now offer you some other, cleaner

employment.  Can you write?’”
“I can.”
“Then take this letter to a friend of mine tomorrow and you

will be given some copying to do.  Work hard, don’t drink, and
remember what I have said to you. Goodbye!”

Pleased at having put a man on the right path, Sergei tapped
Lushkoff kindly on the shoulder and even gave him his hand at
parting.  Lushkoff took the letter, and from that day forth came
no more to the yard for work.

Two years went by. Then one evening, as Sergei was standing
at the ticket window of a theatre paying for his seat, he noticed a
little man beside him with a coat collar of curly fur and a worn
sealskin cap. This little individual timidly asked the ticket seller
for a seat in the gallery and paid for it in copper coins.

“Lushkoff, is that you?” cried Sergei, recognising in the little
man his former wood-chopper. “How are you? What are you doing?
How is everything with you?”

“All right. I am a notary now and am paid thirty-five roubles
a month.”

The Beggar/ 59

Reprint 2025-26



“Thank Heaven! That’s
fine! I am delighted for
your sake. I am very, very
glad, Lushkoff.  You see,
you are my godson, in a
sense.  I gave you a push
along the right path, you
know. Do you remember
what a roasting I gave you,
eh? I nearly had you
sinking into the ground at
my feet that day.  Thank
you, old man, for not
forgetting my words.”

“Thank you, too.” said
Lushkof f. “If I hadn’t
come to you then I might
still have been calling
myself a teacher or a
student to this day. Yes, by flying to your protection I dragged
myself out of a pit.”

“I am very glad, indeed.”
“Thank you for your kind words and deeds. I am very grateful

to you and to your cook. God bless that good and noble woman!
You spoke finely then, and I shall be indebted to you to my
dying day; but, strictly speaking, it was your cook, Olga,
who saved me.”

“How is that?”
“When I used to come to your house to chop wood she used to

begin: ‘Oh, you sot, you! Oh, you miserable creature! There’s
nothing for you but ruin.’ And then she would sit down opposite
me and grow sad, look into my face and weep. ‘Oh, you unlucky
man! There is no pleasure for you in this world and there will be
none in the world to come.  You drunkard!  You will burn in hell.
Oh, you unhappy one!’ And so she would carry on, you know, in
that strain.  I can’t tell you how much misery she suffered, how
many tears she shed for my sake.  But the chief thing was — she

60 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26



used to chop the wood for me.  Do you know, sir, that I did not
chop one single stick of wood for you?  She did it all. Why this
saved me, why I changed, why I stopped drinking at the sight of
her I cannot explain. I only know that, owing to her words and
noble deeds, a change took place in my heart; she set me right
and I shall never forget it.  However, it is time to go now; there
goes the bell.” Lushkoff bowed and departed to the gallery.

ANTON CHEKHOV

Glossary

copeck (also spelt kopeck): Russian coin equal to one hundredth
of a rouble

calumny: the making of false and defamatory statements about
someone in order to damage his/her reputation

suppliant (or supplicant): a person making a humble plea to
someone in power or authority

mendicant: beggar

swindling: cheating a person of money

perplexity: state of being puzzled; bewilderment

irresolutely: hesitantly; undecidedly

billet: here, a thick piece of wood

waif: a homeless person

shovel: remove snow with a shovel (a tool resembling a spade
with a broad blade and typically upturned sides)

roasting (an informal or humorous word): here, scolding

sot: a habitual drunkard

THINK ABOUT IT

1. Has Lushkoff become a beggar by circumstance or by choice?

2. What reasons does he give to Sergei for his telling lies?

3. Is Lushkoff a willing worker? Why, then, does he agree to
chop wood for Sergei?

The Beggar/ 61

Reprint 2025-26



4. Sergei says, “I am happy that my words have taken effect.”
Why does he say so? Is he right in saying this?

5. Lushkoff is earning thirty five roubles a month. How is he
obliged to Sergei for this?

6. During their conversation Lushkoff reveals that Sergei’s cook,
Olga, is responsible for the positive change in him. How has
Olga saved Lushkoff?

TALK  ABOUT  IT

How can we help beggars/abolish begging?

S U G G E S T E D  R E A D I N G

l ‘The Man with the Twisted Lip’ by Arthur Conan Doyle
l The Three Sisters by Anton Chekhov

62 / Moments

Reprint 2025-26